
Lydia Luce’s great-grandfather built the oldest surviving school bus. She bought a 24-foot Blue Bird to continue her family’s legacy—and get to gigs.
Lydia Luce, 32, a singer-songwriter based in Nashville, Tenn., on her 2004 Blue Bird 24-foot bus, as told to A.J. Baime.
In 1927, my great-grandfather Albert Luce created the Blue Bird bus company. My grandfather and his two brothers worked for the Blue Bird bus company, and my dad and his siblings worked there. It was a whole-family thing and a source of family pride.
Lydia Luce
My partner, Ryan Usher, and I always dreamt of buying a Blue Bird bus and converting it to an RV that we could use when we play live music around the country. When the pandemic came, and it was kind of scary to stay at a hotel or go on an airplane, I started looking online.
We found a 2004 Blue Bird in Chattanooga, Tenn. It had a Chevy engine and was half-converted already. I was told it was originally used for a church summer camp for kids somewhere in the Midwest.
We bought the Blue Bird for $20,000 in the spring of 2021, went down to Chattanooga, and brought it home. We are handy-ish, but we had some professional help building the bus out.
We named the bus Seaweed, because of the color. In July of 2021, we went on our first tour.
The bus has four solar panels, a refrigerator, two stove burners with a propane tank, a 40-gallon water tank and a camper toilet. 
We have a big fluffy dog named Bobby, so we needed AC to keep her cool. We have an inflatable kayak, and plenty of room for our instruments. 
We have put thousands of miles on the bus. We have had a couple times where we had to park on the side of the road and solve some mechanical problems. But we have never missed a show.
My partner and I are going back on tour this summer in the northeast, and in the fall we are getting married. We are excited to have adventures with our kids in the Blue Bird. That is our dream, but it is also a way to keep the Blue Bird family tradition alive. 
I have childhood memories of riding in Blue Bird bus No. 1. Our kids will have memories in this one.
Produced by Julia Munslow
