To make a shoe that can be ground up, melted down and reincarnated as another shoe, Swiss sportswear brand On didn’t just need new materials and manufacturing processes. It designed a new sales model. 
A group of clothing brands are working with French startup Carbios to commercialize its technology, which uses enzymes to recycle polyester. 
The study looked at 148 companies in forestry, land use and farming that had committed to slashing emissions. It found only nine had made strong progress on stopping deforestation.
Project delays held back the growth of carbon-free electricity for the company’s data centers but it says its long-term trend is going in the right direction. 
U.S. companies faced a record number of shareholder votes on environmental and social issues this year, but investor support was lukewarm for proposals calling for more ambitious climate targets.
Auto makers like Nissan and Renault are using retired batteries to build large-scale energy-storage systems. 
Hydrogen fuel-cell company Plug Power is betting that growing appetite for fuel made using wind and solar power will give it a path to profitability.
The South Korean state-owned power company’s plan to unload assets could spell opportunity for investors seeking to close plants ahead of schedule. 
Millions of carbon credits have been used to back digital tokens in recent months. Verra said it would no longer allow credits to be retired from its database to create new crypto tokens. 
Floods and wildfires aren’t the only climate-related risks companies are facing. They’re also grappling with hard-to-model questions of human behavior. 
To turn climate pledges into results, companies can follow step by step guidance to build an emissions profile and then identify, evaluate, and prioritize high-impact, near-term actions.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
 Sustainability news, analysis and insights from WSJ's global team of reporters and editors. 
Thursday, July 7th
Thursday, June 30th
Thursday, June 23rd
