Algorithmic stablecoin TerraUSD was supposed to maintain its value at $1 with the help of its sister-crypto, Luna. But TerraUSD’s price collapsed to pennies in May, while Luna plunged by more than 99%, wiping out around $40 billion in value. Their creator Do Kwon has been attempting a comeback by relaunching Luna. WSJ markets reporter Alexander Osipovich joins host Julie Chang to explain the collapse of Do Kwon’s crypto empire and what his second try looks like.
To tackle social isolation among seniors, some caregivers have turned to virtual reality. One company developing that technology is Rendever. At The Wall Street Journal's recent Future of Everything Festival, personal tech columnist Nicole Nguyen spoke with Rendever’s co-founder and CEO about where this tech stands today and how it can be leveraged to transform the day-to-day lives of residents in senior communities. Julie Chang hosts.
Andy Jassy took over as Amazon CEO nearly a year ago. Since then the company’s stock price has fallen, online shopping demand has shrunk and the e-commerce giant has been left with excess warehouse space. As a result, Jassy has been forced to reverse course on some initiatives started by founder Jeff Bezos. WSJ reporter Dana Mattioli joins host Zoe Thomas to discuss how Jassy handled his first year and what it means for Amazon’s future.
The federal government has set aside billions of dollars aimed at improving internet speeds for rural Americans. But, despite multiple government programs designed to fix the problem, many in those communities are still waiting for faster speeds. WSJ reporter Ryan Tracy joins host Zoe Thomas to discuss how communities are being impacted by slow internet.
Crypto has been on a wild ride lately, experiencing huge dips and volatility impacting investors and companies, and catching the eye of regulators. WSJ crypto reporter Paul Vigna joins host Zoe Thomas to answer your questions about how the market is supposed to work, how the government is responding and what the future could hold for the cryptocurrency space.
Short-form videos have become the latest big battleground for social-media platforms. TikTok is the most popular, but hot on its heels is Google’s rival service YouTube Shorts. WSJ reporter Salvador Rodriguez joins host Zoe Thomas to discuss how YouTube Shorts grew in popularity so quickly and the surprising audiences it is attracting.
In a town hall meeting with rank-and-file Twitter employees, Elon Musk fielded questions on free speech, his plans for company leadership and returning to the office. WSJ tech reporter Deepa Seetharaman joins host Zoe Thomas to discuss what was learned at the meeting and what it means for the future of the billionaire’s $44 billion takeover bid.
U.S. traffic safety regulators have released a first-ever survey of crashes suspected of involving advanced driver-assistance technology. At the top of the list with the most crashes is Tesla. WSJ autos reporter Ryan Felton joins host Zoe Thomas to discuss the limitations of the new data and what it could mean for developments in autonomous driving.
The web browser that introduced many people to the internet is being retired on Wednesday. WSJ reporter Alyssa Lukpat joins host Zoe Thomas to discuss why Microsoft decided to shut down Internet Explorer and the impact the browser had on the online world.
A software engineer at Google claims the company has developed an artificial intelligence chatbot that is sentient. Google has dismissed the claims, and suspended the engineer. What made the employee believe this system has gained consciousness and deserves the same rights as humans? WSJ reporter Patrick Thomas joins host Zoe Thomas to discuss what’s behind the assertion and what it means for AI development.
Zoe Thomas is the host of Tech News Briefing. Before joining The Wall Street Journal, she was a producer and reporter for BBC News. Zoe has covered business, economics and technology stories across North and South America and Asia. She has been based out of bureaus in San Francisco, Mumbai and her hometown of New York. When not at work, you can often find her searching for new culinary delights or food trends to test out.
