The House Jan. 6 panel on Monday announced a surprise hearing on Tuesday to “present recently obtained evidence and receive witness testimony.”
Scrapping plans to pause the explosive sessions until July, the committee abruptly announced plans to continue exposing former President Trump’s scheme to overturn the 2020 election.
The subject of the hearings is so far unclear. A spokesman for the panel declined to comment on its substance.
The House Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the US Capitol in the Cannon House Office Building in Washington, DC. (MANDEL NGAN/POOL/AFP via Getty Images)
Just last week, the panel announced it would halt the hearings while it processes what Rep. Jamie Raskin (D-Md.) called a “deluge” of new information.
The Select Committee will convene a hearing tomorrow, June 28 at 1:00pm to present recently obtained evidence and receive witness testimony.https://t.co/6knNdD9UWb
The hastily announced hearing raises speculation that it has obtained breakthrough new evidence or the cooperation of an important witness.
Recently, the committee recently obtained new footage of Trump and his inner circle taken both before and after Jan. 6, 2021 from British filmmaker Alex Holder.
Holder said last week that he had complied with a congressional subpoena to turn over all of the footage he shot in the final weeks of Trump’s 2020 reelection campaign, including exclusive interviews with Trump, his children and then-Vice President Mike Pence while on the campaign trail.
It is uncertain if Holder’s footage is the subject of the hearing on Tuesday, or if Holder himself will be there. Russell Smith, a lawyer for Holder, declined to comment.
Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.) (BRANDON BELL/Getty Images)
The committee, which has held five hearing so far, have examined various aspects of Trump’s unconstitutional effort to stay in power after losing the 2020 election to President Biden, including ugly pressure campaigns on former Vice President Mike Pence, Republican state officials and even his own Justice Department.
[ Jan. 6 committee off to a dramatic start in prime time ]
The panel has previously said that future hearings would focus on the role of white nationalists and other right-wing extremists in the attack on the Capitol and Trump’s own failure to defend Congress against the onslaught.
With News Wire Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
