(Shutterstock)
This past Thursday, the Supreme Court in New York State Pistol and Rifle Association v. Bruen upended the legal framework that appropriately permitted policymakers to protect Americans from gun violence. Never in our nation’s history have guns been so deadly and pervasive, yet the conservative majority opted to confine the interpretation of gun laws to the era of muskets with little helpful guidance. An over-reliance on uncertain, incomplete, or false history, detached from considerations of public health and safety, will confuse courts, imperil policy, and endanger lives going forward.
In Bruen, a 6-3 majority opinion authored by Justice Clarence Thomas held that an element of New York State’s handgun permitting law, requiring that applicants show “proper cause” to obtain an unrestricted permit to carry a handgun in public spaces, violated the Second and 14th Amendments. In doing so, the majority took two unprecedented steps.
First, they expanded the right to bear arms under the Second Amendment to include carrying firearms in public spaces for self-defense. For the past 14 years, the individual right to bear arms had only been explicitly recognized to include possession in the home.
Second, they dramatically changed the way courts are now expected to evaluate the constitutionality of gun safety laws that will likely lead to overturning may-issue public carry licensing in six other states. This new test puts all our nation’s gun regulations on newly uncertain grounds. These changes are both out of step with the realities faced by Americans and recklessly dangerous.
In the opinion, the court replaced a two-part test that all lower federal courts have used to evaluate Second Amendment claims with a test focused solely on text, history and tradition. The two-part test had led to a period of stability and reliability in the realm of Second Amendment law. The test first asked courts to look to history to determine if the law in question impacted the Second Amendment and, if so, determining whether the law was justified because it advanced a governmental interest. Most gun violence prevention laws have been upheld by lower courts under this test because the government has been able to demonstrate how the laws were substantially related to the important governmental interest of maintaining public safety. Now, the answers are not so clear.
The majority claimed that the two-part test went one part too far, falsely asserting that the court does not evaluate other constitutional rights in such a manner. Courts are now bound to only evaluate whether a “regulation is consistent with the Nation’s historical tradition of firearm regulation” when assessing Second Amendment claims. The majority opined that focusing on the constitutional text and history is “more legitimate, and more administrable” for judges than “making difficult judgments about the costs and benefits of firearms restrictions... given their lack of expertise in the field.”
But judges are not historians. Parsing through history without grounding findings in contemporary considerations, such as public health research, is chaotic at best and intentionally misleading at worst. A test based solely on history faces many practical problems. What time periods do we look to? Whose history carries more weight? How do you analogize historical regulations when history fails to provide an exact answer to the law at issue? The majority states that courts should consider most heavily the history surrounding the adoption of the Second Amendment and may consider history around the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, but not too far before or after. How closely this history must come to the adoption of either is unclear.
As the majority opinion astutely noted, “not all history is created equal.” Apparently, to the majority, this means simply ignoring the history that does not align with their preferred outcome. As Justice Stephen Breyer observed in his dissenting opinion, the majority found whatever reasons they needed to discount the historical evidence presented in support of New York’s law. Some “did not last long enough. Some applied to too few people. Some were enacted for the wrong reasons. Some may have been based on a constitutional rationale that is now impossible to identify. Some arose in historically unique circumstances.”
The majority also imposed a perplexing double standard where regulations on firearms are only constitutional if they are rooted in, or closely analogous to, historical laws from a notably narrow timeframe while the Second Amendment itself unquestionably applies to modern weapons that the Founders could not have possibly imagined. And what is a “well-established and representative historical analogue” for something like a large-capacity magazine? Could a semi-automatic rifle used in the mass shooting at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas, plausibly be compared to a musket that takes minutes to load a single shot? The majority has given almost no guidance for lower courts to determine what makes a law analogous enough, instead leaving courts to substitute in their own personal judgment.
History rarely speaks with one voice. As we have recently noted, mere hours before the decision, “[h]istorical regulation of firearms in public is hotly contested by historians and legal scholars alike.” In the face of such contested history, judges can select their ideologically preferred outcome and “cloak these outcomes in the language of history.” What happens when there is new historical evidence regarding firearm regulation? Will such new evidence change the outcome of previously settled law, creating instability within the doctrine? Based on the overtly ideological opinion in Bruen, it does not seem like any evidence would change the outcome of this court.
Thomas claimed that the text, history and tradition test is “neither a regulatory straightjacket nor a regulatory blank check,” but what is it really? Ironically, a discretionary license. A discretionary license for all judges to weave whatever historical narrative they need to justify their personal beliefs on the issue. And that license will be tested. By establishing a radically new test for evaluating Second Amendment claims, every gun violence prevention law, new and old, could be open to new litigation. These laws may not all be struck down, because, as Justice Brett Kavanaugh tepidly stated in his concurring opinion, “properly interpreted, the Second Amendment allows a ‘variety’ of gun regulations.” How courts will arrive at those determinations will be messier and more subjective than ever before, creating an uncertain path forward for government officials and litigants alike.
Most upsetting, and dangerous, is that the new test completely divests Second Amendment evaluation from the lived reality of gun violence. Justice Samuel Alito proclaimed as much in his concurring opinion, asking rhetorically why the dissenting justices think data on mass shootings, firearm suicide, domestic violence or youth firearm deaths are relevant at all when evaluating Second Amendment claims. Alito and the rest of the conservative majority on the court think it irrelevant whether laws or regulations effectively reduce gun violence and advance public safety. Or perhaps they simply do not care.
Roskam is director of law and policy and Carey is law and policy adviser at the Johns Hopkins Center for Gun Violence Solutions at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
