Former President Donald Trump had a “direct and personal role” in the effort to force state and local officials to overturn the 2020 election, Jan. 6 committee Vice Chairwoman Liz Cheney said Tuesday, and it “deserves” the attention of the Justice Department.
The House select committee investigating the attack on the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, took aim at Trump’s pressure campaign to bully Republican state officials and local election workers into “finding” enough votes to flip states he lost in the 2020 elections or naming bogus slates of electors.
[ Trump urges Georgia official to ‘find’ votes to overturn election results: report ]
“The system held, but barely,” said Rep. Adam Schiff (D-Calif.), who led the questioning of witnesses. “And the question remains: Will it hold again?”
Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger and his deputy Gabriel Sterling detailed Trump’s brazen call to urge him to reverse President Biden’s historic 11,000-vote win in the Peach State.
Brad Raffensperger, Georgia Secretary of State, testifies as Gabe Sterling, Georgia Deputy Secretary of State, listens, as the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol continues to reveal its findings of a year-long investigation, at the Capitol in Washington, Tuesday, June 21, 2022.  (Jacquelyn Martin/AP)
Raffensperger recalled telling Trump there was no way he could obey the order to “find” enough votes to overturn the presidential election.
During the call, Trump threatened Raffensperger with a “criminal offense” if Georgia officials did not change the vote count to let him win.
“There were no votes to ‘find,’” Raffensperger told the committee. “The numbers are the numbers, and the numbers don’t lie.”
“President Trump just came up short,” Raffensperger said.
The testimony from Raffensperger and Sterling comes weeks after they appeared before a special grand jury in Georgia investigating whether Trump and others illegally tried to intervene in the vote.
Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, center, testifies as the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol continues, at the Capitol in Washington, Tuesday, June 21, 2022, as Arizona House Speaker Rusty Bowers, left, and Georgia Deputy Secretary of State Gabriel Sterling, right, look on.  (J. Scott Applewhite/AP)
Arizona Speaker of the House Rusty Bowers recounted Trump’s effort to get him to create an alternate slate of pro-Trump electors even though Biden got more votes.
A dyed-in-the-wool Ronald Reagan fan who voted twice for Trump, Bowers said Rudy Giuliani made wild claims that hundreds of thousands of undocumented immigrants and dead people voted in Arizona. But he never produced any evidence.
“I [did] not want to be a winner by cheating,” Bowers said.
He recalled John Eastman, a pro-Trump law professor, dismissing his concerns about the dubious legality of pushing a rogue slate of Trump-friendly electors on the state.
“Just do it and let the courts sort it out,” Eastman told Bowers.
Former U.S. President Donald Trump gives the keynote address at the Faith & Freedom Coalition during their annual "Road To Majority Policy Conference" at the Gaylord Opryland Resort & Convention Center June 17, 2022 in Nashville, Tennessee.  (Seth Herald/Getty Images)
Trump lashed out at the committee even before it was gaveled into session, claiming that there was nothing wrong with his call to Raffensperger and his top deputy, Sterling, which the officials taped.
“A “PERFECT” PHONE CALL to discuss a Rigged and Stolen Election, and what to do about it,” Trump wrote on his social media platform.
Along with his effort to undermine democracy, Trump knew his pressure campaign could potentially cause violence against the local officials and their families but pursued it anyway, committee members said.
“Donald Trump didn’t care about the threats of violence. He did not condemn them, he made no effort to stop them,” said Cheney (R-Wyo.). “This is serious. We cannot let America become a nation of conspiracy theories and thug violence.”
Former Atlanta election worker Wandrea “Shaye” Moss became emotional as she testified about the violent threats she and her mother, also an election worker, Ruby Freeman, received after being falsely accused by Trump and Giuliani of breaking election laws.
Shortly after the allegations against the mother-daughter election workers surfaced, Georgia officials confirmed that they had done nothing wrong.
Schiff asked Moss: “Mr. Giuliani accused you and your mother of passing some sort of USB drive to each other. What was your mom actually handing you on that video?”
“A ginger mint,” Moss said.
Wandrea "Shaye" Moss, a former Georgia election worker, is comforted by her mother Ruby Freeman, right, as the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol continues to reveal its findings of a year-long investigation, at the Capitol in Washington, Tuesday, June 21, 2022.  (Jacquelyn Martin/AP)
In prerecorded testimony, Freeman, who refers to herself as Lady Ruby, said clearly and firmly, “Do you know how it feels to have the President of the United States target you?”
“There is nowhere I feel safe. Nowhere,” Freeman testified. “The president of the United States is supposed to represent every American, not to target one. But he targeted me.”
The select committee also worked to untangle the elaborate “fake electors” scheme that sought to have representatives in as many as seven battlegrounds — Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Nevada and New Mexico — sign certificates stating that Trump, not Biden, had won their states.
The ruse was to challenge the joint session of Congress on Jan. 6, 2021, when Vice President Mike Pence was presiding over the states’ vote tallies. However, the house of cards quickly fell after Pence refused Trump’s adamant demands that he stop the certification of Biden’s win. Soon after, the Capitol was attacked by the pro-Trump mob.
Schiff ended the hearing on a somber tone: “If the most powerful person in the world can bring the full weight of the presidency down on an ordinary citizen who is merely doing her job, with a lie as big and heavy as a mountain, who among us is safe? None of us.”
With News Wire Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
