The famous Silicon Valley adage “move fast and break things” might work well for technology startups. But for the Supreme Court of the United States, the exact opposite is essential. The court must move slowly and try really hard not to break anything. Unfortunately for the country, the justices appear ready to shatter 50-year-old precedent on abortion.
They don’t have to. For even if the conservative justices are intent on narrowing abortion rights, there’s a far less draconian alternative than overturning Roe v. Wade. They could simply hold that the Mississippi law at issue in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which bans abortion after 15 weeks, is constitutional — and leave it at that. Chief Justice John Roberts suggested at oral argument that he may favor this approach: “If you think that the issue is one of choice, that women should have a choice to terminate their pregnancy, that supposes that there is a point at which they’ve had the fair choice,” Roberts said. “Because viability, it seems to me, doesn’t have anything to do with choice. But, if it really is an issue about choice, why is 15 weeks not enough time?”
Abortion-rights demonstrators hold up letters spelling out "My Choice," Saturday, May 14, 2022, outside the Supreme Court in Washington.  (Jacquelyn Martin/AP)
This would still be a huge win for conservatives. Right now, states can’t materially limit abortions until around 24 weeks of pregnancy (when, under previous rulings, a fetus is said to achieve viability). Constricting this to 15 weeks would sharply reduce abortion rights in numerous states. It would not, however, be the gratuitous constitutional fracture that Justice Samuel Alito’s leaked draft opinion eliminating Roe represents.
The court thus doesn’t have to overturn Roe. And, for the sake of the country, it shouldn’t.
The American body politic is, indeed, already teetering on the ragged edge of a breakdown. Seething partisanship, fierce intransigence and startling irrationality have infected the political branches — from the election of Donald Trump as president, to stasis and dysfunction in Congress, to dangerously ignorant views dominating state and local governments.
The last thing the country needs is the Supreme Court piling on.
Perhaps the most important pillar of American democracy that hasn’t weakened in recent years is respect for court decisions. Ever since Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall held in the 1803 case Marbury v. Madison that the judiciary defines the Constitution and everyone else must follow, Americans of all stripes have broadly respected court orders. This foundational principle of American democracy is still intact. While Donald Trump and his fiercest allies have eroded the separation of powers, the rule of law — and even the sanctity of the vote — they have not ignored court orders.
Anti-abortion protesters demonstrate outside the U.S. Supreme Court Wednesday, June 8, 2022, in Washington.  (Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP)
At least not yet.
It’s essential that this continues. Had Trump, for example, not accepted the courts’ rejection of his 2020 presidential election litigation claims, it’s not clear whether Joe Biden’s inauguration would have taken place on time. Put simply: The ongoing degradation of American democracy will dramatically accelerate if bad actors stop adhering to court orders.
This makes maintaining the legitimacy of the courts — starting, of course, with the Supreme Court — fundamentally important. By electing to overturn Roe instead of simply upholding the Mississippi law under review, the court would dramatically undercut its own essential place in America’s constitutional constellation. It would be moving fast and breaking things when the country desperately needs it to move slowly and help stabilize our wobbling polity.
The Supreme Court doesn’t have to overturn Roe v. Wade. And, for the sake of American democracy, it shouldn’t.
Cooper is an attorney and the author of “Stress Test: How Donald Trump Threatens American Democracy.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
