
		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	

					The goofy Hal Wilkerson somehow survived, and thrived, raising five boys in "Malcolm in the Middle." Bryan Cranston, who played Hal, also acted as another famous fake father in the show "Breaking Bad" by taking on the role of drug kingpin Walter White. Or should we say Heisenberg?				

					©20thCentFox/Courtesy Everett C				

					Dre Johnson, played by Anthony Anderson, doesn't always say the right thing when it comes to giving his kids advice, but that's what makes watching his performance on ABC's "Black-ish" so much fun.				

					ABC via Getty Images				

					The freshest father in Bel-Air, Phillip Banks, was played by the late actor James LaRue Avery, who died in 2013. His wealthy character acted as the stern yet caring uncle to protagonist Will Smith in the American sitcom "The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air."				

					Everett				

					Dads come in all shapes, sizes, and colors, including the yellow patriarch of "The Simpsons," Homer Simpson, played by Dan Castellaneta. 				

					20th Century Fox Licensing/Merch				

					Can a dad pull our heartstrings and be a heartthrob at the same time? That's what Jack Pearson does in "This Is Us." Played by Milo Ventimiglia, he's the patriarch of the Pearson family who appears in flashbacks throughout much of the tear-jerking NBC series.				

					Ron Batzdorff/NBC				

					Threatening mobsters by day and attending his daughter's dance recitals by night? Tony Soprano, played by James Gandolfini, who passed in 2013, is the man that can do both on HBO's crime drama "The Sopranos."				

					HBO				

					Master of the dad joke, Phil Dunphy, played by Ty Burrell, is the ultimate good guy and couldn't be a more loveable father of three in ABC's "Modern Family."				

					AP				

					Our favorite bald dad, Damon Wayans' Michael Kyle was almost too carefree sometimes with parenting in "My Wife and Kids."				

					© 2004 ABC, INC.				

					San Francisco's favorite family man! Bob Saget, who passed in early 2022, played Danny Tanner, the widowed father of three girls, in the hugely popular '90s sitcom "Full House."				

					Walt Disney Television via Getty				

					A true "Family Guy," Peter Löwenbräu Griffin, Sr., voiced by Seth MacFarlane, is the one of the original animated TV dads. 				

					FOX Image Collection via Getty I				

					Fred Andrews, played by the late Luke Perry who passed in 2019, was the parental guidance that the teenagers on the CW's "Riverdale" could've used more of.				

					Dean Buscher/The CW				

					Did someone say pancakes? Rufus Humprey, played by Matthew Settle, is everyone's favorite chef and Brooklyn dad on the CW's "Gossip Girl."				

					THE CW				

					Despite always getting caught up in Steve Urkel's antics, Carl Winslow, played by Reginald VelJohnson, showed us that "Family Matters" in the smash hit '90s show.				

					ABC Photo Archives/Getty Images				

					Forever fighting the good fight, Sandy Cohen, played by Peter Gallagher, showed the importance of always sticking up for the underdog in the Fox teen drama "The O.C."				
