
Sign In


            'Woke' creep in America is real and parents need to be aware
Manage Newsletters
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Kavanaugh’s Democratic assassins
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Jim Crow
OPINION:
Twitter can generally be classified as toxic and hazardous to your health. On occasion, however, an intrepid and courageous person will wade through the putrid content to educate Americans about threats to their freedom and the moral underpinnings of our society. Chaya Raichik, who runs the profile @LibsofTikTok is one of those precious few.
Every day the profile, with more than 1.2 million followers, features new videos and incidents of schools, local municipalities, teachers and organizations promoting programming that exposes children to sexual content. Pride Month seems to have put it all on steroids.
Americans expect this behavior in deep-blue states like California, where Christina Aguilera wore a strap-on penis in a public Pride in the Park event last week and “Nicole Jizz” performed a drag show for children in San Francisco. In New York, tax dollars are paying drag queens to go to elementary schools.
But this “woke” creep is happening in red and purple states too — a lot of them.
Drag shows for children, gender identity classes for children, transgender-normalizing school materials, books depicting explicit sexual content in libraries and more have been exposed on @LibsofTikTok in Texas, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Arizona, Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Indiana and more.
It’s no wonder the owner of the profile has received multiple death threats on the platform and this week was forced to move to an undisclosed location.
There was recently a “family-friendly” drag show sponsored in part by the local Satanic Temple in Idaho of all places. In Wisconsin, an LGBTQ group is recruiting children under 18 for classes that teach how to perform in drag. In Beaufort, South Carolina a drag queen book was on the elementary school summer reading list, along with “Antiracist Baby.”
Public outcry, fortunately, forced the postponement of a public drag show for children in Jasper, Indiana.
Leftist teachers, whose confusion about their own identity not long ago would have been considered a mental illness, have now been exposed for indoctrinating elementary school children in nearly every state in the nation.
Homosexuals have made significant strides toward acceptance, but in as much as people on the right need to denounce the type of tactics, lawlessness and stupidity we saw on Jan. 6, 2021, the gay community needs to wrest control of “Pride” away from the far left. Graphic sexual content in schools and public libraries, efforts to normalize gender dysphoria for children, bringing children to drag shows and denial of gender altogether aren’t about gay pride. They’re about sexualizing and confusing children.
Parents are ultimately at fault here. For decades, America’s parents allowed teachers unions to control public education. For decades, school board elections have consistently had the lowest voter turnout in the country. For decades, parents naively believed despite evidence of woke creep, that the teaching profession was interested in math, reading and history.
For decades, they thought living in a red or right-of-center state would protect them and their children.
They were dead wrong. Parents need to acknowledge Leftist indoctrination can happen to their children, regardless of where they live.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said this week on “RuPaul’s Drag Race” that “drag is what America’s all about.” No, it’s not. Certainly not when it involves children.
All people of good character and conscience deserve to be treated with respect, but society must have standards of conduct, especially when it comes to our children.
Parents must act to prevent the exploitation, physical mutilation and harmful indoctrination of their children. They must also embrace the idea that parents who participate in those damaging behaviors should be held to account, as they are already for a range of dangerous behaviors.
Just because the left has created an equivalency between homosexuality, gender dysphoria and drag, for some reason, doesn’t mean dangerous behaviors should be excused.
Parents must also insist that standards of conduct, character and fitness are established for teachers that prevent people who are mentally unstable or driving radical personal agendas from being given access to classrooms. Lawyers and doctors have professional standards and teachers should as well.    
In this moment of national division, Democrats and Republicans, gay, straight, blue state and red can come together to protect our children from being robbed of their innocence. The majority of Americans should be able to agree that drag shows, pornography and gender-fluid ideologies have no place near young children.
It’s time to be loud and proud for our children, or the damage done to them will be on us.
• Tom Basile is the host of “America Right Now” on Newsmax Television, an author and a former Bush administration official.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
                          Click
                            here for reprint permission.
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
