Singer Stacy Francis is showing no sympathy for Wendy Williams in the aftermath of her long-running daytime talk show ending its run last week, calling her “mean.”
The former “R&B Divas LA” star ripped the public outpouring of support for the self-proclaimed “Queen of All Media,” who has been battling health and financial issues this past year. Williams was absent for the entirety of her nationally syndicated chatfest’s 14th and final season.
Stacy Francis (left) and Wendy Williams (Getty Images)
In a blistering social media post, Francis urged people to “stop being fake and stop pretending” that Williams’ bad karma didn’t catch up to her.
The Brooklyn native has a long history with Williams, dating back to her days as a shock jock on WBLS-FM.
“In 1998 Wendy Williams went on air on a popular radio show in NYC and lied to the public about something she observed when she saw me in front of the Broadway theater I was starring at,” the former X-Girlfriend frontwoman wrote in a Facebook post on Sunday. “She lied to the public about many celebrities. She attacked people. She got cussed out by folks. She built her brand gossiping and invalidating and hurting others.”
The star of Broadway’s “Footloose” adaptation would later gain international attention as a standout contestant on the first season of “X Factor USA” for her renditions of the Aretha Franklin classic “(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman” and Prince’s “Purple Rain.”
To promote her appearances, she would appear on “The Wendy Williams Show” during its early years.
Francis said that although she “forgave her” when she appeared on the show, she added that Williams “still had this shady way of handling the news and people.”
“And there are many fans that love and support her because there is this ugly monster people like to feed,” she claimed. “This reality show grime that exist that people love. So stop being surprised that her time on tv ended the way it did. She never stopped being shady.”
The 53-year-old mother of two did say that she believed Williams will rebound “and end up with some 100 million dollar deal on Spotify or something and the support will continue.”
Stacy Francis posted comments about Wendy Williams on Facebook. 
Francis is no stranger to scandal.
In the aftermath of the 2012 death of Whitney Houston, the singing Scientologist told “Access Hollywood” about an altercation she had with the Grammy-winning diva at her last public appearance. Houston allegedly got into a spat with Francis after assuming she was also seeing a former R&B singer she was romantically linked to.
The final new episode of “The Wendy Williams Show” aired last Friday in national syndication. Vanessa Williams, who was the very first celebrity guest booked on the show in 2009, showed up for the farewell that was hosted by best-selling author Sherri Shepherd.
It included a video montage of the best moments from the shoestring budget-produced show’s first 13 seasons including appearances by Halle Berry, Justin Bieber and Aretha Franklin.
Executive producer Suzanne Bass was flanked by fellow producers Norman Baker and Joelle Dawson-Calia and the entire production staff thanked the audience on the last segment of the show.
Williams stepped away from the program in 2020, citing a series of medical troubles, including a longtime battle with Graves’ disease and a breakthrough case of COVID-19. The 57-year-old Asbury Park, N.J., native publicly hoped to return for at least one more season.
On its social media accounts, “The Wendy Williams Show” posted a photo of her famous purple chair on an otherwise empty stage under a caption thanking fans for tuning in.
Howard Bragman, Williams’ last known publicist of record, told the Daily News that he is no longer working with her.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
