With the Highland Park shooting on the nation’s 246th birthday, the U.S. had marked its 309th mass shooting this year, according to a nonprofit that tracks gunfire incidents.
To date this year, there have been on average 11 mass shootings per week, the nonprofit Gun Violence Archive’s data show. The group classifies an incident as a mass shooting when four or more people, excluding the shooter, are shot or killed.
Law enforcement search after a mass shooting at the Highland Park Fourth of July parade in downtown Highland Park, Ill., a suburb of Chicago, on Monday, July 4, 2022.  (Nam Y. Huh/AP)
At least six people were killed and 30 or more wounded Monday when a gunman rained bullets down upon an Independence Day parade in an affluent suburb about 25 miles north of downtown Chicago. The gunman, who as of Monday afternoon was still at large, found his way to a rooftop to wreak his havoc as hundreds of people, including parents with strollers and kids on bikes, fled the scene.
A Lake Forest, Ill., police officer walks down Central Ave in Highland Park, Ill., on Monday, July 4, 2022, after a shooter fired on the northern suburb's Fourth of July parade.  (Brian Cassella/AP)
A massive manhunt was underway as police urged people to shelter in place Monday afternoon. Police sought a slightly built white man, between ages 18 and 20, with long black hair and wearing a white or blue T-shirt.
Two police officers stand their at post the day after a deadly mass shooting on the Westside of Highland Park, Ill. on Tuesday, July 5, 2022, as the American flag flies at half-staff on the Eastside. A shooter fired on an Independence Day parade from a rooftop, spraying the crowd with gunshots initially mistaken for fireworks before hundreds of panicked revelers of all ages fled in terror. (Charles Rex Arbogast/AP)
On Monday evening, police identified 22-year-old area resident Robert Crimo III as a person of interest. He was driving a silver 2010 Honda Fit, and cops said he should be considered armed and dangerous.
Highland Park Police Commander Chris O’Neill urged people to shelter in place as police sought the killer in a “very active apprehension effort.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
