Members of the Ukrainian band Kalush Orchestra hope that their win at this year’s Eurovision Song Contest can translate into a much bigger victory — one against the devastating and unprovoked attacks by Russia.
The folk-rap group that mixes traditional Ukrainian rhythms with contemporary hip hop took home the top prize at the 66th edition of the wildly popular music contest that was held in Turin, Italy earlier this month.
On Sunday, the band announced on social media that they raised nearly $1.3 million for the Ukrainian army — after auctioning off the Eurovision trophy and raffling a pink bucket hat worn by band lead singer Oleh Psiuk — as they continue to defend their land from Russian-led forces.
The trophy, a glass microphone designed by the Swedish artist Kjell Engman, fetched $900,000 in the auction. The winning bid was placed by the cryptocurrency exchange platform WhiteBIT.
The winner of the hat, which was worn during the performance, was chosen at random in a raffle. Each ticket cost 200 Ukrainian hryvnia (about $7), with more than 31,088 people trying their luck, for a total of more than $300,000.
Oleh Psiuk, second from right, frontman of Ukraine's Kalush Orchestra, winners of the Eurovision Song Contest, and his band pose with the trophy in Krakovets, at the Ukraine border with Poland, Monday, May 16, 2022.  (Mykola Tys                         /AP)
The winner of the hat was Volodymyr Onyshchuk, a Ukrainian IT engineer who lives in the Czech Republic.
“You guys are amazing! We appreciate each and everyone of you who donated to this auction and a special thanks to the team Whitebit who purchased the trophy for $900,000 and are now the rightful owners of our trophy,” the group wrote on Facebook.
“Glory to Ukraine! Glory to the Armed Forces of Ukraine,” the band added.
Kalush Orchestra’s song, “Stefania,” was originally written as a tribute to the mother of lead singer Oleh Psiuk, but it turned into an anthem of resilience, amid Russia’s bloody invasion of Ukraine.
“I’ll always find my way home, even if all roads are destroyed,” Psiuk sang, representing one of the 25 countries competing in the grand finale of the song contest.
Shortly after the win, the band announced the auction and the raffle on Instagram, urging fans to donate to help the Ukrainian army, writing “Every euro you donate will help save the lives of Ukrainian soldiers!”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
