Stephen Colbert swears his staffers weren’t trying to stage an insurrection.
On Thursday, a group of “Late Show” employees were arrested at the Capitol while filming a segment about the Jan. 6 committee hearings, starring Triumph the Insult Comic Dog. Both Democratic and Republican members of Congress had agreed to film and the crew spent Wednesday and Thursday shooting. But on the last night of production, the staffers were detained by Capitol police.
“Which actually, isn’t that surprising,” Colbert said during his opening monologue Monday night. “The Capitol Police are much more cautious than they were, say, 18 months ago, and for a very good reason. If you don’t know what that reason is, I know what news network you watch.”
Stephen Colbert on the set of "The Late Show with Stephen Colbert" in New York.  (Scott Kowalchyk / AP)
The crew members, who were just “doing their job,” remained “very professional” and “very calm,” Colbert said, and were “detained, processed, and released.”
“A very unpleasant experience for my staff, a lot of paper for the Capitol Police, but a very simple story,” he said.
Then, Tucker Carlson and other Fox News hosts got involved and started spinning wild tales about the “aggressive” staffers and a Colbert-led “conspiracy.”
“First of all, what?” Colbert said Monday.
“Second of all, huh? Third of all, they weren’t in the Capitol building. Fourth of all, and I’m shocked I have to explain the difference, but an insurrection involves disrupting the lawful actions of Congress and howling for the blood of elected leaders, all to prevent the peaceful transfer of power. This was first-degree puppetry. This was hijinks with intent to goof. Misappropriation of an old ‘Conan’ bit.”
The House select committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021 attack on the Capitol holds a hearing at the Capitol in Washington, Thursday, June 16, 2022.  (J. Scott Applewhite/AP)
Despite the preposterous propositions, Colbert said he wasn’t particularly surprised.
“It’s predictable why these TV talkers are talking like this. They want to talk about something other than the January 6 hearings, the actual seditionist insurrection that led to the deaths of multiple people and the injury of over 140 police officers,” he said.
“But drawing any equivalency between a rioter storming the Capitol to prevent the counting of electoral ballots and a cigar chomping toy dog is a shameful and grotesque insult to the memory of everyone who died and obscenely trivializes the service and the courage the Capitol police showed on that terrible day. But who knows? Maybe there was a vast conspiracy to overthrow the government of the U.S. with a rubber Rottweiler.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
