This week’s box office is all shook up.
“Top Gun: Maverick” is back on top — but being hound-dogged by the new “Elvis” movie.
The Tom Cruise-led action sequel and the Baz Luhrmann-directed “Elvis” biopic tied for the No. 1 spot at the domestic box office over the weekend, both making an estimated $30.5 million.
Another strong weekend for “Top Gun: Maverick” pushed the film past $1 billion globally, giving Cruise his first movie ever to reach that threshold.
“Top Gun: Maverick” has made $521 million in North America through its first five weekends in theaters. This is the third box-office win for “Maverick,” which is the highest-grossing movie of 2022.
The film comes nearly four decades after the original “Top Gun” and centers on Cruise’s Maverick training a new generation of Navy pilots.
“Elvis” also hit a high note with international audiences, adding an additional $20 million overseas during its first weekend in theaters.
Austin Butler in "Elvis." (Warner Bros. Pictures)
The film stars Austin Butler as Elvis Presley and depicts the King of Rock and Roll’s ascent to superstardom, as well as the struggles he faced throughout his life. Tom Hanks plays the musician’s controversial manager, Col. Tom Parker, while Olivia DeJonge portrays the singer’s wife, Priscilla Presley.
“Elvis” is the first film directed by Luhrmann since “The Great Gatsby,” which came out in 2013.
[ ‘Elvis’ director Baz Luhrmann says film humanizes the icon, shares how Elvis Presley’s family reacted to it  ]
Finishing third at the domestic box office over the weekend was “Jurassic World Dominion,” which added $26.4 million. The dinosaur epic won the previous two weekend box offices, and has now made $302 million in North America and $746 million worldwide.
Tom Cruise in "Top Gun: Maverick."  (Scott Garfield/Paramount Pictures)
Directed by Colin Trevorrow, “Dominion” is the third and final film in the “Jurassic World” trilogy, and the sixth film in the “Jurassic” film franchise. The movie reunited original “Jurassic Park” stars Sam Neill, Laura Dern and Jeff Goldblum for their first movie together since 1993′s original “Jurassic Park.”
Rounding out the North American box office’s top five were the newly released horror movie “The Black Phone” starring Ethan Hawke, which made $23.4 million to finish fourth, and the “Toy Story” spinoff “Lightyear” led by Chris Evans, which added $17.7 million to come in fifth.
The July movie slate promises more box-office fireworks, with the animated prequel “Minions: The Rise of Gru” due out this Friday, before Marvel’s much-anticipated “Thor: Love and Thunder” strikes into theaters July 8.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
