A dispute over a dog that erupted into gunfire left a couple dead, an infant orphaned and a third person critically injured in Hartford.
Christina Dang, 27, and Chase Eugene Garrett, 39, were killed in the Sunday night shooting in a driveway at around 9 p.m., The Hartford Courant reported. A woman in her 20s was in critical condition, Hartford Mayor Luke Bronin said at a press conference. All three lived at the residence, as did the baby, who has now been placed with child services.
“This is a personal neighbor dispute over a dog that escalated into violence and into a shooting,” Hartford Police Chief Jason Thody said at Monday’s briefing. “This is another example of a very personal dispute that escalated into violence unnecessarily. I can’t say it enough: We have to find better ways to resolve our conflicts.”
(Shutterstock)
He stressed the importance of finding nonviolent ways to work things out, de-escalate fraught situations, and “have some patience,” he said. “These are tragic situations, and it’s very frustrating for the officers because these are difficult to forget and difficult to prevent.”
Police said that there was no previous history between the neighbors. Thody said police had identified a person of interest and recovered a vehicle that may have been driven away from the scene.
“Is heartbreaking to think that two people have lost their lives and a third person remains in critical condition because of a minor personal dispute that escalated into violence,” Bronin said. “This is the continuation of a very, very distressing trend that we are seeing, not just in Hartford but also around the state and around the country. Which is, is very personal disputes — minor personal disputes — escalating with incredible speed into violence. And the presence of guns then turns those disputes fatal.”
So far this year there have been 20 homicides in the City of Hartford. In comparison, there were 19 homicides in the city during all of 2021. To date this year there have been 59 nonfatal shootings in the city, compared to 65 by this time last year, Hartford Police Lieutenant Aaron Boisvert said, according to The Courant. At its current pace, Hartford will exceed its 2012 total of 23 homicides by the end of July, The Courant said.
“It is just devastating to think about the lives lost and the lives changed, including this very young child’s life changed forever because a minor dispute about a dog turned into a tragic shooting,” Bronin said.
Relatives of Dang told WVIT-TV that the couple had moved to Hartford to raise their child – who police said was 6 months old and family members said was 4 months – and to be closer to Garrett’s family.
“Christina was my baby sister,” sister Julie Dang told the station from her home in Kentucky. “She was a beautiful soul full of life. She was a mother to a 4-month-old, Chosen, and she lost her life over a senseless argument.”
The dog had been placed with a neighbor, The Courant noted. Before Sunday police had never received a complaint about the canine.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
