Paradise can be found close to home.
Fire Island, a narrow, 32-mile barrier island off the southern coast of Long Island, features two communities that have long served as a queer utopia and a safe haven for members of the LGBTQ community.
A sweeping new book, “Fire Island: A Century in the Life of an American Paradise,” by British writer Jack Parlett pays tribute to the queer side of the popular vacation destination by chronicling its history through the eyes of famous writers who frequented the island.
Garden decorations in Fire Island Pines, June 2016 (Daniel Handal)
“I was just completely captivated by it,” Parlett, 30, told the Daily News, about his first visit to the island’s LGBTQ-centric hamlets of Cherry Grove and Fire Island Pines in the summer of 2017.
With its stunning beaches, legendary parties and rich cultural history, Fire Island is celebrated in Parlett’s deeply researched book as a magical place known for the campy silliness of a boat full of drag queens “invading” the harbor every July 4, or the hedonistic sexual culture in the Fire Island Pines that’s still “alive and well,” Parlett writes, or the weekly underwear parties in Cherry Grove.
But it is also a place queer people can call home, strengthen links to their chosen family and come together as a community to fight the devastation caused by the AIDS epidemic.
It’s also a summer paradise that has also been criticized for historically being more accessible to a privileged few, as Parlett points out.
James Baldwin, a frequent visitor to Cherry Grove throughout the 1950s and ‘60s, noted with caution that he was coming into a “mostly white, middle-class queer world,” Parlett writes. Six decades later, after his first visit to the Pines, Parlett wondered whether or how he could fit into the “scene.” He could feel himself “becoming more neurotic about my eating and exercise habits” and even bleached his hair “to replicate the kind of sun-kissed svelteness I’d seen gracing the early-morning dance floor.”
Red Party in Fire Island Pines, Labor Day Weekend 2018. (Daniel Handal)
Parlett, a literary scholar who focuses on queer studies and teaches American literature at the University of Oxford, lived in New York while doing research for his Ph.D. about poets and gay cruising.
Having a reputation as being a gay village since the mid-20th century, Fire Island has deep ties with some of the most important names in art and literature, including Walt Whitman, Patricia Highsmith, Oscar Wilde, James Baldwin, Janet Flanner and American poet Frank O’Hara, who died at age 40 after he was hit by a dune buggy in Fire Island Pines in 1966.
“I’ve been reading these poets, and suddenly seeing for myself the place that so many of them have been and spent time — after that I just kind of couldn’t stop thinking about this place,” Parlett said.
Shortly after that visit, Parlett decided to work on a book that expanded beyond the literary world and turned into a love letter to the community’s history, cultural significance, HIV/AIDS activism and the role it played in the queer liberation movement. .
Jack Parlett (Alex Krook/Alex Krook)
Parlett set out to “trace the footsteps of particular writers on the island ... who burst onto the scene in the 1970s” to see what those stories could teach us about those moments.
“What it was like to be there, but also what it was like to be queer in New York, what it was like to experience community or exclusion in these different historical eras,” he said.
“I see the book not just as a celebration, but something that is trying to engage with the more complicated aspects of Fire Island as a space as well.
Memorial Day Weekend 2013, Fire Island Pines (Daniel Handal)
For decades, the mystique of a sun-soaked gay Xanadu just two hours east of New York City has been exacerbated fueled by its prominence in popular culture.
There was the Kelly Ripa-produced reality show called “Fire Island” that aired on Logo in 2017; the Tony Award-winning play “The Inheritance” that ran on Broadway in 2019; and the rom-com starring Kim Booster and “Saturday Night Live” star Bowen Yang, also named “Fire Island,” that premiered on Hulu this month.
July 4th weekend at Sip-n-Twirl 2019, Fire Island Pines. (Daniel Handal)
“I didn’t set out to write an authoritative history, because I think loads of people who have different experiences of Fire Island will have different claims upon it as a space and different claims upon its history,” Parlett said. “For me, [the book] feels like a response to Fire Island as a place, [and] what we can learn from it.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
