A Los Angeles drill rapper was gunned down Thursday night in the Bronx for his gold chain, which carried his signature nameplate — Moneygang Vontae — police sources said.
Avanti Frowner, 27, who raps under the Vontae stage name, was in New York City to film a music video later in the month when a pack of thieves tracked him to the Amazing Community Pharmacy on E. Tremont Ave. near Arthur Ave. in Tremont at about 1:40 p.m. Thursday, police sources said.
Vontae stepped outside to buy pot from the suspects, who followed him into the pharmacy and held him up, sparking a struggle, law enforcement sources said.
Surveillance footage obtained by the Daily News shows Vontae and a man wearing a white T-shirt and white do-rag  struggling inside the pharmacy as a terrified employee crouched behind the counter.
As the man forcefully pulled Vontae to the ground, three other suspects stormed the store and piled on top of him while drug store employees ran down a staircase into the basement.
The employee crouched behind the counter moved to the back of the store while one of the men hit Vontae over the head with a long umbrella.
The do-rag-wearing man fumbled with a gun before he shot the drill rapper several times.
As Vontae laid on the floor of the pharmacy bleeding, he fired another shot into his chest before he took off with the massive “Moneygang Vontae” nameplate from his neck, cops said.
“There were about three shots, and I saw the guys running away from the pharmacy,” a witness told The News Thursday. “They robbed him. One of them had his chain.”
“One of the guys had a gun and he put it in the pocket of his shorts as they ran away,” said the witness, who wished not to be named.
EMS rushed Vontae to St. Barnabas Hospital, where he died.
Vontae was staying at a hotel on Webster Ave. near the pharmacy. A friend from California accompanied him on his trip.
NYPD officers investigate the fatal shooting of Moneygang Vontae at Amazing Pharmacy, on  E. Tremont Ave. in the Bronx on June 9. (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
“Yesterday they came in the morning and they left and they did not come,” said the hotel’s front desk clerk, Vick Sid. “They never came back.”
Sid said Vontae’s friend returned to the hotel at 7 p.m. the day of the shooting and told him, “My friend was killed.”
“I said, ‘What happened?’ He asked me to check the YouTube. He told me he was killed in the pharmacy,” Sid recalled.
A short time before his death, the drill rapper posted photos of himself outside a Bronx bodega, the massive nameplate dangling from his neck.
“I Got Use To Counting So Much Money I Got Paper Cuts‼️” he wrote in an Instagram post.
Fans mourned his loss on social media.
“I really hope all this s--- a dream gang,” one commented.
The drill rap music genre continues to capture police attention. Rappers belittle and call out rival gang members in their hit songs, fueling gun violence across the city, police say.
Last week, New York City-based drill rapper Gino Mondana was arrested for allegedly shooting a man in the leg following an April fender-bender in the Bronx.
With Ellen Moynihan
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
