The LGBTQ community is finally coming out — of the shadows of COVID.
After two years of virtual celebrations, fully-masked demonstrations, socially-distanced commemorations and full-on cancellations, LGBTQ Pride month is here again.
While the pandemic is far from over, a combination of vaccinations, booster shots and CDC-approved antiviral drugs all point to a Pride month, where your biggest fear is what you are missing out on.
So, fear not. Here’s a little guide to get you started.
Famous LGBTQ artists at Livingston Public Library
Art educator and painter Suzanne Altman explores the lives, works, and impact of some of the world’s best-known openly LGBTQ artists in this presentation about how they have used their art as a tool for social and political change. Expect to hear about Keith Haring, David Hockney, Catherine Opie, John Singer Sargent, and Diane Arbus — and also about those who were less open about their sexuality, including Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci. Free, no registration required. 7 p.m. 10 Robert H Harp Dr, Livingston, NJ
Pride Night at Payette Brewery in Boise, Idaho
Official Pride celebrations in Idaho’s capital city won’t start until September, but that didn’t stop the Boise Gay Men’s Chorus and the Boise Women’s Chorus to mark Pride Month with a Taproom Takeover at Payette Brewery. The choruses, whose mission is to open hearts and minds through music, are organizing the event to highlight positive community LGBTQ awareness. Music lovers of all ages are invited. Payette Brewery will donate 50% of beer sales to the groups. 6-10 p.m. 733 S. Pioneer St Boise, Idaho. 
PrideFest at Abington Free Library
LGBTQ kids, teens, their families and friends are invited to celebrate Pride Month at a celebration with crafts, music, food, giveaways, a story corner, as well as a meet-and-greet with local authors Eric Bell (”Alan Cole is Not a Coward”) and Charles A. Busch, whose debut book, ”Every Variable of Us,” was named by Vogue Teen as one of “25 Books by Black Authors We Can’t Wait to Read in 2022.″ Free, no registration required. 6 - 7:30 p.m. Raindate: June 21. 1030 Old York Road, Abington, Pa. 
Kids, teens, and their families are invited to join us for PrideFest!  Crafts, music, food, giveaways, community organizations, story corner and more!  Meet local LGBTQ+ authors Charles Bush and Eric Bell, and purchase their books! pic.twitter.com/ukeA8KeF0J
Celebrate Pride: Stonewall & Greenwich Village LGBT History Tour
Honor history and celebrate Pride by walking along the same path explored by previous generations who fought for the rights of the LGBTQ community of yesterday and today. Ken Lustbader and Jay Shockley, co-directors of the NYC LGBT Historic Sites Project, are guiding history buffs and Pride enthusiasts through a tour of sites associated with the early LGBTQ activism and history, which influenced culture, politics, and behavior in the U.S. 6 p.m. Christopher St. at W. Fourth St., Manhattan
Celia Gooding, left, and Laila Kelly pose for a picture in front of the Stonewall Inn before the Queer Liberation March in New York, Sunday, June 30, 2019. (Seth Wenig/AP)
“The Women’s House of Detention: A Queer History of a Forgotten Prison” Eric Marcus in conversation with author Hugh Ryan at Housing Works Bookstore
The incredible story about a little-known prison in Greenwich Village that housed tens of thousands of queer women, trans men and gender-nonconforming people between 1929 and 1974, most of them incarcerated for being improperly feminine, is the subject of a new book by award-winning author and historian Hugh Ryan. “The Women’s House of Detention” has been hailed by critics as a “vital contribution to LGBTQ history” that is “compelling from start to finish.” Ryan sits down with fellow LGBTQ history extraordinaire Eric Marcus, founder and host of the “Making Gay History” podcast, for a conversation about his latest work. 1 p.m. 126 Crosby St., Manhattan
“Edie Windsor: Champion for Marriage Equality” at the New-York Historical Society
The legacy of one of the greatest warriors in the fight for LGBTQ history in the U.S. is being highlighted by New York City’s oldest museum. Edith (Edie) Windsor, who died in 2017 at the age of 88, was the lead plaintiff in the 2013 Sumpre Court case that overturned Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act, a landmark victory that forced the federal government to recognize same-sex marriages. “Edie Windsor was a trailblazer in every sense of the word,” Louise Mirrer, the museum’s president and CEO told the Daily News. “We’re commemorating Pride Month with this special installation featuring the suit she wore to the Supreme Court in 2013 as she advocated for marriage equality, and we’re honored these items will be joining the New-York Historical Society’s collection,” she added. Runs through Oct. 9. 170 Central Park West, Manhattan.
Edith Windsor attends the New York City Gay Pride 2017 march on June 25, 2017  in New York City. (Dimitrios Kambouris/Getty Images)
Naima Green: “A Sequence for Squeezing” at Baxter St at the Camera Club of New York
A new exhibition by the artist and photographer Naima Green, in which she explores play and pleasure while focusing on the experiences of Black, Brown, and queer individuals, opens at Baxter St at the Camera Club of New York, an artist-run organization and one of the city’s oldest art nonprofit spaces. “A Sequence for Squeezing” is centered around two sequences of photographs in which the artist turns her camera toward solitary moments of pleasure and relief — an expansion of themes Green visited in previous works, such as the sensuality of enjoying food, and the exploration of water as a site for pleasure and freedom. Opening reception: 6 - 8 p.m. Runs through July 23. 126 Baxter St., Manhattan.
Our Night Out Wilmington: Pride Month celebration
Our Night Out is a social group for members of the LGBTQ community in Willmington, Del., that meets on the third Thursday of the month. Naturally, that means that Our Night Outters are celebrating Pride this week. The event will be held at Constitution Yards, a pet-friendly seasonal beer garden, so participants are free to bring their four-legged friends along. “So grab your friends, come out in your most colorful outfits, grab a few drinks, play a few games, and stay a while,” organizers said. “We’re hoping for a big crowd for Pride month.” Free. 6-9 p.m. 308 Justison St., Willmington, Del.
Saint Paul Seniors Pride in the Park
East Side Elders, a nonprofit that helps senior citizens in St. Paul, Minn., live independently in their own homes is celebrating its first Pride Party. All LGBTQ seniors, their families and caregivers are invited for a night at the Phalen Picnic Pavilion. The event will include dinner, a dance party, a variety show and more. A limited number of rides are available. Call (651) 808-1901 to RSVP. Free, 5-8 p.m. 1600 Phalen Drive, St. Paul, Minn. 
Save the date for our Pride Party on June 16th! Dinner, Dance Party, and a Variety Show for LGBTQ+ seniors, friends, and caregivers. Join us at the Phalen Pavilion from 5pm to 8pm June 16th! pic.twitter.com/r4n9xjxjFI
Ladyland Festival at Avant Gardner
Ladyland is a Coachella-esque outdoor queer music festival produced by NYC clubland powerhouse Ladyfag — or the “reigning queen of nightlife,” according to Vogue. This colorful celebration of unity and diversity is seen by many as a kick-off to Pride weekend festivities in New York City. This year, the impressive lineup of talent, headlined by superstar DJ Honey Dijon, includes Tinashe, Sevdaliza and “RuPaul’s Drag Race” royalty Vanessa Vanjie. 140 Stewart Ave., Brooklyn
Movies Under the Stars: “Pride”
Fire up that popcorn machine, pick up some rainbow cookies and head to Greenwich Village for a special showing of the award-winning 2014 film “Pride.” Based on a true story, this feel-good gem features a group of LGBTQ activists who raise money to help families affected by the 1984 miner’s strike in the U.K. Free, movie begins at dusk, James J Walker Park at Hudson St., Manhattan.
Drag Queen Story Hour Milwaukee: Swimming with Pride 2022
The always-fabulous drag queens of the Milwaukee, Wisc., branch of Drag Queen Story Hour are taking their charisma, uniqueness, nerve and talent to the pool. According to organizers, the event will feature “local merfolk” reading stories to children and their families. The first 50 children receive a free pool pass, so they can jump in the water after the reading. 2 p.m. 1301 W. Hampton Ave.
Da Bronx Pride Week Festival
“RuPaul’s Drag Race” superstar and Bronx native Kandy Muse and Karen Mercedez, from the Netflix Series “The Circle,” are hosting the borough’s biggest Pride celebration. Hosted by Destination Tomorrow, New York’s only Black trans-led LGBTQ center, this all-day event will feature a march, rally, family entertainment, as well as performances by Seduction, the House of Miyake-Mugler, ballroom icon Sinia Alaia, and more. Free, noon-6 p.m, Westchester Ave., between Brook Ave. and Bergen Ave.
LGBTQ Saves Youth Pride Picnic at Trinity Park, Fort Worth, Texas
This free, annual event in North Texas offers a safe space for LGBTQ youth and their families to meet new friends, participate in fun activities, score cool goodie bags, and simply be who they are. Hamburgers and hotdogs will be provided to all participants free of charge. 10 a.m.-2 p.m. Individual sponsors and volunteers needed. 2401 University Dr., Fort Worth
Chicago Pride Fest
Organizers for this year’s festivities are expecting more than 60,000 Pride enthusiasts from the city and beyond to celebrate LGBTQ life, culture and community. The traditional street festival will feature artists performing in 3 stages, drag shows, DJs, giveaways, over 150 vendors of arts/crafts, food and drinks, and even a pet parade. Performers include “RuPaul’s Drag Race All Stars” winner Alaska Thunderf--k, “Pose” star Dyllón Burnside and Chicago-born rapper CupcakKe. Suggested donation $15. Saturday and Sunday, rain or shine, from 11 a.m. - 10 p.m. Northalsted on Halsted Street from Addison to Grace St, Chicago, Ill.
Confetti flies as people gather at Chicago's Grant Park during the Pride in the Park festival, Saturday, June 26, 2021. (Shafkat Anowar/AP)
OutCycling Pride Ride
New York City’s most colorful riders are going hybrid for their annual Pride Ride this year. Participants of the OutCycling Pride Ride 2022 will have several options to show their Pride in person — from an easy-breezy 30-mile ride to an intimidating century (100 miles) — as well as by riding their own routes from anywhere in the world. A portion of the proceeds will go toward OutCycling’s Fearless Flyers, a program designed to teach cycling and leadership skills to LGBTQ youth. Visit outcycling.org for information.
OutCycling (Alan Barnett )
Black of Center: Juneteenth Block Festival
For one of its first in-person Pride events since 2019, The Center, is hosting a festival to celebrate Juneteenth, focusing on Black LGBTQ artists, storytellers, businesses and vendors. Doors are open to all for an afternoon of music performances, games, storytelling, art-making workshops, community discussions, and more. Free, noon-5 p.m, 208 W. 13th St., Manhattan
Check back next week for Week 4.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
