Trying to understand the man the governors of New York and New Jersey want to be CEO of the bistate Gateway Development Commission, overseeing the overblown $35 billion Gateway boondoggle concocted by Amtrak and being funded mostly by the states, we poked around on Kris Kolluri.
For the past four years, Kolluri has led Cooper’s Ferry Partnership, a nonprofit helping New Jersey’s poorest city, Camden, right across the Delaware River from Philly.
Kris Kolluri answers questions from the Senate Judiciary Committee, Monday, Feb. 27, 2006, at the New Jersey Statehouse in Trenton. (MEL EVANS/AP)
The publicly available 990 IRS forms show that Kolluri makes $400,000 a year from a charity with an $8 million income. And according to the N.J. attorney general’s Division of Consumer Affairs online database of nonprofits, it was “Non-Compliant,” meaning that “the organization has not met all of the registration requirements of the Charitable Registration and Investigation Act for one or more fiscal years.”
The AG’s office confirmed this, even as the nonprofit told us that they were fully up to date. The next day, the charity was “Compliant” and the AG’s spokeswoman said that she would get answers on how it changed overnight. We never heard back from her and were told that she had retired. Eventually, the AG’s office informed us that the Cooper’s Ferry employer identification number was improperly redacted, resulting in the “Non-Compliant” listing. Once the number was provided, the status became “Compliant.”
In 2014, Cooper’s Ferry was not being compliant with South Jersey Democratic boss George Norcross, who gets his way in Camden. As documented by WNYC and ProPublica and also by the Philadelphia Inquirer and Politico, he wanted a waterfront parcel held by Cooper’s Ferry; they resisted. Norcross then applied pressure and Cooper’s Ferry surrendered the property. The chair of Cooper’s Ferry, John Sheridan, and his wife Joyce were murdered later that year. Their son tells WNYC that the land deal is part of the mystery.
Cooper’s Ferry, renamed Camden Community Partnership last year, is now 100% with Norcross, including Kolluri, and recently moved into a Norcross building. Last week, Acting AG Matt Platkin opened a probe into the Sheridan case. And Kolluri, pushed by Norcross, is heading for Gateway.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
