Johnny Depp is sinking his fangs into music — and bringing some star power along for the ride.
Weeks after his explosive defamation trial with ex-wife Amber Heard, the “Pirates of the Caribbean” star is going on tour next year with his supergroup Hollywood Vampires, the band announced Wednesday on Instagram.
“The Hollywood Vampires are BACK!! We’re coming to Germany and Luxembourg Summer 2023,” the band — which includes Depp, Alice Cooper, Aerosmith guitarist Joe Perry and Alice Cooper guitarist Tommy Henriksen — captioned a poster of their tour dates.
Musician Alice Cooper (R) and Actor/Musician Johnny Depp of the Hollywood Vampires perform onstage at Hessentags-Arena during the 56th Hessentag on May 29, 2016 in Herborn, Germany.  (Andreas Rentz/Getty Images)
The foursome is slated to perform in Germany at the end of June 2023.
(L-R) Singer Alice Cooper, musician Joe Perry and actor/musician Johnny Depp of Hollywood Vampires attend The 58th GRAMMY Awards at Staples Center on February 15, 2016 in Los Angeles, California.  (Larry Busacca/Getty Images)
Hollywood Vampires have two studio albums, with guest appearances by Paul McCartney and Dave Grohl.
The announcement comes just weeks after the verdicts were issued in Depp and  Heard’s defamation trial, which took place in Virginia.
Depp, 59, sued the “Aquaman” actress, 36, for $50 million for defamation in relation to the 2018 Washington Post op-ed in which she identified herself as “a public figure representing domestic abuse.” Depp said the piece was clearly a nod to the abuse allegations she’d leveled against him, despite never being explicitly named in the piece. Heard countersued Depp for $100 million due to his former lawyer dubbing her accusations a “hoax.”
On June 1, the jury reached a long-awaited verdict in the trial, awarding Depp $15 million in compensatory and punitive damages, which was reduced to a little over $10 million, while Heard was awarded $2 million in compensatory damages.
Heard last week elaborated on her position in a two-part interview with the “Today” show.
“To my dying day, I will stand by every word of my testimony,” she told Savannah Guthrie.
The interview also featured as the centerpiece for last Friday’s airing of “Dateline.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
