Former “X Factor” contestant Tom Mann was supposed to be a newly married man, but instead is mourning the sudden passing of his fiancée.
The 28-year-old musician took to Instagram Monday to share the death of Dani Hampson, with whom he shared infant son Bowie. She was 34.
“I can’t believe I am writing these words but my darling Dani - my best friend, my everything and more, the love of my life - passed away in the early hours of Saturday morning, 18th June,” Mann captioned a black-and-white photo of Hampson and the couple’s son.
Tom Mann performs with Stereo Kicks in 2015. (Ollie Millington/Redferns)
“On what was supposed to be the happiest day of our lives ended in irreversible heartbreak,” he continued. “I feel like I have cried an ocean. We never made it to the alter [sic]; or got to say our vows, or dance our first dance, but I know you know that you were my entire world and the best thing that has ever happened to me, Danielle.”
Mann promised to “wear this ring that I was always supposed to wear as a sign of my unconditional love to you.”
Noting he is “completely broken” as he tries to come to terms with the horrific turn of events, Mann said he needs to “use any strength I can muster for our little boy” and vowed to “do my everything to raise Bowie just the way we always wanted.”
“The most beautiful person inside and out. The most incredible soul,” said Mann. “My darling Dani, the brightest light in any room, my world is nothing but darkness without you. I will miss you forever.”
Mann, who previously auditioned for the talent show’s U.K. version in 2014, was originally supposed to marry Hampson — a public relations executive, according to her Instagram profile — in 2020 but delayed the nuptials as a result of COVID.
Hampson, who often posted photos of the couple and little Bowie, last took to Instagram at the end of May, when the couple and their son were vacationing in Italy.
On New Year’s Eve, Hampson said that “2021 started much like 2020 - expecting to become husband & wife - only we ended up as mum & dad instead :white_heart:” and referred to the birth of Bowie as “my highlight, proudest moment & biggest achievement. Now & always.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
