Advertisement
Supported by
The Watching Newsletter
A wake-and-bake comedy returns to Showtime, and a sumptuous new drama set on the Italian Riviera comes to PBS.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Alexis Soloski
‘Flatbush Misdemeanors’When to watch: Sunday at 11 p.m., on Showtime.
This lowrider comedy series, created by the friends and stand-up comics Kevin Iso and Dan Perlman, returns for a second season. Combining real stakes — child welfare, chemical dependency, job insecurity — with a lackadaisical, wake-and-bake tone, the first season introduced the starving artist Kevin (Iso) and the high school teacher Dan (Perlman), longtime friends who share a crummy apartment in a gentrifying Brooklyn enclave.
This second season explores the consequences of the Season 1 finale, which saw Kevin flee and Dan sent to the rubber room, their friendship frayed. (Season 2 starts streaming Friday on the Showtime website and app.)
‘Hotel Portofino’When to watch: Sunday at 8 p.m., on PBS. (Check local listings.)
A hospitality-industry “Downton Abbey” and an upmarket, entrepreneurial version of “The Durrells in Corfu,” this six-episode PBS Masterpiece series is set on the Italian Riviera during the interwar years. Bella (Natascha McElhone), the daughter of a British industrialist, has opened a boutique hotel, an enterprise complicated by her useless husband (Mark Umbers) and artistic, shellshocked son (Oliver Dench). Creeping fascism is kind of a problem, too. The show has a paint-by-numbers feel, but the sumptuous gowns and more sumptuous locations have their particular pleasures. If you enjoy pale English people in mildly exotic environs, book in.
‘The Summer I Turned Pretty’When to watch: Starting Sunday, on Amazon Prime Video.
For fans of the “To All the Boys” film series, based on the novels by Jenny Han, here, it seems, are more boys. For this seven-part series, Han has created an adaptation of the first book in her own “Summer” trilogy; it stars Lola Tung as Belly, an introverted high schooler who shows up for her usual summer beach vacation having suddenly woken up on the right side of puberty. Her friends — particularly the two handsome sons of her host — treat her differently now. Watch if you like it when teenagers have all the feels and you don’t mind a little sand in your lobster roll.
Advertisement
