The prime minister has lost support in his Conservative Party over lockdown-breaking parties at Downing Street during the height of the Covid crisis.
Follow our live news updates on Boris Johnson and the no-confidence vote.
 Mark Landler and Stephen Castle
LONDON — Prime Minister Boris Johnson survived a tense vote of no confidence on Monday, fending off a mutiny that nevertheless leaves him reeling and presages a volatile period in British politics, as he fights to stay in power and lead a divided Conservative Party.
The vote, 211 to 148, fell short of the majority of Tory lawmakers needed to oust Mr. Johnson. But it laid bare how badly his support has eroded since last year, when a scandal erupted over revelations that he and his senior aides threw parties at 10 Downing Street that violated the government’s lockdown rules. More than 40 percent of Conservative lawmakers voted against him in an unexpectedly large rebellion.
Mr. Johnson vowed to stay on, declaring that the victory should put an end to months of speculation about his future. “It’s a convincing result, a decisive result,” the prime minister said from Downing Street after the results of the secret ballot were announced.
“As a government,” Mr. Johnson added, “we can focus and move on to the stuff that really matters to people.”
History shows, however, that Conservative prime ministers who have been subjected to such a vote — even if they win it — are usually drummed out of office, if not immediately then within a few months.
Mr. Johnson won a smaller share of his party’s support on Monday than either his predecessor, Theresa May, did in 2018, or Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher did in 1990, when they survived no-confidence votes. Mrs. May was forced out six months later. Mrs. Thatcher lasted only a few days.
And yet, Mr. Johnson is a singular figure in British politics, gleefully defying convention and often seeming immune to the rules of political gravity. With a comfortable majority in Parliament, his party is no danger of losing power. He could opt to ride out the storm, claiming, as he did on Monday evening, that he got a larger mandate than when he was first elected leader of the party in July 2019.
Still, for a politician who led the Tories to a landslide election victory in 2019 with the promise to “get Brexit done,” it was a bruising fall from grace — one that could expose him to a political insurgency in his party, an empowered opposition, and further electoral setbacks that weaken his credibility.
In two and a half years, Mr. Johnson has gone from Britain’s most reliable vote-getter — a celebrity politician who redrew the country’s political map — to a scandal-scarred figure whose job has been in peril since the first reports of illicit lockdown parties emerged last November.
As Britons paid tribute to Queen Elizabeth’s 70-year reign last week, they were turning against the chaotic tenure of their prime minister. On Friday, Mr. Johnson was loudly booed by the crowd at St. Paul’s Cathedral when he and his wife, Carrie, attended a thanksgiving service for the queen.
That moment may have crystallized the loss of public support for Mr. Johnson, an ethically flexible journalist-turned-politician whose peccadilloes were forgiven more often than not by a public he proved adept at charming.
Still, for now, Mr. Johnson remains in power, and under the party’s current rules, he cannot face another no-confidence vote for a year. The odds of removing him will depend on several wild cards.
Will his Cabinet turn against him, as Mrs. Thatcher’s did after the vote in 1990, precipitating her swift resignation? Will the party threaten to change the rules and hold a second no-confidence vote, as it suggested it might with Mrs. May, persuading her to negotiate her exit? Will Mr. Johnson gamble by calling an early general election, seeking a mandate from the public that he could not get from his party?
Mr. Johnson sought to deflect questions about a new election on Monday night, saying only, “I’m certainly not interested in snap elections.”
In 1995, Prime Minister John Major triggered, and won, a leadership contest in the Conservative Party, only to go down to a crushing defeat to Tony Blair and the Labour Party two years later. Given Britain’s economic woes and the Conservative Party’s weakness in the polls, some Tories fear a similar outcome this time.
Opposition leaders seized on the result to paint Conservative lawmakers as having endorsed the leadership of a lawbreaking prime minister.
“Conservative MP’s made their choice tonight,” said the leader of the Labour Party, Keir Starmer. “They have ignored the wishes of the British public.” Voters, he said, are “fed up — fed up — with a prime minister who promises big but never delivers.”
The result leaves Conservatives restive and divided, after a tense day in which senior members of the party sparred openly on social media. Some lawmakers argued that his position had become untenable.
Roger Gale, a Conservative lawmaker, expressed surprise at the size of the rebellion. “I think the prime minister has to go back to Downing Street tonight and consider very carefully where he goes from here,” Mr. Gale said to the BBC.
But one of Mr. Johnson’s defenders, James Cleverly, a minister in the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, said, “he’s won it comfortably and now we need to get on with the job.” He said of Mr. Johnson’s electoral track record, “There’s no other candidate that is going to get anything like that level of support.”
Mr. Johnson was greeted warmly when he addressed Conservatives earlier in the afternoon, with some lawmakers pounding their desks in gestures of support, according to those in attendance. But he also got challenging questions, and as the members drifted out of the committee room afterward, it was clear he had not convinced all those who opposed him to call off their mutiny.
“I told the prime minister that if he broke the law he would have to go,” said Steve Baker, an influential pro-Brexit lawmaker who has called on Mr. Johnson to step down. “He’s clearly broken the law, he’s clearly acquiesced in the law being broken, so I stick to my word that I gave on the record that he should go.”
Noting that he had helped Mr. Johnson become prime minister, Mr. Baker described it as an “awful moment.”
Mr. Cleverly said the prime minister “was in very much serious mode,” and that his speech was “light on jokes and heavy on plans and policy.”
“He’s actually got a plan for what he wants to do next, how we deliver on the promises we made in the 2019 general election,” he said, “how we continue delivering through really, really difficult times.”
The latest chapter of this drama began on Sunday when Mr. Johnson was informed by Graham Brady, the head of a committee of Conservative Party backbenchers, that the threshold of 54 letters calling for a no-confidence vote had been reached. Mr. Brady and Mr. Johnson then negotiated the timing of a vote, with the prime minister pushing to hold it quickly.
That gave Mr. Johnson a tactical advantage because it deprived would-be rivals of time to organize a challenge to him. One potential challenger, Jeremy Hunt, tried to move quickly, declaring on Monday that he would be “voting for change.” Mr. Hunt, a former health secretary and foreign secretary, lost out to Mr. Johnson as party leader in 2019.
Nadine Dorries, Mr. Johnson’s culture secretary and one of his most ardent defenders, bitterly criticized Mr. Hunt for “destabilizing the party and country to serve your own ambition.” In a post on Twitter, she said, “You’ve been wrong about almost everything, you are wrong again now.”
The timing of the vote was also dictated by Queen Elizabeth’s Platinum Jubilee, a four-day celebration that ended on Sunday. Mr. Brady was determined not to allow news of a no-confidence vote to overshadow the festivities. As a result, Britain’s political drama played out behind closed doors while the political establishment gathered to pay tribute to the queen in a series of public events.
After he had been told of the vote, Mr. Johnson and his wife, Carrie, attended a pageant at Buckingham Palace, where his face betrayed no signs of the brewing crisis. Several lawmakers who submitted letters calling for a vote asked Mr. Brady that they be postdated so they would not be seen as interfering with the jubilee.
During a star-studded concert on Saturday evening, Mr. Johnson watched performers including Alicia Keys and Queen while Conservative lawmakers pored over a memo from anonymous members circulating on their WhatsApp group, which warned that failing to eject Mr. Johnson would bring the party to ruin, according to a report in The Telegraph.
The blunt assessment of the memo, published by The Telegraph, was that “Boris Johnson is no longer an electoral asset.”
Megan Specia contributed reporting.
 Anushka Patil
President Volodymyr Zelensky praised Boris Johnson in his nightly address, saying he was grateful to Johnson for providing Ukraine with weapons and “fully understanding our needs.” The two men spoke earlier on Monday and have developed a close relationship since Russia’s invasion.
 Megan Specia
Prime Minister Boris Johnson survived a no-confidence vote on his leadership, but the Conservative voices speaking out against him reveal a rift that the opposition is already capitalizing on.
Keir Starmer, the opposition Labour Party leader, said in a news conference that the British public is “fed up with a prime minister who promises big but never delivers.”
He added that Britons were “fed up with a prime minister who has presided over a culture of lies and lawbreaking at the heart of government, fed up with a prime minister who is utterly unfit for the great office that he holds.”
“Conservative MPs made their choice tonight,” Mr. Starmer said. “They have ignored the British public and hitched themselves and their party firmly to Boris Johnson and everything that he represents.”
Other Labour Party members swiftly offered their reaction to the vote. David Lammy, a senior lawmaker responsible for foreign affairs, told the BBC that Mr. Johnson is now “walking wounded” and added that “the Conservative Party should get rid of him.”
“You need someone that the British people can trust,” he said.
Wes Streeting, a senior Labour lawmaker responsible for health and social care, said that the vote indicated broader issues within the Conservative Party.
“But a majority of Conservative MPs have shown that the rot has set deep into the Conservative Party,” Mr. Streeting wrote on Twitter. “Johnson is unfit to govern. So are they.”
 Megan Specia
Shortly after 148 members of his Conservative Party cast ballots saying they no longer had confidence in his leadership, Prime Minister Boris Johnson declared the vote a victory even though it laid bare the fissures in his party.
“It’s a convincing result, a decisive result,” Mr. Johnson told the BBC. “What it means is that, as a government, we can move on and focus on the stuff that really matters to people.”
The vote was an opportunity to put in the past issues that Mr. Johnson said the news media has emphasized — a reference to the Downing Street parties that violated lockdown rules and imperiled his leadership of the party.
Mr. Johnson urged the party to “unite” and turn its attention to topics like the cost of living crisis and other challenges facing the country. He refused to answer repeated questions about whether he would call a snap election, which would force an early general election in hopes that a strong showing by his party would strengthen his hold on leadership.
Instead, he returned to the theme of what his government could still do for the public, saying he would “use this moment, which I think is decisive and conclusive, and continue with our priorities.”
He added, “I think what matters is what we deliver.”
 Megan Specia and Stephen Castle
Despite Monday night’s vote laying bare deep fractures within the prime minister’s own Conservative Party, supporters and detractors emphasized a need to move on and focus on governing the nation.
But even as they urged unity, vocal opponents of Mr. Johnson said that the 148 votes against him signaled that the British leader had lost significant trust.
Roger Gale, a Conservative backbencher, voted against Mr. Johnson and said he was surprised at just how many of his fellow lawmakers did the same. Speaking to the BBC, he said the vote was “severely damaging” to Mr. Johnson’s reputation.
He had been a vocal opponent of Mr. Johnson, but emphasized that the vote against him was “not an orchestrated campaign.”
“I think the prime minister has to go back to Downing Street tonight and consider very carefully where he goes from here,” Mr. Gale said.
Others in the party were quick to support Mr. Johnson. Nadhim Zahawi, Britain’s education secretary, said moments after the vote that it was time to “move on,” in an interview with Sky News.
Describing the prime minister’s victory as a “comprehensive vote of confidence,” James Cleverly, a foreign office minister, appealed to the Conservative Party to unite behind Mr. Johnson. “There’s no other candidate that is going to get anything like that level of support,” he said, adding: “He’s won it comfortably, and now we need to get on with the job.”
Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, wrote on Twitter that she was “pleased that colleagues have backed the Prime Minister. I support him 100%. Now’s the time to get on with the job.”
Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the Exchequer, echoed the familiar call, saying “now it’s time to move forward.”
 Stephen Castle
In theory, victory for Boris Johnson in Monday’s vote means he cannot face another no-confidence motion for a year, securing his position in Downing Street. In reality, his position is different.
Weakened prime ministers are vulnerable to plotting, and their authority can be further undermined by rebellions among lawmakers in Parliament that make it impossible to get key legislation through.
Resignations by ministers — particularly senior ones — can deal serious damage to leaders, particularly if they are orchestrated. Mr. Johnson’s cabinet is heavily made up of his supporters, making this less likely, but it is not impossible. For example, there were rumors this year that Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the Exchequer, might quit; and if Mr. Johnson were to try to demote him in a reshuffle, such speculation could return.
The rule that there can be no repeat of a no-confidence motion for a year could also be changed by the senior hierarchy of the Conservative Party in Parliament.
Even a threat to do so has been enough to persuade a prime minister that her or his time in Downing Street is coming to an end. That was the case for the previous prime minister, Theresa May, who survived a no-confidence vote in December 2018 but announced her resignation within six months of her victory after relentless pressure.
So if enough Conservative lawmakers conclude that they want to ditch Mr. Johnson, there are still ways to force him out.
 Mark Landler
News ANALYSIS
LONDON — When Boris Johnson won a landslide election victory for his Conservative Party in 2019, he loomed as a colossus over British politics, the man who had redrawn the country’s political map with a vow to “get Brexit done.”
With an 80-seat majority in Parliament, the greatest amassed by a Conservative leader since Margaret Thatcher in 1987, Mr. Johnson seemed assured of five years in power. Some analysts predicted a comfortable decade in 10 Downing Street for Mr. Johnson, the most reliable vote-getter in British politics.
Now, just two and a half years after that triumph, Mr. Johnson’s political invincibility has been shattered. Rebels in his party fell short of ousting him in a tense no-confidence vote on Monday. But with 148 of 359 Tory lawmakers voting against him, he has been damaged, perhaps irretrievably, as an effective, credible leader. Though he remains prime minister, he may be living on borrowed time.
It is one of the most head-spinning reversals of fortune in modern British political history.
What happened?
To some extent, Mr. Johnson’s standing crumbled because of the same confounding mix of strengths and foibles that propelled his rise: rare political intuition offset by breathtaking personal recklessness; a sense of history not matched by a corresponding sense of how he should conduct himself as a leader; uncanny people skills vitiated by a transactional style that earned him few allies and left him isolated at dangerous moments.
It is that last quality, analysts say, that made Mr. Johnson so vulnerable to the setbacks he has suffered. With no underlying ideology beyond Brexit and no network of political friends, the prime minister lost the support of lawmakers in his party when it became clear they could not count on him to win the next election.
 Jason Karaian
In the financial markets, there was little drama after the vote results were announced. The British pound, which was up against the dollar and euro for most of the day, retained most of its gains. Many investors expected the prime minister to win, and analysts say that global factors, like rising inflation and interest rates, are more important to the path of Britain’s economy.
 Megan Specia
Johnson refused to answer repeated questions about whether he would call a snap election. But he said he would “use this moment, which I think is decisive and conclusive, and continue with our priorities,” vowing to address the cost of living crisis and a number of other national issues. “I think what matters is what we deliver and what we do,” he said.
 Stephen Castle
Conservative lawmaker Julian Sturdy has called on Johnson to consider quitting. “The scale of the vote against the Prime Minister this evening is clear evidence that he no longer enjoys the full-hearted confidence of the parliamentary party and should consider his position,” Mr. Sturdy wrote in a Twitter post
 Megan Specia
Prime Minister Boris Johnson speaking after the vote said: “I think it’s a convincing result, a decisive result. What it means is that, as a government, we can move on and focus on the stuff that really matters to people.”
 Stephen Castle
Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, wrote on Twitter that she was glad that her colleagues back Johnson.
 Stephen Castle
Describing the prime minister’s victory as a “comprehensive vote of confidence,” James Cleverly, a foreign office minister, appealed to the Conservative Party to unite behind the prime minister. “There’s no other candidate that is going to get anything like that level of support,” he said, adding, “He’s won it comfortably, and now we need to get on with the job.”
 Megan Specia
Roger Gale, a Conservative lawmaker, said he voted against Johnson and was surprised at how many of his fellow lawmakers did the same. Speaking to the BBC, he said the vote was “severely damaging.” “I think the prime minister has to go back to Downing Street tonight and consider very carefully where he goes from here.” 
 Megan Specia
Starmer said members of the British public “are fed up with a prime minister who promises big but never delivers.” "Conservative MPs made their choice tonight, and they have ignored the British public.”
 Megan Specia
Keir Starmer, the opposition Labour party leader, said on Twitter that the vote made the choice between the two parties “clearer than ever before.”
“Divided Tories propping up Boris Johnson with no plan to tackle the issues you are facing, or a united Labour Party with a plan to fix the cost of living crisis and restore trust in politics.”
 Megan Specia
Boris Johnson has survived a confidence vote, with 211 members of his party voting for him and 148 voting against him.
 Stephen Castle
And that’s it. Voting has ended for the no-confidence motion. The counting starts now, and the result is expected at 9 p.m. London time/4 p.m. Eastern.
 Megan Specia
Despite the private nature of the ballot, a number of Conservative lawmakers have been declaring their positions, either in posts on social media or in interviews at Westminster. The latest to voice his vote was John Lamont, who said he voted against Boris Johnson and would be resigning as the foreign minister’s parliamentary private secretary.
 Megan Specia
The political infighting within the Conservative Party spilled out into the public on Monday in a Twitter spat between an outspoken ally of Prime Minister Boris Johnson and another prominent party member who indicated his intention to vote to remove Mr. Johnson.
Jeremy Hunt, a Conservative lawmaker and former health secretary and foreign minister, tweeted that he planned to “vote for change.” In response, Nadine Dorries, Britain’s culture secretary and an ardent supporter of Mr. Johnson, denounced Mr. Hunt’s planning for the pandemic in a series of tweets.
Ms. Dorries has emerged as a devout defender of Mr. Johnson since she was appointed to his cabinet late last year.
On Monday she accused Mr. Hunt of “duplicity right now in destabilizing the party and country” to serve his own “personal ambition,” and said Mr. Hunt’s “pandemic preparation during six years as health secretary was found wanting and inadequate.”
Mr. Hunt, who has been seen by some as a potential contender for his party’s leadership if Mr. Johnson were ousted, had tweeted earlier in the day, indicating his intention to file a no-confidence vote.
“Anyone who believes our country is stronger, fairer & more prosperous when led by Conservatives should reflect that the consequence of not changing will be to hand the country to others who do not share those values,” he wrote. “Today’s decision is change or lose. I will be voting for change”
After the heated thread from Ms. Dorries, Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice U.K., a group that aims to hold public institutions accountable for the country’s high Covid death toll, responded to the public infighting.
“Failure to prepare for the pandemic is being used for political point scoring but for us it meant the loss of our loved ones,” the organization said in a response to Ms. Dorries. “The failure to prepare cost lives. The failure to learn quickly cost more. Squabbling won’t save lives. The inquiry can. There must be no more delays.”
 Stephen Castle
Prime Minister Boris Johnson just arrived to cast a ballot in the no-confidence motion on his leadership. Not much doubt about how he voted. 
 Mark Landler
LONDON — For a while it looked as though Russia’s brutal invasion of Ukraine would prove to be a useful distraction for Prime Minister Boris Johnson.
But after months in which the war in Ukraine took the spotlight away from Mr. Johnson’s political woes, they finally caught up with him, and on Monday the prime minister survived a tense no-confidence vote. The too-close-for-comfort result leaves him badly wounded and sets off a volatile period in British politics as he fights to stay in power and fend off potential challengers in his Conservative Party.
The wall-to-wall coverage of the war eclipsed the scandal over Downing Street parties during the lockdown of 2020, and even adversaries of Mr. Johnson — including the Labour Party leader, Keir Starmer — put on hold their demands that the prime minister resign.
But in recent weeks, Britons began turning against the brief, chaotic tenure of their prime minister, with the crowd at St. Paul’s Cathedral booing when he and his wife, Carrie, attended a thanksgiving service for Queen Elizabeth II.
Allies of Mr. Johnson argued that “Partygate,” as the London tabloids called it, was a needless intrusion at a time when Europe was confronting its first major land war since World War II. “It is fundamentally trivial,” said Jacob Rees-Mogg, a former leader of the House of Commons, adding that the affair would soon be forgotten.
Mr. Johnson, who had paid relatively little attention to Ukraine as Russian troops massed along its borders, quickly staked out a position as one of the country’s staunchest defenders in the West. He authorized shipments of powerful weapons to Ukraine’s army and placed regular phone calls to its president, Volodymyr Zelensky, who was grateful for the support.
The first of several speeches Mr. Zelensky made to foreign Parliaments was delivered to Britain’s House of Commons, and he singled out Mr. Johnson for praise. And Mr. Johnson visited Mr. Zelensky in Kyiv, walking with the president on a street in the capital in a highly visible show of support.
But as the fighting on the other side of Europe has ground on, domestic matters have regained prominence. And while the public remains generally supportive of Mr. Johnson’s handling of Ukraine, the war has burnished the reputations of two other cabinet ministers: Ben Wallace, the defense secretary, and Liz Truss, the foreign secretary.
Both appear on lists of potential replacements for Mr. Johnson.
 Stephen Castle
Conservative lawmakers are gossiping and joking as they wait in line to vote. 
 Stephen Castle
The line is moving in Parliament and voting has started for the motion of no confidence in Boris Johnson. Conservative lawmakers now have less than two hours to vote in a ballot that closes at 8 p.m. British time. 
 Stephen Castle
In a speech to his fellow Conservative lawmakers, Prime Minister Boris Johnson argued that the best was yet to come if they continued to support him, and that he would prove an election winner for a second time.
“I will lead you to victory again and the winners will be the people of this country,” Mr. Johnson said, according to excerpts from the text released by a party official.
Mr. Johnson also promised to reduce taxes and focus on the problems confronting Britain as he prepared to face a no-confidence vote on Monday after public outcry over violations of pandemic lockdown rules.
“We can deliver and we can unite,” he said.
Mr. Johnson warned that the opposition Labour Party would prevail in the next election “if we were so foolish as to descend into some pointless fratricidal debate about the future of the party when, frankly, there is no alternative vision that I am hearing.”
James Cleverly, a minister in the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, said Mr. Johnson “was in very much serious mode,” and that his speech was “light on jokes and heavy on plans and policy.”
He said he believed Mr. Johnson would survive the vote, because he put forth a viable plan for the party: “For what he wants to do next, how we deliver on the promises we made in the 2019 general election, how we continue delivering through really, really difficult times.”
The prime minister is famous for making political escapes, and he told his party that there was “plenty of evidence over the last 20 years” that it would be wrong to write him off now.
But Steve Baker, an influential pro-Brexit lawmaker who has called on Mr. Johnson to resign, said the speech had not changed his vote.
“I told the prime minister that if he broke the law, he would have to go,” Mr. Baker said outside the meeting room in Parliament where Mr. Johnson addressed his party. “He’s clearly broken the law, he’s clearly acquiesced in the law being broken.”
Mr. Baker said he had helped Mr. Johnson become prime minister and described the situation as “an awful moment.”
Asked what he expected the result of the vote to be, Mr. Baker said it was “highly likely” that Mr. Johnson would retain the support of a majority of the party’s lawmakers, although there would be “quite a big vote against him.”
“But what that means over the months, I don’t know,” he added.
 Megan Specia
A strike on London’s tube kept some lawmakers away from Parliament on Monday as it complicated travel, and could mean that some Conservative lawmakers vote by proxy when ballots begin to be cast shortly.
 Saskia Solomon
Voters in a London neighborhood that Boris Johnson once called home were ready for him to move out of Downing Street.
Joe Mossman, who owns a Japanese restaurant in Islington, the North London neighborhood where Mr. Johnson lived while serving as the city’s mayor from 2008 to 2016, condemned Mr. Johnson’s “cavalier attitude” over parties held at Downing Street at the height of a coronavirus pandemic despite lockdown protocols.
“I think he could have been ousted several months ago, or done the decent thing and resigned,” said Mr. Mossman, 43.
Hours before the prime minister faced a no-confidence vote by his Conservative Party, residents of the neighborhood, which is hardly a hotbed of conservative sentiment and is well known for its left-wing views, were critical of Mr. Johnson. But Mr. Johnson’s public support has cratered just two years after leading his party to overwhelming victory: His approval rating in a YouGov poll dropped to just 26 percent by the start of May.
Andrey Mishin, 59, described Mr. Johnson as “unfit for the job.”
“He hasn’t got integrity, and he’s a pathological liar,” Mr. Mishin said. “I’ve followed his policies from the time he became mayor of London, and he has failed.”
But geopolitical factors gave even Mr. Johnson’s harshest critics at least some pause about a possible leadership change.
“I wonder whether, with a new prime minister, Britain could manage to maintain its hard stance towards Putin?” said Mr. Mishin, referring to the invasion of Ukraine by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
Lucy Shipton said she had been “horrified” by Mr. Johnson’s behavior and hoped Conservative lawmakers removed him as the party’s leader, which would trigger a handover of power to a new prime minister.
But Ms. Shipton, 66, a teacher, worried about Mr. Johnson’s potential successor.
“I’m not very inspired by the alternatives I’ve seen in the Tory party,” she said. “But I feel that it is impossible to carry on with someone who has no integrity.”
For Clare Goodman, 36, the boos that greeted Mr. Johnson at St. Paul’s Cathedral during a service for the Platinum Jubilee for Queen Elizabeth II was a sign of the deep disapproval he faces.
“You’d expect there to be a big overlap between royalists and conservative voters,” she said. “The fact that he was booed shows the public’s mood.”
 Stephen Castle
Conservative Party officials will announce at 9 p.m. British time whether Boris Johnson has retained leadership of the party, and therefore his job as Britain’s prime minister.
In all, 359 Conservative lawmakers are eligible to take part in a no-confidence vote in Mr. Johnson, who needs to win a majority of ballots — at least 180 — to keep his job.
The decision will be made in secret balloting beginning at 6 p.m. British time. Lawmakers will file in to a committee room in Parliament, have their names checked off against a list, surrender their cellphones, and cast their ballots. Limited proxy voting will be permitted.
Voting will end after two hours. Mr. Johnson will be privately informed of the result a few minutes before it is announced on live television.
If he loses, Mr. Johnson will cease to be leader of the Conservative Party, but would be expected to remain prime minister until a successor is chosen and he hands over power to them.
 Stephen Castle
Prime Minister Boris Johnson has finished his speech to fellow Conservative lawmakers ahead of the no confidence vote, and left the committee room.
 Megan Specia
For many of the families of the more than 179,000 people in Britain who died during the coronavirus pandemic, the parties at Downing Street during lockdowns felt like an affront, and some called for Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s resignation.
Now, as Mr. Johnson faces a no-confidence vote in Parliament after months of revelations of lawbreaking, some are watching the proceedings warily. Lobby Akinnola, 31, whose father, Femi Akinnola, died of the coronavirus, said that the announcement on Monday of the vote left many bereaved families with mixed emotions.
“It’s kind of waiting to see how things pan out,” Mr. Akinnola said. “I’d say there’s a real concern that the same old faces are going to continue to defend the indefensible and put politics over people.”
But, Mr. Akinnola added, “He’s lost the trust of the public,” and the loss of that trust means Mr. Johnson can no longer effectively govern.
“He doesn’t have the moral authority any more,” he said.
Mr. Johnson was fined this year for breaching lockdown laws for his involvement in one of the parties, as was Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the Exchequer and Mr. Johnson’s wife, Carrie Johnson. A report released last month by Sue Gray, a British civil servant, detailed the full extent of the partying and described an office culture in which alcohol use was rampant.
When news reports of the parties broke in the fall of 2021, Mr. Akinnola said he was devastated. He and other bereaved family members had met with Mr. Johnson in September of 2021 and the prime minister told him that he had done “everything he could to protect people.”
“I cannot reconcile within me how someone can see the devastation that was wrought by Covid on the people they are supposed to protect and think it’s OK to have a party,” Mr. Akinnola said.
At the time, the prime minister’s office said he would ensure that a public inquiry into the coronavirus pandemic “would get to the bottom of many of the questions that they, and thousands of others like them, have about the pandemic,” and added that it was “critical to learn lessons and understand what happened in detail.”
One of the parties was held on May 15, 2020, the day after Mr. Akinnola’s father was buried. Most family members could not attend because of restrictions, and Mr. Akinnola said he has struggled to deal with his grief.
After the report was released by Ms. Gray, Mr. Johnson said he took “full responsibility” for everything that took place “on his watch.”
Mr. Akinnola is a member of Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice U.K., a group that aims to hold public institutions to account for the country’s high Covid death toll.
 Stephen Castle
In Parliament there is an atmosphere of tension and excitement, with reporters lining the corridors outside the committee room where the prime minister is appealing behind closed doors to his lawmakers to keep him in his job.
 Stephen Castle
Loud desk banging and cheers greet Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s arrival to address his fellow Conservative lawmakers.
 Stephen Castle
Conservative Party lawmakers are gathering in a committee room in Parliament to hear Prime Minister Boris Johnson make a final appeal for their votes in a motion of no confidence. Former prime minister Theresa May is among those entering the room to listen to her successor defend his record.
 Megan Specia
Monday night’s no-confidence vote for Prime Minister Boris Johnson returned Britain to bare-knuckled political infighting after a decidedly apolitical weekend, when Britons celebrated Queen Elizabeth’s Platinum Jubilee, and her unifying role as the popular and symbolic head of state.
But during the four-day celebration of the queen’s 70 years on the throne, Mr. Johnson’s troubles were on full display, highlighting national discontent with the prime minister, and putting his public persona in stark relief with that of the queen.
Throughout the weekend, as Mr. Johnson took part in the jubilee celebrations, members of the public — and even participants — made their contempt known.
Mr. Johnson and his wife, Carrie Johnson, were booed as they walked up the steps of St. Paul’s Cathedral on Friday ahead of a service of thanksgiving. Videos circulated showing a similar response as they attended a Saturday night concert outside Buckingham Palace. And during the concert two actors, Lee Mack and Stephen Fry, made digs at Mr. Johnson on the national stage.
But it was the revelers who crowded London streets during the long weekend who remarked — unprompted and often — about their distrust of the government, even as they reflected on their admiration for the queen, providing an insight into how the public at large viewed their leader.
Marian Argent, 77, who had gathered with three generations of her family on the Mall outside Buckingham Palace for the Trooping the Color parade on Thursday, remarked that the Queen was a unifying force, “unlike politicians.”
She rolled her eyes as she remarked “Boris,” with a sigh, before quickly shifting her focus back to the festivities.
In Hyde Park on Friday, Marina Burns, 60, said of the celebrations for the Queen: “It’s all apolitical, that’s why it’s so unifying.”
“Meanwhile, politics is a mess,” Ms. Burns added. “It is absolutely dreadful at the minute with Boris and Partygate.”
She said she considered the jubilee celebrations as one of the first post-Covid moments that the nation could actually find joy in, amid the “doom and gloom” of failing leaders, economic hardship and pandemic losses.
A few park benches away, Erwin Kunnen, 60, who was visiting from the Netherlands and waiting to depart for his flight home, also pointed to the “mess with the prime minister” as one of the many difficulties Britain was currently facing, and why so many people were excited for the positivity of the jubilee.
Catherine Cooke, 48, who works for the National Health Service, also tucked an exasperated comment about the failings of the government into an otherwise glowing account of the festivities.
Ms. Cooke, when reflecting on the “great respect” for the Queen because of her sense of duty to the country, adding, “Our politicians, like Boris, not so much.”
The comments on the streets of London may be indicative of a greater national sentiment, with Mr. Johnson’s approval rating in a YouGov poll dropping to just 26 percent by the start of May. On the heels of the Sue Gray report late last month that highlighted the government’s failure of leadership during coronavirus lockdowns, some 60 percent of people surveyed by YouGov said that Mr. Johnson should no longer be the leader of the Conservative Party.
A snap poll from Opinium on Monday morning, hours after the vote was announced, found that 28 percent of voters think that Conservative lawmakers should vote to keep Mr. Johnson, while 59 percent believed they should vote to remove him.
 Emma Bubola
LONDON — As Conservative lawmakers prepared for a private vote on the future of Boris Johnson, Britain’s airwaves and social media were packed on Monday with very public expressions of support for and criticism of the beleaguered prime minister.
“I’ll be voting for Boris this evening,” Michael Gove, a cabinet minister whose brief includes housing policy and local government, wrote on Twitter. “We need to move past this moment and unite behind Boris.”
Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the Exchequer, also expressed his support for Mr. Johnson. “The PM has shown the strong leadership our country needs,” he wrote on Twitter. “I am backing him today and will continue to back him.”
Sajid Javid, the health secretary, told BBC radio that he did not support the no-confidence vote. “The country wants to see us focus on the big challenges ahead,” he said. 
Other members of the cabinet also expressed support for Mr. Johnson, including Dominic Raab, the secretary of state for justice; the Brexit minister, Jacob Rees-Mogg; Steve Barclay, Mr. Johnson’s chief of staff; the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, Brandon Lewis; and Foreign Secretary Liz Truss. 
But several Conservative lawmakers voiced different views.
Jeremy Hunt, the former health secretary who was Mr. Johnson’s defeated rival in the last Conservative leadership contest, has been discussed as a potential successor while stopping short of a public challenge. On Monday, he announced he was going to vote against the prime minister. “Today’s decision is change or lose. I will be voting for change,” he wrote on Twitter. 
John Penrose, a member of Parliament who also held an unpaid position as the government’s anticorruption champion, quit that role, saying that the prime minister had almost certainly broken the code of conduct for government ministers. “That’s a resigning matter for me, and should be for the PM too,” he wrote. 
Jesse Norman, a former backer of Mr. Johnson, wrote him a letter withdrawing his support, citing a variety of reasons, including the lockdown-breaking parties at Downing Street, and a plan to send asylum seekers to Rwanda, which he called “ugly.”
“For you to prolong this charade by remaining in office not only insults the electorate,” he wrote, but also makes a change of government at the next election more likely. 
Opposition politicians have urged Conservatives to vote against Mr. Johnson. 
“I think they’ve got to show some leadership and vote against the prime minister,” Keir Starmer, the leader of the main opposition Labour Party, told LBC radio on Monday. “He’s lost the trust, I think, of the country, I think that’s pretty clear on all the evidence that I’ve seen.” 
Ed Davey, the leader of the centrist Liberal Democrats, said Monday was “judgment day” for Conservatives. “If they fail to sack Boris Johnson, it will be an insult to all those who made sacrifices and suffered while he partied,” he wrote on Twitter. 
 Eshe Nelson
As of 9:30 p.m. British time (4:30 p.m. Eastern)
Source: FactSet
Financial markets appeared unperturbed by the political shock waves following the announcement that Britain’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, would face a no-confidence vote in his leadership. When he won the vote, they continued as they had before.
The pound rose against the dollar and other major currencies, while the FTSE 100, Britain’s benchmark stock index, closed 1 percent higher on Monday. With betting odds pointing to Mr. Johnson’s survival, the result didn’t upset expectations, and market moves are more likely to reflect global concerns about the war in Ukraine and efforts by central banks to rein in inflation.
Samuel Tombs, the chief U.K. economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, wrote in a note to clients after the vote was called but before ballots were submitted that the pound’s appreciation was modest. Regardless of how the vote went, he said, the move by some in his party to oust him was received favorably because markets tend to like Conservative governments and the party’s chance of winning the next election could be higher under a new leader if Mr. Johnson had lost the vote.
Shortly after the voting results were announced, the pound was 0.4 percent stronger against the U.S. dollar and 0.6 percent higher against the euro, mostly retaining gains made earlier in the day. In the past three and a half weeks, the pound has risen 3 percent against the dollar, regaining some of the ground lost in the previous months.
Overall, Mr. Tombs added in his note before the results, the outcome of the no-confidence vote “won’t have a large bearing on the near-term economic outlook,” in part because the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, recently announced a multibillion-pound spending plan to help households with inflationary pressures on their finances and soaring energy bills.
 Max Fisher
The Interpreter
Boris Johnson, long famed for brushing off accusations of distorting, misleading or outright lying that, far from slowing his rise, seemed to only bolster his image as an incorrigible scamp, now faces potential political death over the very charge to which he had seemed immune.
But even if some of his past fibs may have arguably been more harmful to others around him, this one — charges that he lied about attending parties at his official residence in May 2020 that violated his own government’s lockdown orders — hits on a particular sensitivity that, psychologists have found, holds special power to enrage.
Moral hypocrisy — behaving badly while simultaneously hectoring the rest of us to do good — evokes a level of anger that neither lying nor wrongdoing bring out on their own, studies have repeatedly found.
Mr. Johnson’s real sin, in this telling, was pushing Britons to go without for the common good, all while his office held events that violated this spirit of shared sacrifice and, by risking viral spread, undermined its effect.
He has acknowledged as much, telling Parliament in January, “I know the rage they feel with me and with the government I lead when they think in Downing Street itself the rules are not being properly followed by the people who make the rules.”
The case of Mr. Johnson, and the backlash that such transgressions can bring, has parallels with that of another prominent figure: The tennis star Novak Djokovic, who after his own long record of controversies never quite caught up with him, suffered severe professional damage over accusations that he fabricated or obfuscated in his application for an exemption to Australia’s Covid vaccination requirement.
That incident became a flashpoint in global debates over vaccine rules. But it also inspired fierce anger perhaps in part because, like Mr. Johnson, Mr. Djokovic was seeking to benefit from society’s compliance with those rules, which made Australia safe enough to hold the tournament in which he was scheduled to play. And he has done it while bending or breaking those same rules to satisfy his own desires to avoid the vaccine and travel freely.
