Representative Tom Rice is bracing for a tough runoff election against a Trump-backed challenger following Tuesday’s primary.
By Maya King
Follow our live updates on primary elections and results in South Carolina.
CONWAY, S.C. — Tom Rice, the South Carolina congressman who was one of 10 House Republicans to vote to impeach President Donald J. Trump after the Jan. 6 attacks, has a catchall term to describe the former president’s crusade against him: Trump’s Very Presidential Traveling Revenge Circus.
Mr. Trump has made unseating Mr. Rice, a five-term congressman, one of his top priorities in the state’s primary elections on Tuesday. He threw his support in the Republican primary for Mr. Rice’s seat behind State Representative Russell Fry, calling into a rally for Mr. Fry this week and describing Mr. Rice as a “back-stabbing RINO,” the acronym for Republican in name only, a conservative slur.
“He lifted up his hand and that was the end of his political career — or we hope it was,” Mr. Trump said of Mr. Rice’s vote to impeach him.
In a 35-minute interview on Friday alongside his wife, Wrenzie, after a barbecue luncheon campaign event, Mr. Rice sounded every bit like a man in the fight for his political life. His campaign is not counting on an outright win against Mr. Fry but is instead bracing for a tough runoff with him.
But while some, after crossing Mr. Trump, have tried to salvage their political careers by walking back their comments or retiring from Congress, Mr. Rice has doubled down.
“To me, his gross failure — his inexcusable failure — was when it started,” Mr. Rice said of the Jan. 6 riot. “He watched it happen. He reveled in it. And he took no action to stop it. I think he had a duty to try to stop it, and he failed in that duty.”
Mr. Rice, a pro-business conservative and self-proclaimed Chamber of Commerce Republican, helped craft Mr. Trump’s sweeping new tax code in 2017. Five years after those reforms and 17 months after the Jan. 6 attacks, he argued that the former president had overstayed his welcome in the G.O.P.
“He’s the past,” Mr. Rice said of Mr. Trump. “I hope he doesn’t run again. And I think if he does run again, he hurts the Republican Party. We desperately need somebody who’s going to bring people together. And he is not that guy.”
Mr. Rice said the Jan. 6 prime-time hearing on Thursday night, which featured footage of the Capitol riots and incriminating testimony from close Trump associates, “puts an exclamation point on what we did,” referring to the 10 House Republicans who backed impeachment.
In the days after the riot at the Capitol, Mr. Rice said, he considered voting to impeach Mr. Trump, and spent that Saturday and Sunday in his home congressional district reading the dozens of stories he had asked his staff to send him about the president’s whereabouts on Jan. 6. As he learned of the president’s refusal to stop the attack, he became incensed. When it came time for his vote, he said he had “zero question in my mind” about whether Mr. Trump should be held accountable.
“I did it then,” he said. “And I will do it tomorrow. And I’ll do it the next day or the day after that. I have a duty to uphold the Constitution. And that is what I did.”
Mr. Rice did not vote to certify the election, however, saying he had become concerned about ballot discrepancies in Pennsylvania that were outlined in a letter to House Republican leadership.
During a House Republican meeting one month after the Capitol riots, he defended Liz Cheney for her vote to impeach and criticized Kevin McCarthy, the minority leader, for his continued embrace of the former president, according to audio from the exchange.
“Kevin went to Mar-a-Lago this weekend, shook his hand, took a picture and set up Trumpmajority.com. Personally, I find that offensive,” Mr. Rice said at the time.
In the months following the vote, Mr. Rice has been made a pariah among those in Mr. Trump’s circle, as has his wife. “I don’t feel like I fit in with that group anymore,” Ms. Rice said on Friday, referring to the Republican base.
Mr. Trump’s efforts to sway Republican primary voters and disparage Mr. Rice have left the congressman both frustrated and puzzled. He has come to view them as a political stunt.
“Bring on the circus,” he said of Mr. Trump’s involvement in the primary. “You know, some people are afraid of clowns. I’m not afraid of clowns.”
Jonathan Martin contributed reporting.
By Alyce McFadden
Voters in Alaska are taking part in a new type of election this weekend: one conducted entirely by mail, the first of its kind in the state’s history. And it will be an open primary, allowing people to pick from candidates of both parties — also new in the state.
The list voters will choose from is long: A whopping 48 candidates are running for the state’s lone House seat. One of them is former Gov. Sarah Palin. A man legally named Santa Claus is also on the ballot.
The special primary election is to replace Representative Don Young, who was the longest-serving Republican in the House when he died in March.
Alaska voters will have until 7:59 p.m. local time on Saturday to cast their votes by mail. Elections officials will begin counting the ballots after the deadline passes and expect to release preliminary vote counts in the hours that follow — but unofficial final results may not be known until June 21. 
And in a new wrinkle, a state court judge ruled on Friday that Alaska election officials could not certify the results of the race until visually impaired voters “are provided a full and fair opportunity to participate,” according to The Associated Press, which reported that Alaska planned to ask the state’s Supreme Court to review the decision.
All of the state’s more than 595,000 eligible voters were mailed a ballot for the contest. Nearly 20 percent of them had already sent in their ballots as of June 8, according to statistics published by the Alaska Division of Elections (and about 87,000 were returned as undeliverable). In primary elections in 2018, voter turnout was just shy of 20 percent by the time all votes had been counted.
With the new, nonpartisan primary system, which voters approved as part of a 2020 ballot initiative, the four candidates from any party who get the most votes are expected to proceed to the general election on Aug. 16, when voters will rank them in order of preference. This is called ranked-choice voting, which New York City used for the first time last year (reviews were mixed).
The winner determined on Aug. 16 — assuming the election is certified on time — will fill the seat for the rest of the current term, through January.
But Aug. 16 is also the date of Alaska’s regular primary contests, including for the 2023 to 2025 term for the House seat, so voters will see some candidates’ names twice on the same ballot: once to decide the outcome of the special general election and once to pick candidates to proceed to the general election this fall for the full two-year term.
Only 26 of the candidates running in the special election are also competing in the regular election. Several others have also filed.
To help voters navigate the new features of this year’s elections, Alaska’s elections office has started a statewide voter education program that has included “pretty much anything you could do,” according to Tiffany Montemayor, a public relations manager for the Division of Elections.
“Radio ads, bus ads, every kind of medium you can talk to someone, we’re going to be using that for voter education,” Ms. Montemayor said.
By Katie Glueck
Sean Patrick Maloney is a Democratic Party stalwart who declares himself a “practical, mainstream guy.”
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is a political outsider-turned-left-wing star with a powerful social media megaphone.
Perhaps no two House Democrats better represent the dueling factions of a party at war with itself — over matters of ideology and institutions, how to amass power and, most of all, how to beat Republicans. Mr. Maloney, who represents a Hudson Valley-area district, is the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, tasked with protecting incumbents and making him a pillar of the establishment. Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, who represents the Bronx and Queens, has made it her mission to push that establishment to the left, one endorsement of a liberal challenger at a time.
The two forces collided this week when Ms. Ocasio-Cortez handed her endorsement to Mr. Maloney’s primary opponent, Alessandra Biaggi, a left-leaning state senator with a political pedigree. It is often frowned upon for incumbents of the same party to back primary challengers, and it is especially unusual within a state’s delegation. But Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, who toppled a Democratic incumbent herself in 2018, has never been one to abide by such rules, and her muscle and fund-raising savvy could be a major factor in the race.
The move turned a contest already filled with powerful New Yorkers and divided loyalties into a messy national Democratic proxy battle. There are clear tensions on issues that have divided the moderate and left wings of the party, including public safety, Medicare for All and fund-raising tactics. Driving those disputes are more existential questions, like how to pursue political survival in a climate that appears increasingly catastrophic for the party in power.
“It’s a fight between two Democrats: one is younger and dynamic and wants to make changes quickly,” said former Governor David Paterson, for whom Mr. Maloney once worked and who has remained neutral in the race. By contrast, he said, Mr. Maloney “is now emerging in the leadership of the House, and is thinking more about the entire party and how things will go in November this year.”
The fight will play out in New York’s 17th District, which under new boundaries includes parts of wealthy Westchester County, outside New York City, and conservative Hudson Valley hamlets. The district was recently redrawn as part of a redistricting fight that left some Democrats seething at Mr. Maloney. It also left the 17th District more competitive — raising the stakes for a primary fight that may turn on which candidate voters think can hold the seat. Mike Lawler, a state assemblyman, is expected to be the Republican front-runner in the primary on Aug. 23.
“We have an incredible opportunity to be able to win against Republicans in November by being bold on our positions for working people,” Ms. Biaggi said in an interview.
But that may not happen with an Ocasio-Cortez endorsement, warned Suzanne Berger, the chairwoman of the Westchester County Democratic Committee, who is backing Mr. Maloney.
“They misjudged the voters of New York-17 if they think that is helpful to winning in November, which is the main point,” she said. “Republicans will use that endorsement as a weapon in November.”
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez declined an interview request. Her spokeswoman, Lauren Hitt, said that the district would be competitive regardless and that “with Roe and gun safety on voters’ minds, Senator Biaggi’s record makes her uniquely positioned to drive out enthusiastic voters in the midterms.”
Ms. Biaggi and Ms. Ocasio-Cortez have been political allies since they both rose to prominence by defeating Democratic incumbents in 2018. Ms. Biaggi, 36, is the granddaughter of Mario Biaggi, who was a 10-term congressman from New York. Hillary Clinton, whose Chappaqua home is now in the district, helped lead Ms. Biaggi’s wedding ceremony. Mr. Maloney, 55, has his own Clinton connections. He worked in former President Bill Clinton’s White House as a staff secretary, and he recently marched with Mrs. Clinton in a Memorial Day parade in Chappaqua, according to a photo he posted on Twitter. Spokesmen for the Clintons had no comment on their plans to endorse in the race.
Mr. Maloney, who calls himself a “pragmatic progressive who gets things done,” is regarded as the favorite in the race, though local party officials say both candidates have work to do in introducing themselves across a newly configured district. Ms. Biaggi, for her part, argued that Mr. Maloney had been too timid on issues like health care — she supports Medicare for All and said that “ideally private insurance would not be part of that.” She casts Mr. Maloney as too close to corporate interests.
And, at a moment of overlapping national crises and frequent stalemate on Capitol Hill, where Democrats hold narrow majorities, she suggested that voters were in the mood for candidates who would “fight like hell for them.”
When Mr. Maloney first arrived in Congress after flipping a Republican seat in 2012, he was unquestionably more of a centrist. But his allies now dismiss the idea that the congressman — New York’s first openly gay member of Congress who has long fought for L.G.B.T.Q. rights and supported climate proposals backed by Ms. Ocasio-Cortez — is a moderate.
In an interview, he said he believed “in mainstream policies that can get done right now, on things like protecting our kids from gun violence, protecting reproductive freedom and climate change.” (The Senate has stymied most of those priorities.)
He noted several times that he had “nothing but respect” or “tremendous respect” for Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, despite her endorsement of Ms. Biaggi.
“I’m an original co-sponsor of the Green New Deal, and we have spoken about that — I speak to her all the time,” he said.
But as of Thursday, he confirmed, they had not spoken since she raised the prospect last month that he should step aside as D.C.C.C. chairman, amid a battle over redistricting that threatened to tear the delegation apart. According to people in and around the delegation, who were granted anonymity to discuss private conversations, there have not been efforts to mediate between the two representatives.
Ms. Hitt, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez’s spokeswoman, said that they were “collegial despite their differences.”
After the state’s high court struck down a congressional map drawn by Democrats and a new map was announced, Mr. Maloney declared that he would be running not in the redrawn version of his current 18th Congressional District but in the slightly safer 17th District. He lives there — and Ms. Biaggi does not, although she is planning to move to it — but the area is largely represented by Representative Mondaire Jones.
The leader of the campaign committee entertaining a challenge to a fellow incumbent drew explosive backlash, and Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, citing a conflict of interest, suggested that Mr. Maloney should step down as chairman should he pursue such a challenge. Ultimately, Mr. Jones decided to run in a different district and a primary was averted, but some members still privately bristle at the episode.
Asked about his message to disgruntled colleagues, Mr. Maloney acknowledged that he “could have done things better,” even as he stressed that the district he selected was only marginally safer for Democrats than the alternative.
“I also thought there was a way for it to work out and avoid a primary between members and that’s just what we did,” he said.
He also promised that, as chairman of the committee, his “heart” and his “focus” would be on protecting the Democratic majority even as he navigated his own race.
At the same time, Mr. Maloney noted that he ended a policy that blacklisted consultants or political groups that backed candidates who ran against incumbents. The policy had been a point of contention between left-leaning members and the D.C.C.C.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez has backed several challengers this year — one lost and one narrowly trails in a race that is headed to a recount — much to the annoyance of some Democrats.
“New York’s post-redistricting fiasco is a clear demonstration of why a sitting member of Congress should not lead the political arm of the Democratic Party,” said Representative Kathleen Rice of New York. But she also seemed to criticize Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, complaining about “certain members with their own long history of challenging incumbents” who are stirring the pot.
“When the stakes are this high, Democrats should be coming together to keep the majority, rather than promoting Dem-on-Dem violence,” she said.
Asked about criticism that Ms. Ocasio-Cortez is overly eager to take on her colleagues, Ms. Hitt said that the congresswoman believed that no one was entitled to re-election “by default.”
Some nationally prominent House Democrats have rallied around Mr. Maloney, who is close to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. The list includes the chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus, Representative Joyce Beatty of Ohio, who said in an interview Thursday that she was supporting him.
Some of the criticism Mr. Maloney is getting, she noted, comes with the job.
“You’re never going to make everybody happy, and you’re judged on victory,” she said.
Representative Hakeem Jeffries of New York, the chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, called Mr. Maloney “a hard-working and well-respected member of Congress who has won multiple hotly contested elections,” and expressed confidence that voters “will once again send him back to Washington.”
Asked if that was an endorsement, he said only that the comment spoke for itself. But it reflected an unmistakable sign of encouragement from party leadership.
The primary is scheduled for August. But for all the drama around the contest, some Democrats in the delegation and beyond are already consumed by bigger problems amid an ever-worsening political climate.
“When you’re facing the possibility of a tornado,” said former Representative Steve Israel, a former D.C.C.C. chairman, “the angry breezes don’t really matter.”
By Maya King
CONWAY, S.C. — In one of South Carolina’s most Republican congressional districts, the prime time hearing of the House Select Committee’s investigation into the Jan. 6 attack on Thursday seemed to change few minds among those casting ballots on the last day of early voting ahead of Tuesday’s primary election.
The televised hearing, with a viewership that topped 19 million, featured minute-by-minute footage of the Capitol riot and testimony from figures in former President Donald J. Trump’s inner circle — nearly all of which had not been made public before. 
But to both Democrats and Republicans in this northeast corner of South Carolina, the footage only confirmed their beliefs about the events of Jan. 6, 2021. 
“My question is: Are the right people listening to what was said?” said Barbara Hake, a voter and a former first vice chair of the county’s Democratic Party. “They’re preaching to the choir with me. But I think there were things that were revealed that weren’t revealed before.” 
Many voters would not talk on the record, citing their concerns about how politically-charged the nation’s climate has become. Several said they watched only part of the committee hearing or caught snippets of the new footage. While some believed the attack on the Capitol was a violent, deadly threat to democracy led by a power-hungry former president, others remained suspicious of how it was presented, saying the grave descriptions of the day appeared overblown. 
Some who doubted the veracity of the hearing believed it to be a Democrat-led ploy to punish Republican lawmakers and protesters whom they described as largely nonviolent. 
“The whole thing is a setup in my opinion,” said Larry Biddle, a Republican. “I see through it immediately.” 
Mr. Biddle added that he believed the makeup of the Jan. 6 committee was too lopsided to provide a nonpartisan examination of the day. He scoffed at the mention of Representatives Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, both Republicans and members of the panel, and called them “R.I.N.Os,” or Republicans in name only.
“They don’t put the people on there who are powerful and strong and authentic conservatives,” Mr. Biddle said.
Rick Giles, a military veteran who supports Republican and Libertarian candidates, called the events of Jan. 6 a “horrible disgrace to the country” while at a campaign event on Friday for Representative Tom Rice, one of the 10 House Republicans who voted to impeach Mr. Trump.
The hearing, Mr. Giles said, left him even more disgusted by the deadly assault on the Capitol. He said he was particularly moved by the law enforcement testimony, adding that on the day of the riot, he was most disturbed by the attacks on Capitol Police officers. 
“It was sad,” he said, and added that his opinion “has not changed by a thing.”
“I’m hoping in the future, people on both sides, especially in the Republican Party, can get someone who’s more middle of the road, moderate,” Mr. Giles said. 
By Jesse McKinley and Nicholas Fandos
For New York’s beleaguered Republican Party, all signs had been pointing for months toward 2022 being an exceptional year.
As Democrats battle the traditional midterm slump, Republicans were blessed with unforeseen fortune, including a court victory that resulted in new congressional lines pitting veteran liberals against each other and putting new House districts in play. Add in Gov. Kathy Hochul’s middling poll numbers, and many New York conservatives were dreaming of a united G.O.P. winning its first statewide election since 2002.
Then Carl Paladino walked in.
Mr. Paladino, the party’s lightning rod former gubernatorial nominee, unexpectedly re-emerged in the past week as a candidate in the newly drawn 23rd Congressional District in Western New York, a development that has driven a sharp wedge between some Republicans, including those who feel Mr. Paladino’s history of racist and outrageous remarks disqualifies him and could endanger Republicans up and down the ballot.
It is also fueling a potentially nasty proxy war between two of the party’s younger Trump-aligned leaders vying for dominance: Representative Elise Stefanik, the powerful North Country conservative who has endorsed Mr. Paladino, and Nick Langworthy, the state party chairman who formally declared his candidacy for the 23rd District on Friday, taking a veiled swipe at his onetime ally’s tendency toward incendiary statements.
“We don’t just need people who like to make noise,” said Mr. Langworthy, in a campaign announcement video. “We need proven fighters who know how to win.”
Far from rattled, Ms. Stefanik, the No. 3 House Republican, is standing by Mr. Paladino, whom she endorsed moments after the district’s current congressman, Representative Chris Jacobs, announced last week that he would not seek re-election in the face of furious backlash for his embrace of gun control measures after mass shootings in Buffalo — near his district — and in Uvalde, Texas.
Ms. Stefanik’s team spent the week helping Mr. Paladino collect signatures to qualify for the ballot. And privately, she and her allies are fanning discontent for Mr. Langworthy among midlevel party leaders and lawmakers, a growing number of whom believe his congressional run could prove a costly distraction for the party if he does not resign as chairman.
Needless to say, a rough-and-tumble primary battle on the banks of Lake Erie is not what Republicans had in mind ahead of critical midterm elections that were shaping up to be the most promising for the party in two decades.
After the redistricting fiasco for Democrats, party leaders planned to compete seriously in as many as a dozen House districts across the state.
And in a likely race for the governorship against Ms. Hochul, a Democrat who has seen her job performance ratings sag in the face of concerns about crime and the economy, Republicans are hoping for a serious shot at breaking a lengthy losing streak in a state in which registered Democrats outnumber Republicans by more than two to one.
Four Republicans are facing off in the June 28 primary for governor, with Representative Lee M. Zeldin of Long Island receiving the party’s blessing. Andrew Giuliani, the son of the former New York City mayor; Rob Astorino, the former Westchester County executive; and Harry Wilson, a corporate turnout expert, are also all on the ballot and will meet for their first debate on Monday.
“This is a distraction in a battle that nobody needs at all,” Thomas Doherty, a former top aide to Gov. George Pataki, the last Republican elected statewide in New York, said about Mr. Paladino and the debris spinning off his campaign.
“You have the leading Republican in the House supporting a guy who has a ton of baggage against the Republican chairman,” Mr. Doherty added. “It just doesn’t make any sense.”
Since Mr. Paladino entered the race last Friday, Media Matters, the left-leaning watchdog group, has already unearthed a Facebook post amplifying conspiracy theories about the mass shootings in Buffalo and Texas and a 2021 radio interview in which Mr. Paladino praised Adolf Hitler as “the kind of leader we need today.”
Mr. Paladino, 75, who was soundly defeated in the governor’s race by Andrew M. Cuomo in 2010, has long been known for racist and homophobic comments. He partially apologized for the Hitler remarks on Thursday, calling them a “serious mistake” that he nonetheless claimed had been twisted by the news media.
On Friday, Mr. Paladino’s campaign said it would not comment on Mr. Langworthy’s candidacy, but it said he planned to file more than 3,000 petition signatures to qualify for the ballot, more than his opponent.
“I am so grateful for the outpouring of grass-roots support from thousands of Republicans across NY-23 in such a short amount of time,” Mr. Paladino said in a statement. “Onward to victory!”
In her own statement, Ms. Stefanik said she was “focused on winning back the majority this November,” while serving her constituents and the House Republican Conference she leads in Washington.
But some Republican state leaders were apoplectic about Mr. Paladino, including Keith H. Wofford, a Black corporate lawyer who was the party’s 2018 nominee for attorney general. He issued an unsparing statement on Friday saying that his personal experience left no room for doubt about who Mr. Paladino was.
“There are many times where people have called one Republican or another a racist, and I have explained to those accusers why they were wrong,” Mr. Wofford said. “But Carl Paladino is a racist. Not ‘racially insensitive’; not ‘unsophisticated’; a straight-up, old-school racist.”
He added: “If he wins the primary, I hope he loses in November.”
Democrats have chosen Max Della Pia, an Air Force veteran and community activist, as their nominee in the district.
Mr. Langworthy’s decision to run — after he pushed Mr. Jacobs to step aside — has not been without controversy. A series of county party leaders have criticized him for trying to run for Congress and lead the state party simultaneously, raising concerns about conflicts of interest.
“It has to be all hands on deck and our state chair can’t be hunkered down in the 23rd Congressional District running a primary while we are simultaneously trying to elect a governor,” said Lawrence A. Garvey, the party chairman in Rockland County.
He called on Mr. Langworthy to resign.
“The potential is very much there to squander what good options we have this year,” Mr. Garvey added, clarifying that he was not trying to boost Mr. Paladino either: “No person in their right mind could defend some of the things he has said.”
That sentiment was echoed by Susan McNeil, the Republican Party chair in Fulton County, northwest of Albany, and Mike Rendino, her counterpart in the Bronx.
“You can’t serve two masters,” said Ms. McNeil, who is close with Ms. Stefanik. “I’m not arrogant enough to think I could do both.”
Mr. Rendino said Mr. Langworthy would make a fine congressman, but said “we need a state chair committed to raising the money necessary for ballot security and protecting the party in the upcoming statewide elections.”
In an interview, Mr. Langworthy, 41, argued that he was advancing the party’s interests by taking on Mr. Paladino and said that he maintained the support of the “vast majority” of county G.O.P. chairs in the state.
He also predicted he would have no trouble focusing on winning the governor’s race for Republicans in the general election after defeating Mr. Paladino in the primary.
“There’s naysayers and people who have self-interest in any organization, and perhaps they are egged on by certain elected officials, but I won’t take the bait,” he said. “The most destructive thing that can happen is for us to have a leadership election.”
Mr. Langworthy’s run for office comes after a career as a party operative, including a stint in Mr. Pataki’s office and time spent working for two Republican House members. In 2010, he became the chairman of the Erie County G.O.P., a position he used to boost Mr. Paladino’s raw and rambunctious campaign for governor.
Both he and Mr. Paladino urged Donald J. Trump to run for governor against Mr. Cuomo in 2013, ultimately failing to convince him. Both stumped for Mr. Trump in his 2016 presidential run.
In 2019, Mr. Langworthy helped oust the party’s longtime chairman, Edward F. Cox, with the then-president’s support and took the job himself, promising a new face for the party.
The 23rd District, which was redrawn by a court-appointed mapmaker last month, should be safely Republican. It runs from the Buffalo suburbs to the Southern Tier, on the New York-Pennsylvania border, and includes some of the state’s most conservative counties.
Still, after suffering a brutal spring — with their carefully crafted redistricting plan shredded by the courts and their lieutenant governor indicted on bribery charges — Democrats seemed delighted on Friday to sit back and let the Republicans share the glare of scrutiny.
“I would not call the past few months perfect for my team, and it worried me as a Democrat,” said Christine C. Quinn, a state party leader.
But she called the G.O.P. strife an ongoing “train wreck.”
“Republicans seem committed to messing this thing up so badly,” she added.
By The New York Times
On Thursday night, the House panel investigating the Jan. 6 attack opened its landmark series of public hearings with new revelations, video footage and testimony to make the case for a methodical conspiracy led and coordinated by former President Donald J. Trump.
Our colleagues provided live coverage and analysis. Here’s a guide to catching up:
Read five takeaways from the hearing.
At the heart of the Jan. 6 committee’s presentation was a gripping story with a sprawling cast of characters, but only three main players: Mr. Trump, the Proud Boys and a Capitol Police officer.
Representative Liz Cheney, the Republican from Wyoming who took center stage on Thursday night as the vice chairwoman of the committee, has been unrepentant in continuing to blame Mr. Trump for stoking the attack, and her Republican colleagues for following his lead by spreading the lie of a stolen election. That stance has left her marginalized by her party, with her colleagues ousting her from her leadership position and seeking to purge her from the House by boosting a MAGA-styled primary challenger.
A clip was shown of the testimony of Bill Barr, Mr. Trump’s last Senate-confirmed attorney general, in which Mr. Barr dismissed Mr. Trump’s repeated claims of fraud and recalled that he had told the president he considered it nonsense and wanted no part of it.
Times journalists also put together a timeline of the Jan. 6 attack and its aftermath. The story so far has been pieced together through the prosecutions of rioters, the early stages of a broader Justice Department investigation, the work of the House select committee examining the attack and its origins, and the work of journalists.
By Blake Hounshell
Much of the news coverage of Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn the 2020 election has rightly focused on the machinations in and around the White House. If you haven’t yet, read The New York Times’s big package today pulling together the definitive timeline.
But one major component of Trump’s ramshackle effort to subvert the outcome was his reliance on lawmakers in swing states who were receptive to his claim that Joe Biden’s victory was not legitimate.
At least 21 state legislators — all of them Republicans — participated to one degree or another in the events of Jan. 6, 2021, according to research compiled by the Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee. You’ve probably heard that much, and you’ll most likely hear more about them if you tune into the rest of the House investigative committee’s public hearings, the first of which was held last night.
But it’s unlikely you heard much about what happened next.
The ensuing story of these characters in that day’s dark drama is, in many ways, the story of the Republican Party in its awkward not-so-post-Trump phase: a rightward scramble for the former president’s favor, with many viewing their involvement in Jan. 6 as a ticket to greater power, and others as a moment they would rather forget.
More than a quarter of the 21 are seeking either federal or statewide office, and several State House members are running for State Senate seats, an upgrade in political status.
Only two members of the group responded to a request for comment, including one state senator, Mike Azinger of West Virginia. Azinger said in a telephone interview that he was “glad I went,” adding, “I hope President Trump calls us back just to stick it in the eye to the left who are just trying to destroy him and in my opinion, destroy the republic.”
A few have faced legal and professional consequences, but only one has publicly expressed remorse for his actions: Derrick Evans, who was a newly elected delegate to the West Virginia Legislature when he live-streamed his entry to the Capitol.
Evans spent about 10 minutes inside the building, but he was arrested two days later and charged with obstructing a federal proceeding. He immediately expressed “full responsibility for my actions” and resigned his seat. Evans recently signed a plea agreement acknowledging his guilt, but he faces up to five years in prison and a fine of as much as $250,000. A sentencing hearing is scheduled for June 22.
Others have fully embraced their renegade status, however — and found thousands of willing followers.
The best-known example of a state lawmaker who has parlayed his involvement in Jan. 6 into electoral success is Doug Mastriano, a state senator in Pennsylvania who is now the Republican nominee for governor. Another oft-covered figure is Mark Finchem, an Arizona state representative and Oath Keepers militia member who is running for secretary of state on a platform of reversing the 2020 results.
Here are three others who have gotten far less attention, but whose rise offers some sobering lessons about the current state of American politics.
Hanks, a member of the Colorado State House who marched with the Ellipse crowd toward the Capitol on Jan. 6, is running for U.S. Senate, hoping to unseat Michael Bennet, the Democratic incumbent. Democrats have mischievously run ads trying to help Hanks in the Republican primary against Joe O’Dea, a construction executive who has taken more moderate positions. The primary will be held on June 28.
Last year, Hanks published a letter describing his experience in Washington on Jan. 6, suggesting that the rioters were antifa “agitators” rather than Trump supporters.
“The last element of hope to rectify the election fraud,” Hanks wrote, “is an intelligence drop of irrefutable information” from foreign intelligence agencies proving “the collusion of foreign and domestic entities to swing the election to Biden.”
In January, during a speech on the floor of the Colorado legislature, Hanks invoked his military experience as he alleged that China was sending “weaponized bio-agents” to the United States and was attacking American democracy by controlling voting machines made by Dominion Voting Systems, an election-equipment company based in Denver.
Hanks has raised just $57,473 for his Senate campaign, according to federal campaign finance reports. But in April, he was the top choice of Republican delegates to the statewide party convention, securing 39 percent of the vote as he muscled several other candidates off the ballot. As he took the stage at the arena in Colorado Springs, Hanks said, “I fully expected Donald Trump to win in 2020” — to roaring applause.
Internal polling commissioned by the O’Dea campaign and shared with The Times shows Hanks trailing by 20 percentage points, with many voters undecided.
Hanks lacks the resources to run television ads. But in a two-minute video promoting his candidacy, he holds a military-style rifle and shoots at what appears to be a photocopier, labeled “Dominion Voting Machine.” As he squeezes the trigger, Hanks says, “As our next senator, I will fight for our conservative values, and I’ll start by targeting our broken election system.”
The machine explodes.
A self-described “Trump in heels,” Chase has been a volatile force in Virginia politics since winning a State Senate seat in 2015. She has carried a loaded handgun on the chamber floor and led a gun rights rally while holding an AR-15-style rifle. When she declined to wear a mask during a legislative session, citing a medical condition, she was made to sit in a three-sided plexiglass box. After the 2020 election, she called on Trump to reject the results and impose martial law.
Chase spoke at Trump’s Jan. 6 rally on the Ellipse, but says she didn’t march to the Capitol.
Which is not to say she was against what happened: She later praised the rioters as “patriots.” Her colleagues then censured her and removed her from committee assignments.
Vying for the nomination for governor at the state Republican convention in May 2021, she came in third place among seven. In October, at an unofficial rally for Glenn Youngkin, the Republican nominee, she pledged allegiance to a flag that was supposedly at the Capitol that day.
In November, she announced a bid for a congressional seat currently held by Representative Abigail Spanberger, a Democrat, but dropped out when the district boundaries changed. Chase has acknowledged she has her eye on federal office. But for now, she has to contend with a primary for her State Senate seat.
Maddock, a longtime bail bondsman, is a state representative who forms one-half of a pro-Trump power couple in Michigan, along with his wife, Meshawn, who is now a co-chair of the state Republican Party.
Matthew Maddock was into storming capitols before most others. He cheered on the entry of armed protesters to the Michigan State Capitol in April 2020, telling reporters at the time: “I like being around people with guns.” He was also part of a group of Republicans who tried to enter the Michigan Capitol on Dec. 14, 2020, to cast an alternate slate of electoral votes.
Democrats have called for various punishments: censure, stripping his committee assignments, booting him from the Legislature entirely. In April, his fellow Republicans, who control both chambers, ejected him from their caucus without explanation.
Maddock had been running for speaker of the Michigan State House, with Trump’s enthusiastic endorsement, though political strategists in the state said his chances of victory were low.
The Maddocks helped organize buses to Washington for the Jan. 6 protests, though Meshawn Maddock later condemned the violence and said she was back in her hotel room by the time the riot began.
Matthew Maddock seemed to have had an inkling of what was coming. In November 2020, as anger on the right over the election results was boiling over, he warned on a conservative talk show that the outcome could lead to domestic strife.
“They lost faith in the election because there was inadequate elections going on, and the next step was the Civil War,” he said, offering a novel interpretation of the motivations of 19th-century voters. “We’re treading on very, very thin ice.”
The New York Times has reported extensively on the events of Jan. 6. Here’s a short primer on what you should read and watch ahead of tonight’s first public hearing:
“Day of Rage: How Trump Supporters Took the Capitol.” If you haven’t done so yet, watch this incredible video documentary by The Times’s visual investigations team. Its journalists spliced together publicly available videos and private footage to present a gripping narrative told from the perspective of the rioters themselves. See also “90 Seconds of Rage,” a minute-by-minute account of the mob violence on the Capitol steps.
The real-time reports: “Inside the Capitol, the Sound of the Mob Came First,” Jan. 6, 2021 | “Senate Being Locked Down’: Inside a Harrowing Day at the Capitol,” Jan. 7, 2021 | “Before Capitol Riot, Republican Lawmakers Fanned the Flames,” Jan. 11, 2021
The reconstructions: “77 Days: Trump’s Campaign to Subvert the Election,” Jan. 31, 2021 | “Lie After Lie: Listen to How Trump Built His Alternate Reality,” Feb. 9, 2021 | “‘It’s Always Going to Haunt Me’: How the Capitol Riot Changed Lives,” Sept. 16, 2021 | “Meadows and the Band of Loyalists: How They Fought to Keep Trump in Power,” Dec. 15, 2021
— Blake
Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.
By Azi Paybarah
Ryan Kelley, a Republican running for governor in Michigan who was at the Capitol during the Jan. 6 attack, was arrested at his home in Allendale, Mich., on Thursday morning, according to Mara R. Schneider, a special agent with the F.B.I.
Mr. Kelley is the first person running for election in a major state or federal race to be charged in connection with the attack. According to a criminal complaint, Mr. Kelley was charged with committing violence against a person or property on restricted grounds, damaging federal property, disorderly conduct and entering a restricted building or grounds without permission. All four charges are misdemeanors, according to Bill Miller, a spokesman for the United States attorney’s office in the District of Columbia.
An F.B.I. agent described Mr. Kelley’s actions in a filing to the court, saying at one point that Mr. Kelley appeared to use his phone “to film the crowd assaulting and pushing past U.S. Capitol Police officers.” The filing also said that Mr. Kelley used “his hands to support another rioter” who was pulling down a metal barricade, and that he gestured “to the crowd, consistently indicating” that it should continue moving toward the entrance to the Capitol.
Mr. Kelley was able to be identified, in part, because what he wore on Jan. 6 was similar to the outfit he wore at the American Patriot Council “Judgement Day” rally in Lansing, Mich., in May 2020, according to the filing.
Efforts to reach Mr. Kelley and his campaign were unsuccessful. The mailbox for the telephone number listed for the campaign was full and could not accept messages.
A man who answered the telephone listed for the campaign treasurer said, “No comment, thank you” when reached by a reporter. 
On Wednesday afternoon, a message was posted on a Facebook page for Mr. Kelley’s campaign that said “Political Prisoner” — echoing how many on the right have referred to those taken into custody in connection with the Jan. 6 attack.
Mr. Kelley was released after making a brief appearance alongside his lawyer in a federal courtroom in Grand Rapids, Mich. He was not required to post bail, Mr. Miller confirmed. His next scheduled court appearance will be a virtual hearing on June 16.
After exiting the courthouse, he thanked the well-wishers who had gathered to greet him. “You guys are awesome,” he said.
He was arrested on the same day that the House committee investigating the attack was set to open a landmark series of public hearings.
One of Mr. Kelley’s Republican rivals in the primary, Kevin Rinke, a businessman, wrote on Twitter: “My hope is that the F.B.I. is acting appropriately, because the timing here raises serious questions.”
Another Republican opponent, Garrett Soldano, a chiropractor, used the arrest to attack the F.B.I., writing on Twitter that it had become “an arm of the Democrat Party.”
Mr. Kelley’s arrest is the latest disruption in the Republican primary for governor, which is set for Aug. 2. Two of the leading candidates in the race — James Craig, a former Detroit police chief, and Perry Johnson, a wealthy businessman — were dropped from the ballot because of forged signatures on their nominating petitions. Both men recently lost legal challenges to be reinstated on the ballot. Mr. Craig and Mr. Johnson are among five Republican candidates in the race who were declared ineligible.
Mr. Kelley is among the remaining five candidates vying to challenge Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, in the general election this fall. Mr. Kelley has raised a fraction of the amount of money as some of the other candidates in the race. 
Mr. Kelley, a real estate broker in a suburb of Grand Rapids, was the lead organizer of an armed protest against pandemic lockdown measures at the Michigan Statehouse in April 2020. In June that year, he called together about 50 militiamen to square off against a few dozen Black Lives Matter protesters over a statue of a Confederate soldier in his town.
And after the 2020 presidential election, Mr. Kelley and militia members showed up for a rowdy protest outside a ballot-counting center in the state.
“Becoming too closely aligned with militias — is that a bad thing?” he said in an earlier interview.
Alan Feuer, David D. Kirkpatrick and Mike McIntire contributed reporting.
By Neil Vigdor
Ryan Zinke, a former interior secretary under President Donald J. Trump, squeaked by to win the Republican nomination for a House seat in Montana, The Associated Press said on Thursday, in spite of the lingering findings of a government watchdog that he broke ethics rules when he was a member of the cabinet.
Mr. Zinke, 60, who was for a time the face of the Trump administration’s environmental rollbacks, edged past Dr. Al Olszewski, an orthopedist and former state legislator, in a five-way primary in the newly created First District in western Montana. The election was on Tuesday.
Mr. Zinke was endorsed by the former president, and his victory put him on a path to return to Congress. Mr. Zinke represented all of Montana in the House from 2015 to 2017, having been elected twice to its at-large seat. Rapid population growth has since given the state a second seat.
As interior secretary, Mr. Zinke dismantled Obama-era rules related to oil, gas and mineral extraction and oversaw the largest reduction of federal land protection in the nation’s history.
Mr. Zinke, a former Navy SEAL, was recommended for the top job at the Department of the Interior by Donald Trump Jr., the former president’s son and a fellow avid hunter, but his nearly two years in the post were plagued by scandals. Mr. Zinke resigned in January 2019 while facing multiple investigations into his ethical conduct.
This year, the Interior Department’s inspector general found that Mr. Zinke had continued to negotiate with developers about a real estate project in his hometown, Whitefish, Mont., violating an ethics agreement he had signed upon taking office to not participate in such matters.
When investigators questioned Mr. Zinke about his role in the negotiations, the inspector general’s report said, he lied about his involvement with a charitable foundation that he had helped found.
The Justice Department declined to bring charges against Mr. Zinke after the release of the report, which he called a “political hit job” in a statement to The Associated Press at the time.
During the primary race, Mr. Zinke’s Republican opponents sought to portray him as quitting Mr. Trump’s administration and as spending more time in Santa Barbara, Calif., where his wife owns a property.
Mr. Trump recently participated in a telephone rally for Mr. Zinke, who will face Monica Tranel in the November election. Ms. Tranel, a lawyer who specializes in energy regulation and previously worked for the Montana Public Service Commission, won a three-way Democratic primary.
A fifth-generation Montanan, Mr. Zinke showed up on his first day as interior secretary in the saddle of an Irish sport horse named Tonto. He also flew a special interior secretary flag above the department’s building when he was present.
But Mr. Zinke’s turbulent tenure presiding over 500 million acres of public land, including 59 national parks, frequently drew scrutiny.
In 2017, Mr. Zinke became the focus of news reports for his use of charter and military planes at taxpayer expense, including a $12,000 flight to Las Vegas for a speaking engagement with the Golden Knights, then the city’s new hockey team, whose owner had donated to Mr. Zinke’s congressional campaigns. The inspector general for the Interior Department found that the flights did not violate any laws, but that the cost of the flight could have been avoided.
As interior secretary, Mr. Zinke also faced accusations from two federally recognized Native American tribes that he had scuttled their joint-venture casino project in Connecticut because of political pressure. A Justice Department investigation into the matter has not resulted in charges.
By Nicholas Fandos
Carl P. Paladino, a Republican running for a House seat in Western New York, praised Adolf Hitler last year for inspiring his followers, describing the fascist dictator as “the kind of leader we need today.”
Mr. Paladino did not specifically condone Hitler’s actions in his remarks, which he made in a 2021 radio interview that was unearthed on Thursday. But he said he was impressed by how the German leader and head of the Nazi Party “aroused the crowd” in his speeches and suggested that Republicans in New York and Washington ought to emulate his approach.
“He would get up there screaming these epithets and these people were just, they were hypnotized by him,” he said in the interview, resurfaced by the left-leaning watchdog group Media Matters. “I guess, I guess that’s the kind of leader we need today. We need somebody inspirational. We need somebody that is a doer.”
“Our Republicans are sound asleep,” he added, referring to party officials as captive to “RINOism,” a derogatory acronym meaning Republicans in name only.
The remarks, for which he apologized on Thursday, were striking even by the incendiary standards of Mr. Paladino, who has previously said that children should not be “brainwashed” into thinking that being gay was acceptable and suggested that Michelle Obama, the former first lady, should be “let loose in the outback of Zimbabwe.”
They could cause major headaches for G.O.P. leaders, particularly Representative Elise Stefanik of New York, the No. 3 House Republican, who has championed his fledgling candidacy.
“Carl is a job creator and conservative outsider who will be a tireless fighter for the people of New York in our fight to put America First to save the country,” she recently wrote on Twitter.
She also invited him to a fund-raiser on Monday at former President Donald J. Trump’s Westchester County golf course, where the two men were photographed together.
The chairman of the New York Democratic Party singled out Ms. Stefanik on Thursday as he called on Republican leaders to condemn Mr. Paladino for “blatant antisemitism.”
“How has the Republican Party stooped so low to support a man who has gone on record idolizing a monster that senselessly killed millions?” said the chairman, Jay Jacobs.
In a statement on Thursday, a spokesman for Ms. Stefanik said she had “one of the strongest records in the U.S. Congress condemning antisemitism” and had pushed bipartisan Holocaust education legislation. But the spokesman did not indicate whether the congresswoman maintained her support for Mr. Paladino.
A Buffalo-based developer who was the Republicans’ 2010 nominee for governor of New York, Mr. Paladino, 75, entered the House race just last Friday after Representative Chris Jacobs said he would not seek re-election. Mr. Jacobs was facing an intense backlash from party leaders angry over his support for an assault weapons ban and other gun safety measures, which he expressed after recent mass shootings.
Mr. Paladino will face a formidable primary challenge from Nicholas A. Langworthy, the chairman of the state Republican Party, who announced his candidacy on Thursday as the developer’s comments reverberated through the 23rd Congressional District.
His entrance set the stage for the kind of explosive primary that New York Republicans had hoped to avoid this year as they seek to retake the House majority in Washington. While the 23rd District is likely to remain in Republican hands, a primary battle could divert resources away from other swing seats the G.O.P. believes it can flip.
But in an interview, Mr. Langworthy argued that allowing Mr. Paladino, a one-time ally, to proceed to a general election would be worse.
“That’s exactly why I am running for Congress, because I provide a candidacy free of distraction,” he said, adding: “We can’t have a circus sideshow on the ticket in Buffalo in the fall that would hurt our statewide prospects.”
He said he would remain party chairman during his campaign.
Mr. Paladino’s comments about Hitler were not even the first time this week that he has drawn condemnation and been forced to apologize.
In a Facebook post and email blast sent last Wednesday, just two days before he said he would run for the House, Mr. Paladino promoted an essay by a Rochester man casting doubt on the official accounts of recent mass shootings in Buffalo and Uvalde, Texas, where he asserted that the purported gunman “was receiving hypnosis training.”
“In almost every mass shooting including the most recent horrific Buffalo Tops Market & the Texas school shootings, there are strange occurrences that are never fully explained,” the man wrote, including conspiratorial references to the suicide of Jeffrey Epstein and the assassinations of John F. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy.
Media Matters was also first to report on Mr. Paladino’s post, which was later removed.
In an emailed statement on Thursday, Mr. Paladino said that his invocation of Hitler had been a “serious mistake and rightfully upsets people,” but he blamed the news media for taking his remarks out of context.
“Any implication that I support Hitler or any of the sick and disgusting actions of the Nazi regime is a new low for the media,” he wrote, adding that he would stay in the race against Mr. Langworthy.
Mr. Paladino initially denied sharing the essay on gun control, claiming he did not know how to post on Facebook, but later admitted doing so to The Buffalo News, adding that he did not agree with all the “conspiracy theories” it cited.
By Neil Vigdor
A former Democratic congressman from Philadelphia who was expelled from the House and imprisoned in the early 1980s for accepting bribes during the Abscam sting has pleaded guilty to operating a yearslong scheme to stuff ballot boxes, federal prosecutors said this week.
The ex-congressman, Michael J. Myers, a member of the House from 1976 to 1980, had been working as a political consultant on behalf of various local, state and federal candidates when he engaged in the election fraud, the authorities said.
Mr. Myers, 79, admitted bribing one local elections judge and persuading another official who served in a similar capacity to inflate the tallies on voting machines at precincts that they oversaw — also known as “ringing up votes” — for certain candidates who were his clients or were favored by him, according to court documents.
Both of the election officials involved in the scheme, which lasted from 2014 to 2018, have already pleaded guilty after being charged separately.
Prosecutors had said in court documents that there was no evidence to suggest the candidates who employed Mr. Myers knew of the fraud scheme. None of the candidates were identified. Many instances of the fraud reported by prosecutors involved Democratic primary elections, with the winners of those races often a lock to win the general election in deep-blue Philadelphia.
Mr. Myers, a former longshoreman who goes by the first name Ozzie, faces up to 60 years in prison in connection with the five criminal counts that he pleaded guilty to on Monday in federal court in Philadelphia. He was indicted in 2020.
The case, which had been seized upon by former President Donald J. Trump and his Republican allies as part of their unsubstantiated claims of widespread voter fraud, had been scheduled to go to trial on Tuesday. All of the allegations against Mr. Myers predated the 2020 presidential election by at least two years.
Noah Gorson, a lawyer for Mr. Myers, who was free on $50,000 bail, declined to comment on Thursday. Sentencing in the case is scheduled for Sept. 27.
“One thing you can say about Ozzie Myers: His values have long been out of whack,” Jacqueline Maguire, a special agent in charge of the F.B.I.’s Philadelphia division, said in a statement on Monday.
During the 1970s, the Abscam investigation exposed a sweeping corruption scandal that ensnared multiple members of Congress and other elected officials. Many of them were caught on videotape accepting bribes from federal agents posing as oil-rich Arabs who had sought help with immigration problems and investment projects.
The code name for the two-year operation, which was dramatized in the 2013 movie “American Hustle,” was Abscam. In total, nearly 20 elected officials were convicted and sentenced to prison: Mr. Myers was among six disgraced congressmen and one U.S. senator.
At his corruption trial in 1980, prosecutors played a tape of Mr. Myers accepting $50,000 from an undercover federal agent posing as an Arab sheikh, for whom the congressman agreed to introduce a bill to help with his immigration issues.
In the tape, Mr. Myers told the federal agent “money talks in this business,” using additional vulgar language. Mr. Myers was sentenced to three years in prison after his conviction, but ultimately served more than a year in that case.
In October 1980, the House voted 376 to 30 to expel Mr. Myers from Congress, the first time it had taken such a step against a sitting representative since Henry C. Burnett, a Kentucky Democrat, who was banished in 1861 for fighting for the Confederacy during the Civil War.
“Decades ago, he valued a fake sheikh’s bribes more than the ethical obligations of his elected federal office,” Ms. Maguire, the F.B.I. special agent, said of Mr. Myers. “This time around, he valued his clients’ money and his own whims more than the integrity of multiple elections and the will of Philadelphia voters.”
Prosecutors said Mr. Myers funneled payments ranging from $300 to $5,000 to Domenick J. Demuro, an elections judge in South Philadelphia, to manipulate votes on behalf of his clients and other candidates favored by him. The money came from consulting fees that he had been paid by the candidates, the authorities said. Mr. Demuro pleaded guilty in 2020 to accepting bribes and certifying false voting results. He is awaiting sentencing.
In another precinct in South Philadelphia, Mr. Myers often drove an official who was in charge of the election, Marie Beren, to a polling station on various Election Days and told her which candidates she should pad vote totals for, according to a criminal complaint.
Ms. Beren, who pleaded guilty last October in connection with the scheme, falsified polling books and voter lists, prosecutors said. She is also awaiting sentencing.
“Votes are not things to be purchased and democracy is not for sale,” Jennifer Arbittier Williams, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, said in a statement on Monday.
