Advertisement
The presumptive Republican front-runner is Tom Kean Jr., a former state lawmaker who came within 1 percentage point of beating Representative Tom Malinowski, a Democrat, in 2020. The strongest contenders challenging Kean, the son of a two-term New Jersey governor, appear to be Philip Rizzo, a former pastor, and Erik Peterson, a state assemblyman.

Winner
        


Race called by The Associated Press.

* Incumbent
As the crowd waited for Representative Karen Bass to speak, Antonio Villaraigosa, the city’s former mayor, echoed many of Bass’s supporters who spoke this evening, pointing out the flood of money Rick Caruso unleashed on the race: “Los Angeles is not for sale.” 

Chesa Boudin concedes defeat. He tells his supporters at an outdoor bar on the edge of the San Francisco Bay: “This was never about one vote count. It was never about one election night party. This is a movement, not a moment in history.” The crowd chants: “Chesa! Chesa!”

No sign of Karen Bass yet, but Mike Feuer, the city attorney, who ran for mayor and dropped out before endorsing Bass, spoke with television reporters while Mariachi Arcoiris, an L.G.B.T.Q. mariachi band, played “My Way.”

With 100,000 votes counted, the San Francisco Board of Elections put votes for the recall of Chesa Boudin, the district attorney, at 61 percent. At the pro-recall watch party, the crowd erupted with elation, shouting, “Sixty-one! Sixty-one!”

The A.P. has called the first spot in the November runoff for California attorney general for the incumbent, Rob Bonta. It remains unclear whether he will face one of two Republican challengers or the independent Sacramento County district attorney, Anne Marie Schubert.

Lanhee Chen, a professor who served as the policy director for Mitt Romney’s 2012 presidential bid, is starting out with a lead in the controller’s race, in early returns. He has given Republicans hope for their first statewide victory since 2006.

Numbers are just beginning to come in in California’s 22nd District, where Representative David Valadao — a Republican who voted to impeach former President Donald Trump — faces Republican challengers. The seat is expected to be highly competitive in the fall.

Turnout in California’s last two June primaries was 38 percent and 48 percent. This one is expected to be even lower — around 30 percent.

The primary in California’s 27th District is likely to determine which Democrat will take on Representative Mike Garcia, a Republican whose seat Democrats regard as a pickup opportunity.

Polls have closed in Los Angeles, where voters are expected to send Rick Caruso, a billionaire real estate developer, into a runoff with Representative Karen Bass. Their mayoral campaign has focused heavily on the city’s struggles with homelessness and crime.

Abby Finkenauer has conceded the Iowa Democratic primary for Senate to Mike Franken, a retired Navy admiral. “I want to congratulate Admiral Franken on his victory,” she said. “Mike ran a great campaign rooted in our shared values.”

With State Senator Zach Nunn’s G.O.P. primary victory in Iowa’s Third Congressional District, prognosticators quickly moved the seat, held by Representative Cindy Axne, a Democrat, from toss-up to leans Republican. Nunn was considered the strongest general election candidate in the Republican race.

A Menendez political dynasty grows in New Jersey: Robert J. Menendez, the son of Senator Robert Menendez, won his primary in the heavily Democratic Eighth Congressional District. Representative Albio Sires, the incumbent, announced late last year he would not seek re-election.

Gabe Vasquez, a Las Cruces city councilor, has won the Democratic primary in the race for New Mexico’s 2nd Congressional District, which covers Albuquerque and the southern half of New Mexico. He will face the Republican incumbent, Yvette Herrell.

Representative Tom Malinowski of New Jersey won his primary today, but he is expected to face a difficult general election.

Representative Tom Malinowski of New Jersey’s Seventh Congressional District defeated his opponent in the Democratic primary, Roger Bacon, according to The Associated Press.

Representative Michelle Steel, a Republican running in a Southern California swing district, missed the votes concerning the certification of the 2020 election. As recently as this weekend, she was still declining to say how she would have voted, saying she did not know.

There are 13 members of Congress who voted to overturn election results in 2020 on the ballot tonight. As we’ve seen in other states, those who claimed issues with the 2020 election have not raised any similar concerns about their own primaries in 2022, despite the rules being largely similar.

There are multiple members of the “America First” slate of secretary of state candidates who continue to doubt the 2020 election on the ballot tonight. Audrey Trujillo is running unopposed in New Mexico, and Rachel Hamm is running in a crowded California top-two open primary.

About only 30 percent of voters are expected to cast ballots in California’s primary, though the state maximizes voting access. Theories abound — voter fatigue, not enough drama. But Ace Smith, a veteran Democratic political consultant, thinks it’s simple: “No one knows there’s an election.”

Winner
        


Race called by The Associated Press.
Source: Election results and race calls from The Associated Press.
The New York Times’s results team is a group of graphics editors, engineers and reporters who build and maintain software to publish election results in real-time as they are reported by results providers. To learn more about how election results work, read this article.
The Times’s election results pages are produced by Michael Andre, Aliza Aufrichtig, Neil Berg, Matthew Bloch, Sean Catangui, Andrew Chavez, Nate Cohn, Alastair Coote, Annie Daniel, Asmaa Elkeurti, Tiffany Fehr, Andrew Fischer, Will Houp, Josh Katz, Aaron Krolik, Jasmine C. Lee, Rebecca Lieberman, Ilana Marcus, Jaymin Patel, Rachel Shorey, Charlie Smart, Umi Syam, Urvashi Uberoy, Isaac White and Christine Zhang. Reporting by Leah Askarinam, Maggie Astor, Alana Celii, Jill Cowan, Lalena Fisher, Blake Hounshell, Shawn Hubler, Soumya Karlamangla, Alyce McFadden, Jennifer Medina, Azi Paybarah, Tracey Tully, Jonathan Weisman and Karen Workman; production by Amanda Cordero and Jessica White; editing by Wilson Andrews, Kenan Davis, Amy Hughes and Ben Koski.
Advertisement
