Advertisement
State Senator Jen Kiggans faces Jarome Bell, a Navy veteran who has called for the execution of people convicted of voter fraud. The winner will advance to what is expected to be one of the nation's most competitive House races in November against Representative Elaine Luria, a two-term Democrat.

Winner
        


Race called by The Associated Press.
Jeremy Hunt’s Achilles' heel was always the sense in his Georgia House district that he was really an Atlantan, parachuted in by Republican leaders. Chris West’s appeal was always that he was a true native of Southwestern Georgia.

Yesli Vega, the Republican challenger who will take on Representative Abigail Spanberger in Virginia, was the chair of Latinos for Glenn Youngkin in the governor’s race last year.

Cuellar’s victory in Texas has stoked a fresh round of Democratic recriminations as some on the left criticize national party leaders for backing the most staunchly anti-abortion Democrat in the House.

It looks like an upset is possible in the Second Congressional District runoff in Georgia. Jeremy Hunt, the well-funded Army captain backed by top Republican leaders, is trailing Chris West, a lawyer and former Air Force officer. Hunt outspent West 10-to-1 in this primary.

Mike Collins, who won the G.O.P. nomination in Georgia’s 10th district, is the son of a former congressman. Yet he ran as a “conservative outsider,” which says a lot about what sells in the Republican Party in 2022.

Georgia has been a no good, very bad state for Trump’s endorsements this year. So far tonight one House candidate he backed there, Vernon Jones, has lost. The other, Jake Evans, is far behind in the early counting.

The polls are now closed in Alabama. Voters who are currently in line to vote will be permitted to do so.

Turnout in Georgia for the runoff elections was a fraction of the record highs seen during last month’s primary. That may be partly because of the state’s new election law, S.B. 202, which shortened the runoff period for elections statewide.

Supporters of Representative Mo Brooks are setting up for his campaign watch party this evening at an indoor shooting range in Huntsville, Ala. He is facing Katie Britt in a runoff for the Republican nomination for Senate. Light turnout is being reported in the state.


* Incumbent
Source: Election results and race calls from The Associated Press.
The New York Times’s results team is a group of graphics editors, engineers and reporters who build and maintain software to publish election results in real-time as they are reported by results providers. To learn more about how election results work, read this article.
The Times’s election results pages are produced by Michael Andre, Aliza Aufrichtig, Neil Berg, Matthew Bloch, Sean Catangui, Andrew Chavez, Nate Cohn, Alastair Coote, Annie Daniel, Asmaa Elkeurti, Tiffany Fehr, Andrew Fischer, Will Houp, Josh Katz, Aaron Krolik, Jasmine C. Lee, Rebecca Lieberman, Ilana Marcus, Jaymin Patel, Rachel Shorey, Charlie Smart, Umi Syam, Urvashi Uberoy, Isaac White and Christine Zhang. Reporting by Alana Celii, Reid Epstein, Lalena Fisher, Azi Paybarah, Justin Swanson and Karen Workman; production by Amanda Cordero and Jessica White; editing by Wilson Andrews, Kenan Davis, Amy Hughes and Ben Koski.
Advertisement
