Advertisement

	By overturning Roe v. Wade, Dobbs is sure to go down as one of the most consequential Supreme Court decisions, undoing a constitutional right that’s been in place for nearly half a century and delivering a decisive victory to the anti-abortion movement.


	As people try to make sense of this moment, we’ve asked six experts — among them, an abortion historian, a university president and two lawyers who’ve argued major cases before the high court — to select one paragraph from the majority opinion, written by Justice Samuel Alito, or from the concurring opinions or the dissent, and unpack what it tells us about both the ruling and the future of America.

Melissa Murray is a law professor at New York University and a co-host of the “Strict Scrutiny” podcast. She has written that the Dobbs decision could threaten the right to birth control.
Thomas, J., concurring
For that reason, in future cases, we should reconsider all of this Court’s substantive due process precedents, including Griswold, Lawrence, and Obergefell. Because any substantive due process decision is “demonstrably erroneous,” … we have a duty to “correct the error” established in those precedents …. After overruling these demonstrably erroneous decisions, the question would remain whether other constitutional provisions guarantee the myriad rights that our substantive due process cases have generated. For example, we could consider whether any of the rights announced in this Court’s substantive due process cases are “privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States” protected by the Fourteenth Amendment ….To answer that question, we would need to decide important antecedent questions, including whether the Privileges or Immunities Clause protects any rights that are not enumerated in the Constitution and, if so, how to identify those rights ….That said, even if the Clause does protect unenumerated rights, the Court conclusively demonstrates that abortion is not one of them under any plausible interpretive approach.
There is so much to say about the opinions in Dobbs — from the maximalist majority opinion to  Chief Justice John Roberts’s and Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s concurrences, which seek to impose some restraint on the majority, to the dissenters’ righteous indignation that their colleagues have laid waste to almost 50 years’ worth of precedents. But for me, the most interesting opinion is Justice Clarence Thomas’s concurrence. 

Justice Thomas often writes separate opinions that fail to garner the votes of other justices. No matter. They always hit their intended targets:  the conservative judges of the lower federal courts. Though Justice Thomas’s legal theories seem off the wall to many, in the hands of these acolytes, many of whom are former Thomas clerks, they flourish in the lower courts, widening the Overton window of mainstream opinion and shifting the terms of our debates. In his concurring opinion, despite the majority’s assurances that the Dobbs decision is limited to abortion and does not implicate other rights, Justice Thomas endorses reconsidering the Griswold, Lawrence and Obergefell rulings. These decisions recognize a right to use contraception, the right to engage in same-sex relationships and the right to same-sex marriage.

This is all to say that for Justice Thomas, and indeed, for the conservative legal movement writ large, abortion is just the beginning. The logic of this concurrence will invite and underwrite a raft of challenges to the rights of heart and home that so many of us take for granted.
John Garvey is the president of the Catholic University of America and an expert in constitutional law and religious liberty. He has written that overturning Roe “would only be the beginning” of the effort to end abortion.
Opinion of the Court
Roe and Casey have led to the distortion of many important but unrelated legal doctrines, and that effect provides further support for overruling those decisions.
According to Einstein’s theory of gravity, massive objects can warp the fabric of space around them,  distorting the trajectories of nearby objects. This has been the effect of Roe v. Wade on the law. Settled doctrines have been twisted beyond recognition when they are applied in cases about abortion. Dobbs rightly recognized this as a reason to set aside the rule of stare decisis and overturn the precedent of Roe.

Consider the law of religious liberty. The court’s zealous protection of Roe has squelched peaceful religious speech by sidewalk counselors. It has invited laws conscripting religious people (in pharmacies, crafts stores, even nuns) into plans to distribute contraceptives. It has led to attempts at aggressive regulation of pro-life pregnancy centers. It has undermined support for the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, passed in 1993 by a unanimous House and a Senate vote of 97-3. That act, which the A.C.L.U. testified in favor of, was designed to accommodate a variety of beliefs and creeds hemmed in by government regulation.  Today the A.C.L.U. says it can no longer support the act because it might affect “access to or referrals for abortion and contraception services.”
Reducing the constitutional magnitude of abortion will have a healthy effect on adjacent areas of the law.  This is a sure sign that the court has moved in the right direction.
Mary Ziegler is a law professor and the author of “Dollars for Life: The Anti-Abortion Movement and the Fall of the Republican Establishment.” She wrote recently about a shift in the anti-abortion movement toward punishing women who have abortions.
KAVANAUGH, J., concurring
The Roe Court took sides on a consequential moral and policy issue that this Court had no constitutional authority to decide. By taking sides, the Roe Court distorted the Nation’s understanding of this Court’s proper role in the American constitutional system and thereby damaged the Court as an institution.
Justice Kavanaugh's concurrence seeks to reassure Americans that the overruling of Roe will be the end of the story. Neutrality will reign, he writes;  there will be no threat to any other constitutional right, no thorny questions about interstate travel or punishment for anyone who performed an abortion when the procedure was legal. These predictions ring hollow in the face of steps already taken by red states and the protests raging outside the court.
 
 Justice Kavanaugh's view of neutrality also seems misguided, at least insofar as the court's legitimacy is concerned. This decision will be perceived as anything but neutral — it was unnecessary for the court to intervene in this case in the first place, much less overturn Roe this quickly; in doing so, the court fulfilled Donald Trump's promise to see the end of abortion rights. If this is the kind of neutrality we should expect, the damage to the court is just beginning.
Mary Bonauto, the civil rights project director at GLAD, argued Obergefell v. Hodges before the Supreme Court in 2015. She has spoken about how same-sex marriage and reproductive rights are intertwined.
Opinion of the Court
Ordered liberty sets limits and defines the boundary between competing interests. Roe and Casey each struck a particular balance between the interests of a woman who wants an abortion and the interests of what they termed “potential life.” … But the people of the various States may evaluate those interests differently. In some States, voters may believe that the abortion right should be even more extensive than the right that Roe and Casey recognized. Voters in other States may wish to impose tight restrictions based on their belief that abortion destroys an “unborn human being.”... Our Nation’s historical understanding of ordered liberty does not prevent the people’s elected representatives from deciding how abortion should be regulated.
As the Obergefell decision explained,  “Courts are open to injured individuals” who seek “to vindicate their own direct, personal stake in our basic charter. An individual can invoke a right to constitutional protection” – such as whether the individual or the government decides on your choice of marriage partner or sexual partner, whether you bear or raise a child and how to raise that child – “even if the broader public disagrees and even if the legislature refuses to act. The idea of the Constitution ‘was to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political controversy, to place them beyond the reach of majorities and officials and to establish them as legal principles.’” 


This paragraph in the Dobbs opinion signals a possible retreat from the court’s bedrock constitutional duty to declare and protect our rights.  It tees up some constitutional rights as matters for states to decide at a time when some states are trying to limit voting access. Submitting basic rights to votes and elections imperils those rights and introduces uncertainty about our protections as we cross state lines. 

 The Dobbs ruling should be a call to action for anyone concerned about protecting civil rights and civil liberties. We should take seriously what the Supreme Court says about the decision being limited to abortion, which is devastating enough. Going forward, we must advance our constitutional ideals and equal justice under law in the courts, and also recognize that organizing, action and voting matter more than ever.
Kathryn Kolbert, the co-founder of the Center for Reproductive Rights, argued Planned Parenthood v. Casey before the Supreme Court in 1992. She wrote last year that a new strategy is needed to protect abortion rights.
Opinion of the Court
Americans who believe that abortion should be restricted press countervailing arguments about modern developments. They note that attitudes about the pregnancy of unmarried women have changed drastically; that federal and state laws ban discrimination on the basis of pregnancy; that leave for pregnancy and childbirth are now guaranteed by law in many cases; that the costs of medical care associated with pregnancy are covered by insurance or government assistance; that States have increasingly adopted “safe haven” laws, which generally allow women to drop off babies anonymously; and that a woman who puts her newborn up for adoption today has little reason to fear that the baby will not find a suitable home. They also claim that many people now have a new appreciation of fetal life and that when prospective parents who want to have a child view a sonogram, they typically have no doubt that what they see is their daughter or son.
I’m struck that while the majority opinion repeatedly gives great weight to the importance of protecting fetal life, it fails to discuss the effect of its ruling on women’s lives and health. The court cavalierly dismisses the fact that bans on abortion will force women to travel hundreds of miles to receive care, risk criminal prosecution for seeking abortion medication on the gray or black market, and will disadvantage those women with the least resources: women of color, poor women, young women, disabled women. The majority opinion brushes off the import of these effects by arguing that the state legislative process will protect women’s interests, because they can vote or drop their babies on the doorsteps of fire stations.

 Those of us who believe that the rights of women to make decisions about their lives ought to be constitutionally protected need to work to elect politicians who agree with us.
Erika Bachiochi is a conservative legal scholar who has argued that Roe v. Wade should be overturned. She is the author of “The Rights of Women: Reclaiming a Lost Vision.”
Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan, J.J., dissenting
Of course, “people” did not ratify the Fourteenth Amendment. Men did. So it is perhaps not so surprising that the ratifiers were not perfectly attuned to the importance of reproductive rights for women’s liberty, or for their capacity to participate as equal members of our Nation. Indeed, the ratifiers — both in 1868 and when the original Constitution was approved in 1788 — did not understand women as full members of the community embraced by the phrase “We the People.” In 1868, the first wave of American feminists were explicitly told — of course by men — that it was not their time to seek constitutional protections. (Women would not get even the vote for another half-century.) To be sure, most women in 1868 also had a foreshortened view of their rights: If most men could not then imagine giving women control over their bodies, most women could not imagine having that kind of autonomy. But that takes away nothing from the core point. Those responsible for the original Constitution, including the Fourteenth Amendment, did not perceive women as equals, and did not recognize women’s rights. When the majority says that we must read our foundational charter as viewed at the time of ratification (except that we may also check it against the Dark Ages), it consigns women to second-class citizenship.
In an attempt to negate the majority’s reliance on the 14th Amendment in its reasoning, the dissent thinks it has thrown a trump card here. Sure, the ratifiers of the 14th Amendment did not understand liberty to include an abortion right. But how could they have? the dissent asks. Women could not vote; the ratifiers were all men! 
This may be. But it is worthwhile to note that the first wave of American feminists, to whom the dissent refers, were quite attuned to the relationship between abortion and women’s liberty and equality; indeed, that some women felt the need to end the lives of their unborn children revealed to them just how deeply society had failed women. Recognizing, as Victoria Woodhull did, that the rights of children “begin while yet they remain the fetus,” these early women’s-rights advocates sought equal rights – in marriage, education, property, the professions and the franchise – in part so they could carry out their responsibilities to their children, born and unborn.

 In doing so, they held not a “foreshortened view” of women’s rights, as the dissent patronizingly argues, but one based on a rich understanding of human beings as fundamentally interdependent. For 19th-century women’s advocates, rights were properly grounded not in male-normative ideals of unencumbered “autonomy,” as the now-repudiated “right” to abortion was, but in our responsibilities to one  another. They offer a model for how we might approach a Roe-free future that, in fact, does better by women than the past 50 years.
Advertisement
