A Ukrainian official said that Russian forces could cut off the eastern city within days. Capturing the city would give President Vladimir Putin a key victory in his bid to control all of the Donbas region.
Follow our live news updates on the Russia-Ukraine war.
 Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Matina Stevis-Gridneff
LYSYCHANSK, Ukraine — With Russia about to encircle Sievierodonetsk, a city critical to its goal of seizing Ukraine’s east, and with a neighboring city squarely in Moscow’s sights, the question of how realities on the ground will shape the next phase of the war became still more pressing Sunday for Ukraine’s Western allies.
“The Russians are making every effort to cut off Sievierodonetsk,” the regional governor, Serhiy Haidai, said Sunday on Telegram, the messaging app. “The next two or three days will be significant.”
Across the river, Ukrainians trying to hold fast against the Russians in Lysychansk had the advantage of good terrain — but dwindling weaponry to defend it with.
“If there is no help with military equipment, of course they will drive us out,” said Oleksandr Voronenko, 46, a military police officer stationed in Lysychansk. “Because everyday the equipment is destroyed. You have to replace it with something new.”
Ukrainian officials have been imploring NATO allies for faster delivery of longer-range weapons, and the urgently needed replenishment of still more basic supplies, including ammunition.
But with the momentum of the war shifting more decisively in Russia’s favor, Ukraine’s allies, their economies threatened and their resolve tested, may soon find themselves forced to confront far more fundamental questions than what sort of weapons to provide, including whether to put pressure on Ukraine to reach a peace agreement with Russia or risk Russian escalation with more aggressive military support.
“There was always a sense that, when the center of gravity shifted to the south and east, there would be the potential for greater Russian gains based on greater mass and their existing territorial acquisitions,” said Ian Lesser, a former American official who heads the Brussels office of the German Marshall Fund.
“But it does raise more serious longer-term questions about the nature of the conflict, Ukraine’s aims and Western aims in relation to those,” he said.
As Ukrainians wait, they are suffering horrific losses in the Donbas region where the fight for Sievierodonetsk is playing out. By Ukraine’s own assessment, it is losing between 100 and 200 people a day as the bloodshed there worsens, in part because of Russian material superiority and in part because of Ukraine’s determination to fight on despite the increasingly bleak picture in the east.
Those Western supplies that have made it through to the front line are neither as plentiful or as sophisticated as Ukraine would like. And some never even make it into battle, hit by Russian strikes before they can even be deployed.
Late Saturday, Russian missiles hit a military warehouse in western Ukraine, wounding nearly two dozen people, and, according to Russia’s Defense Ministry, destroying antitank and antiaircraft missile systems supplied to Ukraine by the United States and the European Union.
The Ukrainian government has poured troops and resources into its effort to hold on to Sievierodonetsk, a strategically important industrial city and the last major urban center in the Donbas region of Luhansk that has not yet fallen. Russian forces have destroyed two bridges leading to the center of Sievierodonetsk and were shelling the remaining one, an important supply line for Ukrainian forces, the regional governor said.
Now, the battle may be about to shift to its sister city, Lysychansk.
On Sunday, from atop a hill in Lysychansk, it was evident why the soon to be focal point of the Russian offensive appears easier to defend than other parts of Donbas: It is on high ground. The sprawling plains of the region are rich in natural resources, but elevation is a rarity.
That leaves the city’s Ukrainian defenders in an advantageous position.
But it’s impossible to defend Lysychansk, a city with a prewar population of roughly 100,000, without the supplies needed to keep Ukrainian tanks and artillery stocked with shells and the thousands of troops garrisoned there fed and equipped.
This is the challenge the Ukrainian military is facing now as Russian forces near the end of their campaign to seize neighboring Sievierodonetsk. Even with Sievierodonetsk captured, Ukrainian troops could most likely defend Lysychansk, in part because the Seversky Donets River separates the two cities — unless Russian forces succeed in severing the city’s supply routes.
It was clear Sunday that the Russians were attempting to accomplish just that by steadily advancing from the southeast.
Plumes of smoke and burning fields where artillery strikes had lit the ground on fire enveloped Lysychansk in a semicircle on Sunday afternoon. The frequent thuds of incoming and outgoing fire echoed across the city as civilians dragged empty bottles to fill up from a fire department water tanker jury-rigged with clean-water filters.
Last week, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said that “in many ways, the fate of our Donbas is being decided” around Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk. But the first city is now virtually encircled, and if Russian forces continue to advance toward the mix of asphalt and bumpy field roads that serve as the only logistics pipeline into the second, Ukrainian officials will have to make a strategic decision: withdraw or risk an encirclement of Lysychansk, too.
“We’re waiting for reinforcements,” said Mr. Voronenko, the military police officer, as a group of 20 or so residents began moving toward evacuation vans. “It has partly arrived in the last several days in the form of artillery. And if we get more, then we can probably hold them off.”
But nearly four months after Russia invaded, the Ukrainian military is running low on ammunition for its Soviet-era artillery and is not receiving enough ammunition, fast enough, leaving the fate of Lysychansk even more uncertain.
For European countries, the question of how to defend Ukraine now is both tactical and political — and raises issues closer to home.
Several E.U. members are fretting that they have sent too much of their own ammunition to Ukraine and are lagging behind in restocking their arsenals. With the bloc’s foreign policy and defense not integrated, European leaders have been forced to try source their own military supplies.
European Union officials say they will try to tap a nine billion euro ($9.5 billion) funding pot to jointly procure military equipment, trying to ease concerns that supporting Ukraine militarily has dangerously weakened defense capabilities elsewhere in Europe.
The bloc is also wrestling with the broader and politically fraught question of how to move forward with Ukraine’s bid to enter the European Union. That decision could bolster Mr. Zelensky at home and perhaps give him more political flexibility to negotiate a cease-fire, but could also lead Russia to dig in or worse.
In a visit to Kyiv Saturday, president Ursula von der Leyen of the European Commission said her administration would provide an opinion on whether the bloc should grant candidate status to Ukraine by the end of the week. Ultimately, however, the decision is a deeply political one that E.U. leaders will be called to answer at a summit June 23 and 24 in Brussels.
For most countries granted candidate status, it takes more than a decade of reforms and negotiations to become a full E.U. member.
Should Ukraine be given a green light, its road forward will most likely be difficult, considering the nation’s dire situation since the onset of war and the poor governance and corruption that marked it even before the invasion.
“Whatever the territorial reality on the ground, having that deepening prospect of Euro-Atlantic integration for Ukraine is very meaningful,” said Mr. Lesser of the German Marshall Fund. “And to the extent that it fosters a growing prospect of an increasingly Westernized Ukraine versus a Russia that’s drifted out into an Asiatic imperial posture, the political contrast between these two actors will become more stark.”
Thomas Gibbons-Neff reported from Lysychansk, and Matina Stevis-Gridneff from Brussels. Natalia Yermak contributed reporting from Lysychansk.
 Andrés R. Martínez
Russian forces have pushed Ukrainian forces from the center of Sievierodonetsk, the Ukrainian military said on Monday. Fighting for control of the city is ongoing, according to the latest update.
 Austin Ramzy
Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea, expressed support for President Putin and his war in Ukraine, state media reported. North Korea went further than most of Russia's allies, who have stopped short of supporting the war. North Korea was one of just five nations to vote against a U.N. resolution in March condemning Russia’s invasion.
 Rebecca Halleck
The transmission of safeguards data between the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine and the International Atomic Energy Agency has been restored after a disruption of nearly two weeks, according to the I.A.E.A. director general, Rafael Mariano Grossi. The remote data transfer from the plant, which has been under Russian control for three months and is being operated by Ukrainian staff, was cut on May 30.
 Rebecca Halleck
Global food security remains imperiled as grain exports face bottlenecks in Poland and Romania, Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister, Dmytro Senik, told Reuters. Ukraine is in talks with the Baltic States to add a third corridor for food exports as the country races to empty silos before July’s harvest, but reaching the ports would require cutting a deal with President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko of Belarus, an ally of President Vladimir Putin.
 Rebecca Halleck
In a recorded video address to the American Jewish Committee’s global forum in New York City, an impassioned President Volodymyr Zelensky, who is Jewish, said, “This is not the 1940s. How could mass killings, torture, burning cities, filtration camps set up by Russian military in the occupied territories, which resemble Nazi concentration camps, become a reality?” 
Photographs and Text by Nicole Tung
Summer weather has brought people out to the many cafes and restaurants in Ukraine’s capital. Worshipers packed churches to mark the Orthodox Pentecost. Nearly all of the city’s checkpoints have disappeared.
The city of Kyiv looks very different compared with the early days of March, when Russian strikes sent residents fleeing the city and into underground shelters. But if one looks closely, there are reminders that a war is still underway: Soldiers deploying for the front lines in the east depart from Kyiv’s railway station, and sandbags remain outside of metro stations, where thousands took shelter in the early days of the invasion.
 Rebecca Halleck
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky repeated his requests to Western allies for more modern missile defense systems and said Sievierodonetsk, “where very fierce fighting is going on — literally for every meter,” remains a crucial focus in his nightly address Sunday evening.
 Alex Traub
With tensions raised across Europe over a newly belligerent Russia, Sweden’s military and the United States Marines concluded a drill on Sunday on Gotland, a Swedish island with strategic significance for control of the Baltic Sea.
“A lot of us thought that there wouldn’t be a need to defend Gotland after Soviet collapse,” Col. Magnus Frykvall, commander of Sweden’s Gotland regiment, said in a telephone interview. “This has been put in a totally new point of view since the war in Ukraine in 2014, and it was even more clear to us with the current invasion.”
The drill came as fears of military conflict with Russia, which not long ago seemed unimaginable in Sweden, have led the nation to apply for membership in NATO. Gotland poses a critical area of concern for Sweden, which like Russia borders the Baltic Sea. Gotland is the Baltic’s largest island.
The drill was part of a broader annual exercise in which the United States sent a giant warship, the U.S.S. Kearsarge, to Stockholm’s port, along with 26 warplanes and 2,400 Marines and sailors.
It was the first time that the military exercise, known as Baltic Operations, included U.S. Marines on Gotland and land-based actions there, Colonel Frykvall said.
The exercise, he said, featured Marines swiftly linking up with Swedish troops on Gotland’s beach, then working to uproot an enemy force from a landing strip that invaders had gained control of and begun to use to bring more troops onto the island.
Gotland’s history shows its strategic importance.
Russia invaded the island in 1808 during a war with Sweden, leading to a month of fighting. Russian forces also landed on the island at the end of World War II in 1945 as a form of “power projection,” Colonel Frykvall said.
At the height of the Cold War, 25,000 Swedish military personnel were stationed on Gotland, he said. But in 2005, the nation closed down its military regiment on the island.
“Sweden thought that there would never be a war in Europe again,” Colonel Frykvall said.
Then came Russia’s annexation of Crimea, which prompted Sweden to resume a military presence on Gotland in 2014.
There are about 400 Swedish members of the military on Gotland — for the moment, Colonel Frykvall said.
“The numbers of military personnel on the island will surely grow quite fast,” Colonel Frykvall said. “We’re looking at wartime organization of 4,000 in a couple years.”
 Anushka Patil
Ukraine’s top military commander, Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, said he had spoken again with his American counterpart, General Mark Milley. Zaluzhnyi said he stressed that Russia has 10 times Ukraine’s firepower and reiterated an urgent request for more 155 mm artillery systems, or howitzers.
 Matina Stevis-Gridneff
BRUSSELS — Ukraine’s European allies are facing questions of both tactical and political importance as bloody battles in the country’s east grind on and tilt in Russia’s favor.
On the tactical front, NATO allies, and especially those in Ukraine’s vicinity, face the challenge of having tapped their own supplies to support the war effort, leaving them with depleted arsenals.
And on the political front, the question of whether the European Union will take the leap to grant Ukraine candidate status for the bloc will need to be answered before the end of the month.
The realities on the battlefield, as Ukrainian officials assess that Russia could fully encircle the eastern city of Sievierodonetsk in the Donbas region in the next two to three days, will likely influence both the decision on how to replenish arsenals and send in ammunition as well as the decision to offer Ukraine hope by granting it E.U. candidate status, even if technically it’s not ready for it.
“There was always a sense that, when the center of gravity shifted to the south and east, there would be the potential for greater Russian gains based on greater mass and their existing territorial acquisitions,” said Ian Lesser, a former State Department official who heads the Brussels office of the German Marshall Fund.
“But it does raise more serious longer-term questions about the nature of the conflict, Ukraine’s aims and Western aims in relation to those,” he added.
He said that accelerating the provision of longer-range weapons per Ukrainian pleas, as well as the requisite training for Ukrainian troops to operate them, would help the country hold down the front.
But several E.U. member countries are fretting that they have sent too much of their ammunition supplies to Ukraine and are lagging behind in restocking their arsenals. The primarily free-trade bloc, for which foreign policy and defense are not integrated, is rallying to source supplies.
E.U. officials said that the bloc would try to tap a 9 billion euro ($9.5 billion) funding pot to jointly procure military equipment, flexing a nascent muscle and trying to ease concerns that supporting Ukraine militarily was dangerously weakening defense capabilities elsewhere in Europe.
But the more strategic question of whether to grant Ukraine candidate status later this month is also a pressing matter for the country’s European allies.
On a visit to Kyiv on Saturday, President Ursula von der Leyen of the European Commission said her administration would provide an opinion on whether the European Union should grant candidate status to Ukraine by the end of the week. However, the decision is ultimately a political one that E.U. leaders will be called to make at their summit on June 23 and 24 in Brussels. 
After gaining candidate status, it takes most countries at least a decade of reforms and negotiations to become full E.U. members. Should Ukraine get the green light later this month, its road forward is likely to be long and hard given its dire situation and issues with corruption and governance before the war.
It would still send a powerful message, experts say.
“Whatever the territorial reality on the ground, having that deepening prospect of Euroatlantic integration for Ukraine is very meaningful,” Mr. Lesser said. “And, to the extent that it fosters a growing prospect of an increasingly Westernized Ukraine versus a Russia that’s drifted out into an Asiatic imperial posture, the political contrast between these two actors will become more stark.”
 Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Natalia Yermak
LYSYCHANSK, Ukraine — To anyone standing on a hilltop in Lysychansk, it is clear why this city that is soon to be the focal point of Russia’s offensive in Ukraine’s east seems defendable: it’s on high ground.
Across the sprawling plains of Ukraine’s Donbas region, which is home to Lysychansk, elevation is a rarity, leaving the city’s Ukrainian defenders in an advantageous position.
But it will be impossible to defend Lysychansk, whose pre-war population was around 100,000 people, without a way to get in the necessary supplies: ammunition for Ukrainian tanks and artillery, food and equipment for the thousands of troops garrisoned there.
“If the help will come, it won’t be occupied,” said Oleksandr Voronenko, 46, a military police officer stationed in Lysychansk. “If there is no help with military equipment, of course they will drive us out. Because every day the equipment is destroyed; you have to replace it with something new.”
That leaves Ukraine’s military with a dilemma — continue to reinforce the city or withdraw — as Russian forces near the end of their campaign to seize Lysychansk’s neighboring city of Sievierodonetsk, just across the Seversky Donets River. If Russian forces capture Sievierodonetsk and sever the city’s supply routes, Ukrainian troops won’t stand a chance in defending Lysychansk.
And it appears that the Russians are attempting to accomplish just that as they steadily advance from the southeast. Plumes of smoke and burning fields, from where falling artillery had set the ground aflame, seemed to envelop Lysychansk in a semi-circle on Sunday afternoon.
Frequent thuds from incoming and outgoing fire echoed across the city as civilians dragged empty bottles to a fire department’s water tanker that had been jury-rigged with clean-water filters.
If Russian forces continue to advance on the mix of asphalt and bumpy field roads that serve as the only supply routes into the city, Ukrainian officials will have to make a strategic decision: withdraw or risk an encirclement of the city.
“We’re waiting for reinforcements,” Mr. Voronenko said, as a group of 20 or so residents began moving toward evacuation vans behind him. “It has partly arrived in the last several days in the form of artillery. And if we get more, then we can probably hold them off.”
 Anushka Patil
A rebranded McDonald’s opened in Russia as “Vkusno & tochka,” which translates to “Tasty, period,” after the fast food giant pulled out of the country this spring and a Siberian mogul bought its 840 Russian stores. The menu remains much the same, although item names have been changed to remove “Mc” and “Mac,” according to Russia’s Tass news agency.
 Matthew Mpoke Bigg
A former British soldier, Jordan Gatley, was killed in Sievierodonetsk while fighting alongside Ukrainian forces, his family said on Facebook. Mr. Gatley left the British Army in March “to continue his career as a soldier in other areas,” the post said. His family learned of his death on Friday.
 Matthew Mpoke Bigg
Russian missiles hit a military warehouse in western Ukraine, wounding nearly two dozen people, the governor of Ukraine’s Ternopil region said on Sunday. He did not say whether any military equipment was damaged, but Russia’s Defense Ministry claimed that the strike destroyed antitank and antiaircraft missile systems supplied to Ukraine by the United States and the European Union.
Lt. Gen. Igor Konashenkov, a spokesman for the ministry, said the attack, which occurred Saturday evening in the city of Chortkiv, also destroyed portable antiaircraft systems as well as artillery shells.
Volodymyr Trush, the regional governor of Ternopil, which includes Chortkiv, said that Russian forces fired four missiles from the Black Sea, and that they also destroyed four five-story buildings. Mr. Trush said that 22 people, including a child, were wounded, but that the injuries were not considered life-threatening.
In a statement on the Telegram messaging app, Mr. Trush said that a fire had broken out because of a gas leak caused by the strike, but he gave no details of whether any weapons were hit.
At the request of Ukraine’s government, the United States, Britain, European Union states and other nations have channeled billions of dollars in military equipment and aid to Ukraine to help fight Russia’s invasion.
Since their full-scale invasion began in February, Russian forces have periodically struck warehouses, rail lines and other infrastructure in an effort to destroy Ukrainian weapons supplies and keep them from getting to the front lines.
While the bulk of the fighting has taken place in eastern Ukraine, Russia has launched several major strikes in the west, often using missiles fired by its naval fleet hundreds of miles away in the Black Sea. In the most deadly of these, Russia killed at least 35 people in a strike in March on a military base 11 miles from Ukraine’s border with Poland.
 Matthew Mpoke Bigg and Shashank Bengali
Russia could soon mount a push to completely encircle Sievierodonetsk, the governor of Luhansk, the province that includes the city, said on Sunday, as President Vladimir V. Putin’s forces press their advantage in numbers and longer-range weapons to wrest momentum in the grinding war in eastern Ukraine.
The Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, said that Russia could cut off Sievierodonetsk within days. Defeat there would mark a bitter end for Ukraine to one of the most intense battles of the conflict, one that has shown Russia’s willingness to bombard cities relentlessly, while also exposing the limits of Kyiv’s ability to defend territory closer to the Russian border.
After more than 100 days of war and despite major setbacks, Russia’s forces now seem be making slow, methodical and bloody progress toward control of Donbas, the industrial heartland in eastern Ukraine that includes Luhansk, and where Moscow-backed separatists have held chunks of territory since 2014. Ukrainian forces appear unable to fend off Russian artillery in the area and are suffering heavy casualties — at least 100 fatalities a day, officials have said.
Ukrainian leaders have redoubled their pleas to the United States and other Western allies for longer-range weapons. Moscow has also sought to target those supplies, and the Russian Defense Ministry claimed that its forces had launched a missile strike on Saturday at a military warehouse in the western city of Chortkiv that destroyed American and European antitank and antimissile systems.
As the war drags on, questions have increased about whether Ukraine’s allies will maintain their level of support in the face of mounting economic concerns at home. American efforts to expand the alliance have stalled, as countries such as Brazil and India hesitate to join the campaign of sanctions and diplomatic pressure.
In other developments:
The city of Lysychansk will likely soon be the focal point of Russia’s offensive in Ukraine’s east. Ukrainian forces have a rare advantage there, but only if supplies can get in.
President Volodymyr Zelensky said he was working to shore up backing for Ukraine’s application to join the European Union. The bloc is discussing ways to integrate Ukraine, though officials have signaled that full membership could take years, if it comes at all.
Ukrainian officials rejected President Biden’s claim that Mr. Zelensky “didn’t want to hear” early warnings about a Russian invasion, arguing that Ukraine’s success in repelling Russian forces from Kyiv showed that it had been prepared to fight.
McDonald’s restaurants reopened in Russia on Sunday, but without the Golden Arches. After the American fast-food giant pulled out this spring to protest the invasion of Ukraine, a Siberian oil mogul bought its 840 Russian stores.
 Matthew Mpoke Bigg
Russian forces are fighting to complete an encirclement of Sievierodonetsk and may completely cut it off in the coming days, the governor of the region that includes the city said on Sunday, suggesting that a major goal of Moscow’s revised military campaign, fought over for weeks, could soon be achieved.
The Ukrainian government has poured troops and resources into its effort to hold on to Sievierodonetsk, a strategically important, industrial city and the last major urban center in the region of Luhansk that has not yet fallen. Russia’s forces are trying to capture all of the wider Donbas region, which includes Luhansk, and where it has held significant territory since 2014.
“The situation in Sievierodonetsk is extremely difficult,” the regional governor, Serhiy Haidai, said on Telegram, the messaging app. “The Russians are making every effort to cut off Sievierodonetsk. The next two or three days will be significant.”
Russian forces have destroyed two bridges leading to the center of Sievierodonetsk and were shelling the remaining one, an important supply line for Ukrainian forces, Mr. Haidai added.
The city is on the eastern bank of the Seversky Donets River and is connected by bridges to the smaller city of Lysychansk, which is on higher ground and is seen as a more defensible fallback position, although it, too, has been under relentless Russian bombardment. Mr. Haidai said on Sunday that Russian forces were continuing to shell Lysychansk as well as a chemical plant on the Sievierodonetsk side of the river that Ukrainian soldiers still control.
The Donbas region of eastern Ukraine became the main target for President Vladimir V. Putin’s forces after they failed to seize Kyiv and were forced to retreat from northern Ukraine in the weeks after their invasion began in February.
After those early setbacks, military experts say that Russia is gradually gaining momentum because its forces have concentrated their advantage in longer-range artillery on a narrowing range of targets. A report by British military intelligence said this month that Moscow could take control of Luhansk within weeks.
Ukraine’s defense minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, said last week that up to 100 Ukrainian soldiers were being killed every day, and he renewed pleas to the West for more sophisticated weapons that could match Russia’s firepower.
While President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine has called the battle for Sievierodonetsk a crucial one that could decide the fate of Donbas, he has also faced a dilemma over how much his forces should sacrifice to hold it. Artillery fire has shattered large parts of the city and forced almost all of the 100,000 prewar residents to flee, leading Mr. Zelensky last week to declare Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk in effect “dead cities.”
 Matthew Mpoke Bigg
Russian forces in the Black Sea fired four missiles on Saturday evening at a military facility in Chortkiv, in western Ukraine, injuring 22 people, the regional governor said. Russian attacks in western Ukraine have been relatively rare since the conflict started.
 Austin Ramzy
China’s defense minister, Gen. Wei Fenghe, said at a forum in Singapore on Sunday that China has “never provided any material support to Russia” in what he called “the Ukraine crisis.” He added that Beijing supported peace talks, while suggesting that the U.S. and NATO had exacerbated the conflict.
 Austin Ramzy
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said he was working to shore up backing for his country’s application to join the European Union, as observers said the war appeared to be moving into a drawn-out phase that increasingly favored Russia.
Mr. Zelensky spoke on Saturday after meeting with Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, who visited Kyiv and offered support for Ukraine ahead of a E.U. meeting later this month that will consider whether to formally grant Ukraine status as a candidate for membership.
“This war is an enormous stress test,” Ms. von der Leyen wrote on Twitter. “And the whole country is stepping up. The same spirit is needed to reform and modernize the country. And Europe is here to support you.”
Though the bloc is discussing ways to integrate Ukraine and other nations on its periphery, full membership could take years, if it comes at all. Mr. Zelensky said on Saturday that his government was working “even harder at all levels to get the right decision.”
“I am convinced that this decision can strengthen not only our state, but also the entire European Union,” Mr. Zelensky said. “What else needs to happen in Europe to make it clear to skeptics that the very fact of keeping Ukraine outside the European Union works against Europe?”
Ms. von der Leyen visited Kyiv amid hints of frustration from allies. In a rare criticism of Mr. Zelensky, President Biden on Friday complained that the Ukrainian leader had downplayed American assessments that Mr. Putin was likely to invade.
 Nancy Ramsey
President Volodymyr Zelensky discounted news reports about Russian passports being issued in two cities in southern Ukraine now occupied by Russia. On Saturday, two dozen Russian passports were handed out in Kherson and about 30 in Melitopol. Ukrainian officials have asked residents in occupied territories not to apply for Russian passports but worry that they may be forced to do so as, say, a condition for employment.
 Nancy Ramsey
Lithuania has opened a cultural center for displaced Ukrainians in the capital of Vilnius, according to the office of President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. Established at the initiative of the nations’ first ladies, Olena Zelenska of Ukraine and Diana Nausediene of Lithuania, the center will offer education, career and psychological services, as well as recreation and child care.
Lithuania has sheltered more than 50,000 Ukrainians fleeing the war, according to a statement from Mr. Zelensky’s office, and has been an ardent supporter of Ukraine. In May, the parliament of the former Soviet republic, now a member of NATO, designated Russia a terrorist state and its atrocities in Ukraine as genocide. And in an interview that same month with The Associated Press, Lithuania’s foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis, called for regime change in Moscow, saying that “so as long as a regime that intends to wage wars outside Russian territory is in place, the countries surrounding it are in danger.”
Like other European countries, Ukrainians who have relocated to Lithuania and hold a valid visa are allowed to work in the Baltic nation without having to obtain a work permit, according to the website Work in Lithuania. With an aging population, a birthrate in decline and young people migrating to other European countries in search of more lucrative employment, Lithuania in recent years has faced labor shortages.
Vytautas Magnus University has provided space for the cultural center in Vilnius. At the ribbon-cutting ceremony on Saturday, Ms. Nausediene promised to “do everything possible to make Ukrainians feel safe in Lithuania, receive medical and social assistance, educational services and, most importantly, so that Ukrainians can nurture their culture and preserve the nation’s vitality.”
Joining by video link from Kyiv, Ukraine, Ms. Zelenska said, “We wanted the center to be really the place where one can address any question — help or communication. We wanted people to be able to study here, to spend leisure time. Join a cultural event or educational course.”
 Jim McKinley
According to the nightly statement from the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Russian troops still had not taken the strategically important eastern city of Sievierodonetsk on Saturday night. The communique said Russians shelled both Sievierodonetsk and its sister city, Lysychansk, across the Seversky Donets River and assaulted Ukrainian positions, but were repelled.
 Natalia Yermak and Thomas Gibbons-Neff
Photographs by Tyler Hicks
Reporting from Lysychansk, Ukraine
DISPATCH
Between the loud thuds of artillery shells landing a few blocks away, dozens of people emerged from a communal shelter in this eastern Ukrainian city Saturday to receive packets of food from a red armored van crewed by a group of volunteers.
It was the first aid they had seen in months.
Lysychansk, an industrial city with a prewar population of around 100,000, is quickly becoming the focal point of Russia’s slow and methodical advance in Ukraine’s east. Russian forces have seized most of the neighboring city of Sievierodonetsk after weeks of vicious street fighting and artillery duels. Lysychansk lies just across the Seversky Donets River and will likely be the next city the Russian army will try to capture.
Though much of Lysychansk has been evacuated, many residents remain. They are staying put as the enemy draws near for many of the same reasons voiced by people who have refused to leave other towns and cities in Ukraine since Russia invaded in late February: a lack of money, nowhere to go, fear of looting and the need to care for disabled or elderly relatives.
But in Lysychansk, a city in Ukraine’s resource-rich and predominantly Russian-speaking Donbas region, the complaint that the Ukrainian government has abandoned them to the advancing Russian forces is also present. It is a narrative harped on by Moscow’s propagandists.
“Your Kyiv government gave up on us,” said one older woman before she received a white bag of food from the back of the van. Her words echoed a Russian radio broadcast that aired for Lysychansk citizens, a recording of which one of the volunteers shared with a reporter.
For months, residents here have been cut off from cellphone networks because they were damaged by fighting, as well as from gas, water and electricity systems. They are bound to the daily routines that they must go through to survive — bringing water from nearby wells, building fires to cook food. Until about a month ago, they used to stand in line for days at a time at an aid center just to get bread, they said. Then the center was destroyed by a Russian missile.
One of the volunteers, Mykhailo Dobrishman, said it was his tenth trip to Lysychansk in recent weeks. The volunteers have a list of addresses from people outside the city who have asked them to find out whether their relatives in Lysychansk were still alive, he said.
“As we hand out the packs of food, we try to persuade them to evacuate,” he said. “There are 20 people who left requests for evacuation today. But it’s really hard to persuade others that we meet on our way, even if they are staying with small kids.”
One teenager at the shelter, who wore a yellow T-shirt and said her name was Victoria, tried to convince her mother to leave. The volunteers had told her that her boyfriend had asked them to evacuate her and that he was waiting for her in a safer region.
For 15 minutes, the mother and daughter debated in front of the industrial building used as a communal shelter, while several artillery shells whistled over their heads. Then they rushed to pack their belongings and to urge other relatives to join them.
In the street near the shelter there were freshly dug rectangular holes in the ground. “These are trenches,” Mr. Dobrishman said. “They are getting ready for the street fights.”
But some older neighbors said they believed the holes were graves for people expected to be killed by shelling.
It is unclear how many civilians have been killed or wounded in Lysychansk by Russian bombardments. A few houses away from the shelter, a man nearly lost his leg after a shell landed in his yard, residents said.
Not far from the shelter was a Soviet-style apartment block occupied by Ukrainian soldiers. The troops’ vehicles were parked underneath the tree-lined alleyway to avoid detection from Russian drones overhead.
Outside the building, a military doctor named Sergiy, who had arrived in Lysychansk a few days earlier with a Ukrainian unit, said they were bracing for an assault. “We’ll do everything possible so that Russians don’t capture the city,” he said calmly, declining to give his last name for security reasons.
Having served in different frontline cities of Ukraine since the beginning of invasion, the doctor said he could not explain why so many people chose to stay in a city that has been shelled incessantly for weeks.
“People are riding bicycles here, children are running around,” he said. “Maybe they don’t evacuate because they are waiting for the other side to come.”
Luda, 52, an energetic woman who had emerged from the communal shelter, where about 50 people were staying, said she was resolved to remain.
“This is our Ukrainian land where we were born and spent our lives,” she said. “This is my land. And whoever comes to take it, will die here.”
Vyacheslav Yatsenko contributed reporting.
 Andrew E. Kramer
Ukrainian officials on Saturday publicly rejected President Biden’s claim that President Volodymyr Zelensky “didn’t want to hear” early warnings about a Russian invasion.
Mr. Zelensky’s high-profile wartime leadership has won praise at home and abroad, but criticism has also been quietly brewing in Ukraine over his government’s preparations for war and his public comments discounting an imminent invasion just days before it happened, the issue Mr. Biden touched on with a remark on Friday.
“I know a lot of people thought I was exaggerating,” Mr. Biden said at a fund-raiser for the Democratic Party, adding, “But I knew we had data.”
He added, “There was no doubt and Zelensky didn’t want to hear it, nor did a lot of people.”
Before the full-scale invasion began in late February, Mr. Zelensky had staked out political positions of seeking diplomatic settlements with Russia, exposing him to some accusations of naïveté toward Moscow.
He won an election in 2019 on a promise to find a negotiated peace in the war with Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine. Once in office, he pursued a policy of disengagement at the frontline, intended to smooth talks but ultimately resulting in Ukrainian troops pulling back by thousands of yards in some spots with no diplomatic softening from Russia as a result.
Mr. Zelensky also acquiesced to a German diplomatic formula to settle the conflict that was widely seen as favoring Russia’s interests. And in the year before the current war, his government focused on road building rather than military spending. None of it helped prevent President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia from massing troops on the border with Ukraine. And in February, Mr. Zelensky played down the possibility of an invasion.
Despite some criticism that Mr. Zelensky misjudged or was too soft on Russia, domestic politics have become mostly muted during the fighting, as opposition parties have focused on the war and its challenges. And Mr. Biden’s remark drew sharp responses from Ukrainian officials, although the country is reliant on U.S. weaponry and pleading for more.
A top aide to Mr. Zelensky, Mykhailo Podolyak, retorted on Saturday in an interview with Interfax that it was “senseless to blame a country that for more than 100 days is resisting the might of the Russian aggressor if the key countries of the world could do nothing preventive to stop Russia” from invading in the first place. The Ukrainian leadership and Mr. Zelensky understood Russia would strike militarily, Mr. Podolyak said, with the only question being the scale of the attack.
“Volodymyr Zelensky had on his desk, continually, analytical materials based on quality intelligence data,” Mr. Podolyak said. “The president also was attentively reacting to all the words and warnings of our partners.”
He cited the Ukrainian army’s swift reaction to the invasion, which thwarted an attack on the capital, as a sign that Mr. Zelensky had been prepared for war.
Mr. Zelensky’s spokesman, Serhiy Nikiforov, also pushed back on Mr. Biden’s comment that the Ukrainian president did not want to hear warnings, saying the two leaders had multiple telephone calls before the war.
“Therefore, the phrase ‘did not want to hear’ probably needs clarification,” Mr. Nikiforov told the Ukrainian news site Liga.net.
 Cassandra Vinograd
President Volodymyr Zelensky, arguing for Ukraine's case to join the European Union, said approval for its application would positively answer “whether the European project has a future at all.”
“The European project certainly cannot be complete without us, without Ukraine,” he told reporters after meeting with the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, in the capital.
 Cassandra Vinograd
Ukrainian officials say shelling has damaged power lines in the eastern Donetsk region, forcing the shutdown of electricity substations. The largest cities in Ukrainian-held Donetsk — including Kramatorsk, Sloviansk and Bakhmut — are without power, the head of the Donetsk regional military administration said on Telegram. Netblocks, which tracks internet censorship, recorded a drop in connectivity in Donetsk.
 Marc Santora and Neil MacFarquhar
The Kremlin began formally issuing Russian passports to Ukrainians living under occupation on Saturday, even as Moscow’s forces confront a growing insurgency in areas they control in southern Ukraine and struggle to provide essential services like medical care.
The move to hand out Russian identification papers is just one facet of Russia’s attempts to solidify Moscow’s control in the south, including making the ruble the legal currency and cutting off Ukrainian cellphone networks. The Ukrainian authorities have warned about such a move for weeks, with Ukraine’s foreign ministry saying it would be “a flagrant violation” of the nation’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Ukraine’s military has also claimed to have found evidence of earlier plans by Moscow to issue Russian passports around Kyiv, the capital. After Russian forces were forced to withdraw from around the city, a cache of passport forms from the former Soviet Union was found in an abandoned house near the town of Makariv, according to the Ukrainian military intelligence agency.
Such documents, which have not been produced in Ukraine since 1990, were brought into the country by Russian forces during the war to be used as blueprints for new identification papers, the Ukrainians said.
Ukrainian officials have urged people living in occupied provinces not to apply for the passports, but also fear that Russia could use coercive measures — like requiring them for employment — to force people to exchange their documents. Russian news outlets reported on Saturday that the authorities in the south had handed out about two dozen Russian passports in Kherson and 30 in Melitopol, with hundreds more applications pending.
As Russia takes an increasing hold on the occupied areas, including the southern region of Kherson and a large chunk of neighboring Zaporizhzhia, Ukrainian officials and witnesses who have fled the area have described a grim picture of life under occupation.
The exiled mayor of the city of Kherson, the only Ukrainian provincial capital captured by Russian forces, said that thousands of residents had lost their jobs and their sources of income. “Cafes and summer food courts, which we’ve always had plenty of, are now closed,” Ihor Kolykhaiev, the exiled mayor, said in a lengthy statement about the conditions in the city based on accounts of people living there. People have not been able to get a Ukrainian cellphone signal in more than a week.
In Mariupol, the Black Sea port that was leveled by Russia, even basic medical needs are not being met, according to the Ukrainians. And Britain’s defense ministry on Friday joined a growing chorus expressing alarm about the increasingly dangerous living conditions in the city. A lack of clean water, the destruction of the sanitation system and the collapse of the health care system, the ministry reiterated, could fuel an outbreak of cholera.
Even as workers in Mariupol continue to dig bodies out of the rubble following a monthslong bombardment, Petro Andriushchenko, an adviser to the city’s mayor, said that Russian forces were broadcasting propaganda from cars of “pseudo-historical” programs about Peter the Great, apparently taking their cue from President Vladimir V. Putin, who said this past week that he was engaged in a similar campaign to capture lands he views as rightfully Russian.
Moscow has made similar “Russification” efforts before. In the breakaway regions of eastern Ukraine known as the Luhansk People’s Republic and the Donetsk People’s Republic, the Kremlin opened up a fast track to Russian citizenship for residents in April 2019. Hundreds of thousands of people received passports.
The same thing happened after Moscow staged a referendum after invading in Crimea in 2014. Residents voted to join Russia, although the annexation was not recognized internationally.
