Yesli Vega won a Republican primary last week to take on Representative Abigail Spanberger, a Democrat, in Virginia.
By Azi Paybarah
A Republican nominee in a closely watched House race in Virginia made bizarre and false comments about rape victims, saying in leaked audio recordings that she wouldn’t be surprised if a woman’s body prevents pregnancies from rape because “it’s not something that’s happening organically,” and that the rapist is doing it “quickly.”
The nominee, Yesli Vega, a supervisor and sheriff’s deputy in Prince William County, made the remarks at a campaign stop last month in Stafford County, according to Axios, which published the audio recordings on Monday.
The person Ms. Vega is speaking with in the two clips, which together run about a minute long, is not identified and Axios did not reveal the source of the audio.
In a statement, Ms. Vega did not dispute the authenticity of the recordings, but said: “As a mother of two children, yes I’m fully aware of how women get pregnant.”
The first clip indicates Ms. Vega was speaking in the context of the debate about abortion, as she can be heard saying: “The left will say, ‘What about in cases of rape or incest?’”
Ms. Vega cited her experience as a police officer, saying that she had “worked one case” since 2011 “where as a result of rape the young woman became pregnant.”
In the second clip, after the unidentified woman said she heard that it is “harder for a woman to get pregnant if she’s been raped,” Ms. Vega replied: “Well maybe, because there’s so much going on in the body, I don’t know. I haven’t, haven’t, you know, seen any studies but if I’m processing what you’re saying it wouldn’t surprise me, because it’s not something that’s happening organically, right? It’s forcing it.”
After the unidentified woman said the body “shuts down,” Ms. Vega replied: “Yeah, yeah, and then the individual, the male, is doing it as quickly, it’s not like, you know, and so I can see why maybe there’s truth to that.”
Ms. Vega’s statement did not say directly whether she stood by her comments. “Liberals are desperate to distract from their failed agenda,” the statement reads. She also said her political opponents “would rather lie and twist the truth” than explain their stance on abortion.
Her campaign did not explain what “lie” her comment was referring to.
Ms. Vega won a June 21 Republican primary to take on the Democratic incumbent Abigail Spanberger in Virginia’s Seventh Congressional District, a newly drawn, Democratic-leaning district. Ms. Spanberger supports abortion rights.
On Twitter, Ms. Spanberger called Ms. Vega’s comments “extreme and ignorant” and “devoid of truth.”
Ms. Vega’s recorded comments are similar to remarks made in August 2012 by Representative Todd Akin, who, as the Republican Senate nominee in Missouri, said pregnancy from rape is “really rare” because, “If it’s a legitimate rape, the female body has ways to try to shut that whole thing down.”
Leading Republicans called on Mr. Akin to drop out of the race, which he rebuffed. He went on to lose the race to the Democratic incumbent, Senator Claire McCaskill, by nearly 16 percentage points.
By Jonathan Weisman
Representative David Valadao, a Republican running in a strongly Democratic district in California’s Central Valley, will face off in November with his strongest challenger yet after primary voters gave the Republican and Democratic establishments the candidates they wanted.
Mr. Valadao, whose victory was called by The Associated Press weeks after the June 7 primary, is one of the most endangered House Republicans in the country.
He voted to impeach former President Donald J. Trump for inciting the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol, then laid low and largely escaped Mr. Trump’s wrath. He attracted two Republican primary challengers — Chris Mathys, who ran as a pro-Trump voice, and Adam Madeiros, who campaigned as a traditional pro-agriculture conservative in the Central Valley.
Mr. Valadao’s Democratic challenger — Rudy Salas, a five-term assemblyman who is a popular fixture in the Fresno area — cleared the Democratic field the night of the primary in a district whose lines shifted in his favor, away from the outskirts of conservative Bakersfield.
In the end, Mr. Valadao’s two Republican rivals, Mr. Mathys and Mr. Madeiros, seemed to have split the anti-Valadao vote. That cleared the way for the strongest candidates to compete in one of the Democrats’ few pickup opportunities in the House in November.
By Neil Vigdor
Soon after a video appeared to capture a Republican State Senate candidate and off-duty police officer punching his Democratic opponent, a woman, at an abortion protest in Rhode Island, he was arrested and charged — and he withdrew from the race.
Jeann Lugo, 35, was charged on Saturday with simple assault and disorderly conduct after the Friday night skirmish outside the State House in Providence, according to the Providence Police Department. He was also suspended from the force.
Jennifer Rourke, 40, a progressive Democrat who is running for the State Senate for the third time after losing primaries in 2018 and 2020, identified herself as the victim.
The confrontation on Friday — viewed nearly 5 million times on Twitter in a video taken by a journalist — came as a crowd of demonstrators had assembled at the state capitol to decry the Supreme Court’s ruling earlier that day striking down Roe v. Wade.
In the video, a man is seen repeatedly striking a demonstrator in the head with a closed fist, an assault that Providence’s mayor called “immensely disturbing.”
Moment @JenRourke29 struck by who appears to be her Senate opponent @JeannCLugo pic.twitter.com/kJd64rRO1B
Mr. Lugo, a three-year police veteran with the Providence Police Department, did not respond to requests for comment on Monday, but he did not dispute throwing punches when reached by The Providence Journal.
“I’m not going to deny,” he told the newspaper. “It was very chaotic, so I can’t really tell you right now. Everything happened very fast.”
It was not immediately clear whether Mr. Lugo had a lawyer. The Providence Fraternal Order of Police also did not respond to an inquiry on Monday.
Ms. Rourke, who is Black, Puerto Rican and white, said in an interview on Monday that she was trying to escort a protester away from the crowd when the otherwise peaceful protest became heated.
“It was out of nowhere,” Ms. Rourke said. “He punched me at least two times.”
Ms. Rourke, a co-founder of Rhode Island Political Cooperative, a progressive group that supports candidates of color and those with L.G.B.T.Q. backgrounds, said she had never met Mr. Lugo before the encounter. The next morning, she said, she went to an emergency room, after experiencing hearing loss in her left ear and head pain. She also filed a police report, which was obtained by The New York Times.
“This is what it is to be a Black woman running for office,” Ms. Rourke on Saturday said on Twitter. “I won’t give up.”
On Monday, Ms. Rourke’s rival in the Democratic primary, Michael J. McCaffrey, made a surprise announcement that he would retire — clearing a major obstacle in the 29th Senate District.
It was not clear whether the recent events had played a role in the decision of Mr. McCaffrey, the majority leader in the chamber who had defeated Ms. Rourke in two previous Democratic primaries. He did not respond to a message on Monday. The deadline is Wednesday for candidates to file for the Sept. 13 primary.
On Saturday, Mr. Lugo tweeted, “I will not be running for any office this fall,” before deactivating his Twitter account.
A spokeswoman for the Rhode Island Democrats declined to comment on Monday. A message left for the Rhode Island Republican Party was not returned.
The Providence Police Department is continuing to investigate the matter.
By Nick Corasaniti and Alexandra Berzon
GRAND JUNCTION, Colo. — Just six weeks before the 2020 presidential election — game day for vote-counting bureaucrats — Tina Peters was so proud of her operation at the Mesa County clerk’s office that she invited a film crew in to show it off. There’s no chance of mishap here, she boasted.
“The Russians can’t hack into and start casting votes for someone,” she said, as a few in the office chuckled.
By May 2021, it was Ms. Peters, not the Russians, who had helped engineer an audacious breach of voting machines, according to an indictment charging her with seven felonies. Ms. Peters arranged to copy sensitive election software from county voting machines in an attempt to prove the 2020 presidential election was rigged, according to court records. Prosecutors said she committed identity theft and criminal impersonation, and violated the duties of her office in the process. Ms. Peters has pleaded not guilty.
The strange tale of Tina Peters — a once-ordinary public servant consumed by conspiracy theories and catapulted to minor stardom by believers — will take its next twist on Tuesday, when voters decide whether to make the indicted public official the Republican nominee for secretary of state, the top election official in Colorado. Polls are sparse in the primary race, but Ms. Peters is considered a contender.
Ms. Peters did not just stumble into the world of election conspiracy theories. A review of public statements and interviews with people involved in her case showed she was repeatedly assisted by a loose network of election deniers, some of whom worked alongside Donald J. Trump’s legal team to try to subvert the presidential election in 2020. They are still working to undermine confidence in elections today.
That network’s involvement is just one of several bizarre plot points in Ms. Peters’s case. The Mesa County breach involved a former surfer who was dressed as a computer “nerd” and made a FaceTime call during the operation, reporting by The New York Times shows. Afterward, the crew shared their loot — images of voting machine data — at a conference streamed online, advertising the effort to thousands. On Friday, Ms. Peters told The Times that her congresswoman, Representative Lauren Boebert, “encouraged me to go forward with the imaging.”
A press officer for Ms. Boebert, a Republican, called the claim false.
Through it all, Ms. Peters has parlayed the episode into a national political profile on the right, speaking at events across the country where she is celebrated as a hero. Influential election deniers have come to her aid: Mike Lindell, the MyPillow executive who supports a stable of lawyers and researchers promoting bogus theories, says he has funneled as much as $200,000 to Ms. Peters’s legal defense. Others, including Patrick Byrne, a former Overstock executive, have run ads attacking her primary opponent.
In a statement to The Times, Ms. Peters declined to answer specific questions about the episode, citing pending litigation. In September, before Ms. Peters was indicted, her lawyer acknowledged that she had allowed “one non-employee” to copy hard drives, but argued that there was no rule or regulation against it, something the secretary of state’s office disputes.
In public appearances since, Ms. Peters has said she made the copies because she worried the voting machine company was going to delete computer systems that recorded the 2020 election and wanted to preserve records. She has been less forthcoming about how the material ended up online.
“The people want to know HOW our elections have been turned over to machines with no oversight, transparency or real security in any meaningful way,” Ms. Peters said in the statement.
Materials released in the Mesa County breach have been used to fuel the churn of misinformation about President Biden’s victory. Election experts say the episode also highlights a growing vulnerability in election security: the insider threat.
Since the Mesa County breach was made public, there have been more than a half-dozen reports of local election officials taking similar actions. Election conspiracy theory promoters claim there are more out there.
Experts say the danger is that the very people trusted to carry out elections could release confidential information and undermine security measures.
It’s a “new and, frankly, more discouraging” threat, said Christopher Krebs, who ran the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency at the Department of Homeland Security from 2018 to 2020. “Institutionally, we’ve lost a bit of a North Star in terms of how elections are conducted.”
Tina Peters’s 2018 election to clerk and recorder of Mesa County, a Republican stronghold amid the canyons of western Colorado, was her first foray into public office. A former flight attendant who ran a construction company with her ex-husband, Ms. Peters made her top campaign issue the reopening of local Division of Motor Vehicles satellite offices, a promise she fulfilled quickly.
But she had more trouble with election administration. Three months after the 2019 election, more than 500 ballots were found uncounted in a drop box outside the county election office. In the 2020 presidential primary, completed ballots were found blowing in the wind near the clerk’s office, according to The Daily Sentinel, the newspaper in Grand Junction. 
By July 2020, residents had begun a recall effort to remove her from office, but they failed to obtain enough signatures.
The general election in Mesa County in 2020 went off smoothly, with no complaints of fraud or other delays. Yet the conspiracy theories spouted by Mr. Trump quickly took hold in this deeply red county, and county commissioners were soon inundated with calls from constituents questioning the results.
Ms. Peters eventually rejected requests to hand-count the ballots in her own county, where Mr. Trump won 62 percent of the vote, but she began to express doubts about the national results. She connected with a local group, organized by Ms. Boebert’s former campaign manager, that met regularly to swap theories. In April 2021, the group hosted Douglas Frank, a high school math and science teacher in Ohio whose debunked theories have been influential with election conspiracists.
After seeing Mr. Frank’s presentation, Ms. Peters invited him to attend an upcoming “trusted build” of the county election equipment, according to court records. The process is essentially a software update — performed in a secure location by officials from the secretary of state’s office and employees of Dominion Voting Systems, the voting machine manufacturer — that election skeptics have come to believe erases critical election data. It does not.
Mr. Frank did not accept the offer, but another member of the election denier network did attend, according to court records and interviews. Conan Hayes was a former pro surfer who had worked with Mr. Trump’s legal team as it challenged the 2020 results. In 2021, Mr. Byrne paid him around $200,000 to continue his work for a year, according to Mr. Byrne.
According to an account from Mr. Byrne, and confirmed by Mr. Hayes, he attended the trusted build on May 25, 2021. Mr. Hayes called Mr. Byrne from inside the Mesa County election offices, speaking in a hushed voice and explaining that he’d been invited to make backup copies of machines by a government official who thought that a cover-up was underway, Mr. Byrne said. When the two spoke over FaceTime, Mr. Byrne saw Mr. Hayes was dressed like a computer “nerd” and wearing someone else’s identification tag, Mr. Byrne said.
Ms. Peters had introduced a contractor at the event and identified him as Gerald Wood, a local I.T. consultant, according to court records. The real Mr. Wood, however, told investigators he was not there that day, or two days earlier, when his badge was used to enter a secure area.
Mr. Hayes has not been charged and is not named in the indictment, though a judge’s order did identify him as later receiving a package in the mail from Ms. Peters.
In a brief phone interview, Mr. Hayes said Mr. Byrne’s account was accurate. “Patrick is pretty clear on things,” he said.
Ms. Peters didn’t speak in detail about the incident, though she alluded to acting on her worries about the election in a meeting with a county commissioner over the summer.
“She talked about these white-hat guys, and she talked about having brought someone in to look at the computers, and that she now believed there was some compromise to the machines,” recalled Janet Rowland, a Republican and county commissioner in Mesa County. “And that was when she used the phrase, I think even twice at that one meeting, ‘I’ve seen things I can’t unsee.’”
In early August, passwords to the Mesa County election equipment appeared on a QAnon figure’s Telegram channel and then a right-wing website, leading to an investigation by the secretary of state.
Days later, Mesa County’s breach found an even bigger spotlight at a “Cyber Symposium” in South Dakota organized by Mr. Lindell. After one of Mr. Lindell’s other wild claims, which Mr. Hayes had also worked on, fizzled, he changed the conversation: Ms. Peters appeared onstage to tell her story and the Mesa County conspiracy was born.
As part of Ms. Peters’s legal defense, information copied in Mesa County was soon packaged into a series of three reports purporting to show corruption in the election system. They were pumped through the online forums and promoted at in-person meetings. Mesa County soon overtook other discredited theories, such as the fictions about improprieties in Antrim County, Mich., that Mr. Trump eagerly promoted.
In fact, some of the same figures were involved in crafting both conspiracy theories. Mr. Hayes had helped to obtain the Antrim County information. And a cybersecurity firm, Allied Security Operations Group, that wrote the debunked Antrim analysis also produced the Mesa County reports for Ms. Peters’s legal team, according to the firm’s leader. There is no evidence the group was involved in the Mesa County breach.
Mr. Byrne calls the reports “the Rosetta Stone for us to prove the whole thing.” But experts say they reveal no problems at all. Two of the three reports don’t even suggest issues with election results and, instead, draw false conclusions about the vulnerability of elections machines by misinterpreting certain laws and procedures, said Matt Crane, executive director of the Colorado County Clerks Association, who has studied the reports closely.
A third report claims to show anomalies in two Mesa County elections. But the issues were caused by human error and there was no evidence that any vote counts were improper, according to the Mesa County District Attorney’s office, which did an extensive investigation.
In February, Ms. Peters decided to try to turn her celebrity into political power, announcing a bid for secretary of state.
She made appearances on Stephen K. Bannon’s podcast and linked up with a group of far-right candidates for secretary of state across the country. She secured a speaking slot at a rally held by Mr. Trump in Wyoming.
In March, Ms. Peters was indicted on 10 criminal counts related to the effort to copy voting equipment software, including attempting to influence a public servant, criminal impersonation, conspiracy to commit criminal impersonation, identity theft and first-degree official misconduct.
​​On the campaign trail, Ms. Peters says the charges are politically motivated. She has claimed the investigation is part of a “globalist takeover” and casts herself as a martyr for a cause.
“I went to jail for you and I will continue to do it,” she told a group of election activists in Texas in April.
Ms. Peters has declined to say who is paying her lawyers, but has directed people wanting to support her legal efforts to donate to the Lindell Legal Offense Fund, which Mr. Lindell says he uses for various lawsuits and projects.
​​In the closing days of the campaign, Ms. Peters has received other assistance. A new super PAC in Colorado called Citizens for Election Integrity has spent roughly $100,000 on advertisements attacking Pam Anderson, one of Ms. Peters’s opponents for the Republican nomination, according to campaign finance disclosures.
The group recently received a $100,000 donation from The America Project, a group founded by Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser, Michael Flynn, another figure in the fight to overturn the 2020 election, and Mr. Byrne.
Ryan Biller contributed reporting from Grand Junction, Colo.
An earlier version of this article misstated the sum spent by a super PAC in Colorado, Citizens for Election Integrity, on ads attacking Pam Anderson, one of Tina Peters’s opponents for the Republican nomination. It has spent roughly $100,000, not $198,000.
By Michael Wines and Eliza Fawcett
WASHINGTON — “Do you feel safe? You shouldn’t.”
In August, 42-year-old Travis Ford of Lincoln, Neb., posted those words on the personal Instagram page of Jena Griswold, the secretary of state and chief election official of Colorado. In a post 10 days later, Mr. Ford told Ms. Griswold that her security detail was unable to protect her, then added:
“This world is unpredictable these days … anything can happen to anyone.”
Mr. Ford paid dearly for those words. Last week, in U.S. District Court in Lincoln, he pleaded guilty to making a threat with a telecommunications device, a felony that can carry up to two years in prison and a fine of up to $250,000. He did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
But a year after Attorney General Merrick B. Garland established the federal Election Threats Task Force, almost no one else has faced punishment. Two other cases are being prosecuted, but Mr. Ford’s guilty plea is the only case the task force has successfully concluded out of more than 1,000 the Justice Department said it has evaluated.
Public reports of prosecutions by state and local officials are equally sparse, despite an explosion of intimidating and even violent threats against election workers, largely since former President Donald J. Trump began spreading the lie that fraud cost him the 2020 presidential election.
Colorado alone has forwarded at least 500 threats against election workers to the task force, Ms. Griswold said.
The sluggish pace has sparked consternation among both election workers and their supporters, some of whom say they are souring on the idea of reporting the menacing messages to prosecutors if nothing comes of it.
“The reaction usually is ‘Thank you for reporting that; we’ll look into it,’ and there’s no substantive follow-up to understand what they’re doing,” said Meagan Wolfe, the president of the National Association of State Election Directors. That leads some “to feel there isn’t adequate support that can deter people from doing this in the future,” she added.
After this article was published, Dena Iverson, the Justice Department’s principal deputy director for public affairs, issued a statement saying that the department, through the task force, “stands behind all election workers nationwide.”
Ms. Iverson said most threats to election workers do not meet standards for a criminal investigation “because they do not include an unconditional threat of violence.” But she said the task force often followed up with recipients of threats, unconditional or not, to assess risks and provide other support.
The depth of election workers’ fear was underscored in hearings this month by the congressional panel investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, assault at the U.S. Capitol. Ruby Freeman and Shaye Moss, who are mother and daughter and both election workers in Atlanta, told of being forced into hiding by a barrage of threats in December 2020, after being falsely accused of election fraud by Rudy Giuliani, who was then Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer. Protesters tried to enter a relative’s house in search of the two. Eventually, they quit their positions.
That is not the norm, but neither is it uncommon. Ms. Griswold said one Colorado county clerk wears body armor to work, and another conducts business behind bulletproof glass.
“In my experience, if someone is telling you over and over how they’re going to hang you, asking you the size of your neck so they can cut the rope right, you have to take the threats really seriously,” she said, citing threats she had received.
The city clerk in Milwaukee, Claire Woodall-Vogg, said she had “completely redesigned our office at City Hall for safety reasons” after receiving hundreds of threats, which she said had been forwarded to the task force.
An investigation by Reuters in September turned up more than 100 threats of death or violence to election officials in eight battleground states, which at that time had produced four arrests and no convictions.
A survey in March by the Brennan Center for Justice found that one in six local election officials have personally experienced threats, and nearly a third said they knew people who had left their jobs at least in part because of safety concerns.
The Justice Department has said previously that the task force was tracking and logging election-related threats, and had opened dozens of criminal investigations as a result. That led to charges in February against men from Texas and Nevada and the recent guilty plea in Nebraska.
The task force also has conducted training and education sessions on threats with state and local law enforcement and election officials and social media platforms. Each of the 56 F.B.I. field offices has assigned an agent to collect and analyze threat reports, and federal prosecutors have been trained in assessing and investigating threats.
The trickle of prosecutions in the wake of those moves is explained in part by federal law, which defines illegal threats extremely narrowly in the name of preserving the constitutional right to free speech.
“You need to say something like, ‘I am going to kill you.’ It can’t be ‘Someone ought to kill you,’” said Catherine J. Ross, a professor and expert on First Amendment law at George Washington University. “That’s a very high bar, and intentionally a high bar.”
That so-called true threat doctrine classifies even many extreme statements as protected political speech. That rules out charges in a great many cases of threats against election officials — even when the recipients feel terrified for their lives.
Joanna Lydgate, founder and chief executive officer of the bipartisan legal watchdog organization States United Democracy Center, said she was encouraged to see results from the task force and understood, “These cases can be challenging to bring, and they take time.”
She said: “We definitely hope to see more of this from DOJ, because investigating these threats, building these cases and holding people accountable is critically important, especially as we’re looking toward the midterms.”
In Arizona, the office of Secretary of State Katie Hobbs has reported more than 100 threats to the F.B.I. in the last year, said a spokeswoman, C. Murphy Hebert. Ms. Hebert said she was confident that the task force was reviewing those threats, but that could be cold comfort to recipients who have not seen results.
“For the folks monitoring and the folks being targeted, a hundred messages saying ‘You should die’ is pretty threatening,” she said. “But based on what we know of the process,” they are not actionable, she said.
Matt Crane, the executive director of the Colorado County Clerks Association, said threats sent to him in the past year included voice mail and online chatter urging that he, his wife and children be shot in the head. He said he had reported at least one threat to the F.B.I.
But while the bureau has helped clarify how its threat review process works and has met with local clerks, he said, he still does not know whether his report was followed up on.
“It does not give a lot of comfort to the people who receive threats,” he said. “I’ve heard some say: ‘Why should I report it? I’m better off just carrying my gun with me and if something happens, at least I can do something to protect myself.’”
Other experts say the lack of both action and transparency was undermining the principal goal of the task force — to stop the epidemic of violent threats.
“Three prosecutions in a year for a problem that is nationally widespread seems awfully low,” said David J. Becker, a onetime voting rights lawyer at the Justice Department who now directs the nonprofit Center for Election Innovation & Research. “Whether accurate or not, the impression among election officials is that the effort the Department of Justice launched with great fanfare a year ago isn’t getting the job done.”
The Brennan Center report in March found that more than half the threats against election officials who were polled had gone unreported, and that a vast majority of threats were forwarded to local law enforcement agencies, not state or federal law enforcement.
Four in 10 election officials said they had never heard of the task force. And while the Justice Department has increased outreach to election officials and publicized a hotline that can be used to report complaints, “there is really very little detail about what happens when complaints are made,” said Lawrence Norden, the senior director of the center’s Elections and Government Program.
“Election officials rightly feel that public repercussions for these threats are going to be critical to curtailing them,” he said. But, so far, there have been too few court cases to provide any sense that offenders will be held accountable.
Until that changes — if it does — election officials need more reassurance that law enforcement has their back, he and others said.
“You have a lot more election officials who are exercising their Second Amendment rights than before 2020,” said Mr. Crane, the head of the Colorado clerks association. “It only takes one of these crazy people to show up at your doorstep.”
By Nicholas Fandos
A pair of seismic rulings by the Supreme Court jolted the race for governor of New York on Sunday, as Democrats and Republicans made final pitches to an electorate that found itself at the center of renewed national debates over guns and abortion rights.
All three Democratic candidates for governor fanned out Sunday morning to Black churches in Harlem and Queens, Manhattan’s Pride March and street corners across the city to denounce the rulings and promise an aggressive response.
“We’re going to pass a law that’s going to say, you can’t bring a weapon into this church on a Sunday,” Gov. Kathy Hochul, the Democratic front-runner, assured congregants at Greater Allen African Methodist Episcopal Cathedral of New York in Jamaica, Queens.
“I don’t want those guns on subways, either,” she added. “I don’t want them in playgrounds. I don’t want them near schools.”
The Republican candidates, who mostly lauded both rulings, generally stuck to other messages with broad appeal to a state where both abortion rights and gun control are popular — attacking Ms. Hochul for New York’s rising inflation and elevated crime rates.
But in at least one episode, the abortion issue was hard to avoid. Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York City, said that he was slapped in the back by a grocery store employee referencing abortion on Sunday afternoon while he was campaigning for his son, Andrew, on Staten Island.
“The one thing he said that was political was ‘you’re going to kill women, you’re going to kill women,’” said Mr. Giuliani, who said he understood the remark to be a reference to the Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade on Friday.
The police, who did not confirm the abortion remark, said a suspect was in custody but had not been charged. The younger Mr. Giuliani was not on hand.
Equal parts exuberance and frustration, the final pitches roughly hewed the battle lines that were drawn months ago in races that have been punctuated by violent tragedies — like the racist attack at a Buffalo supermarket in May — and buffeted by quality-of-life concerns.
Only this time, the fights played out in the shadow of the Supreme Court decisions issued in recent days on abortion rights and New York’s ability to regulate firearms. The rulings have injected a fresh dynamic into the races and appear to have given Democrats a new sense of urgency.
Ms. Hochul, the state’s first female governor, put both rulings at the center of her weekend hopscotch across the city, highlighting her decisions to spend $35 million to aid abortion access and call lawmakers back to Albany next week for a special legislative session to address the justices’ decision to overturn a 100-year-old New York law limiting the ability to carry concealed weapons.
Hours after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade on Friday, the governor raced to a protest in Manhattan’s Union Square, promising thousands of New Yorkers that New York would be a “safe harbor” for abortion under her leadership.
In a show of her standing with the state’s Democratic establishment, Ms. Hochul and her running mate, Lt. Gov. Antonio Delgado, also trotted out powerful Democratic surrogates. Mayor Eric Adams campaigned with them in Brooklyn on Saturday, and Representative Gregory W. Meeks, the chairman of the Queens Democratic Party who has prodded her to put together a more diverse campaign, accompanied her to church on Sunday.
“I’m not telling you who to vote for,” Ms. Hochul teased in Jamaica. “You’re not supposed to do that in church.”
Some voters said they were already impressed.
“Thus far, I’ve been happy with what she’s done,” said Shirley Gist, a 74-year-old retired speech pathologist who voted early for Ms. Hochul on Saturday. “If it isn’t broken, don’t fix it.”
Jumaane D. Williams, New York City’s left-leaning public advocate, and Representative Thomas R. Suozzi, who is running to Ms. Hochul’s right, did their best at a Sunday appearance at Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem to convince the uncommitted of just the opposite.
“I’m a common-sense Democrat. I’m tired of far left, and I’m tired of crazy right,” Mr. Suozzi said in remarks where he tied himself to Mr. Adams’s crime-fighting plans and pledged to cut taxes and improve public education. He knocked Ms. Hochul for accepting support from the National Rifle Association in past campaigns — an affiliation she has since disavowed.
Mr. Williams did not explicitly address the Supreme Court decisions but laid blame nonetheless at the feet of Democratic power structure.
“I have to be clear, Democratic leadership has failed this time,” he said. “They failed to act.”
Still, it was far from clear that the attacks would be enough to turn the tide against Ms. Hochul, who is spending millions of dollars more in advertising than either primary opponent and holds a large lead in public polls. In fact, some Democrats predicted that backlash to the Supreme Court rulings would only help Ms. Hochul, a moderate from Buffalo who only took office last summer.
“What can the two Democratic challengers do?” said former Gov. David A. Paterson. “They can’t be against it, so they have to kind of sit and watch.”
He predicted a comfortable win for Ms. Hochul: “When people are embattled, they tend to vote more pragmatically,” he said.
Democrats will also decide on a candidate for lieutenant governor on Tuesday. Mr. Delgado has ample institutional support, but he faces a pair of spirited challenges from Ana María Archila, a progressive activist aligned with Mr. Williams, and Diana Reyna, a more moderate Democrat running with Mr. Suozzi.
The winner will face Alison Esposito, a Republican and longtime New York City police officer.
The Republican race for governor has been considerably more lively — full of name-calling, increasing disdain and sharper policy differences between the candidates. But with scant public polling available and most of the candidates still struggling to establish name recognition with primary voters, even the state’s most-connected Republicans were scratching their heads.
“I have no idea how this turns out,” said John J. Faso, a former Republican congressman and the party’s 2006 nominee for governor.
With Mr. Giuliani and Harry Wilson nipping at his heels, Representative Lee Zeldin, the presumptive front-runner backed by the State Republican Party, spent the weekend touring upstate New York in a campaign bus trying to shore up support in regions that typically sway his party’s primary.
“Everybody’s hitting their breaking point right now,” Mr. Zeldin told a small crowd of about three dozen who gathered in an industrial park outside of Albany. He promised to rehire people who had been fired for refusing to be vaccinated, and to fire the Manhattan district attorney, who has become a punching bag for Republicans.
Another candidate, Rob Astorino, spent Sunday shaking hands with potential voters on the boardwalk in Long Beach on Long Island.
Mr. Wilson, a moderate who favors abortion rights and has positioned himself as a centrist outsider, has done relatively little in person campaigning. But he has blanketed the airwaves with more than $10 million worth of advertisements filleting Mr. Zeldin as a flip-flopping political insider.
Near Albany, an entirely different message was being delivered by Andrew Giuliani, who spent Saturday night spinning laps around the Lebanon Valley Speedway in a Ram pickup emblazoned with his face. He gleefully tied himself to his former boss, Donald J. Trump: “You like that guy, right?”
Though Mr. Giuliani, 36, is an outspoken critic of abortion and proponent of firearms, he spent much of his three hours at the speedway Saturday night reminding voters of his MAGA credentials.
The cheers that rose from the crowd suggested he was among friends.
Wearing an American flag wrap over a tank top, Wendy Dominski, 52, a retired nurse who drove five hours from Youngstown, N.Y., to volunteer for the event, said the other Republicans in the race are either RINOs — Republicans in Name Only — or “flat-out flip-flop liars.”
She had little doubt who the former president supports, even if he hasn’t said so. “Giuliani stands for everything that Trump stands for, and that we stand for,” she said.
Reporting was contributed by Jay Root, Jeffery C. Mays, Dana Rubinstein and Grace Ashford.
By Nicholas Fandos
In the primary races for governor of New York, the candidates in each party naturally have some common alliances but also some surprising differences.
Of the four Republican candidates, for example, one would shun possible support from the former President Donald J. Trump. The three Democratic hopefuls adamantly disagree on how to approach New York’s affordability crunch.
And the candidates’ bagel preferences? All over the map.
With early voting already underway and just days to go before New York’s June 28 primaries, Democrats and Republicans are locked in sharp contests of ideology, experience and taste that will help determine the future of New York State as it tries to move past the coronavirus pandemic.
The winners are most likely headed toward the most competitive general election the state has seen in two decades, in which voters will decide whether to extend Democrats’ 16-year hold on the governor’s mansion, or make a course correction in Albany.
On the Democratic side, Gov. Kathy Hochul has the upper hand against both Jumaane D. Williams, the progressive New York City public advocate, and Representative Thomas R. Suozzi, a Long Island centrist. But the three have put forward conflicting Democratic Party visions on how to fix the housing crisis, fight crime, and win back voters exiting the party.
Who will emerge as the Republican nominee remains anyone’s guess. Representative Lee Zeldin, who hails from Suffolk County, has the official endorsements of the Republican and Conservative parties, but he has faced spirited challenges from Harry Wilson, Rob Astorino and Andrew Giuliani, the son of the former New York City mayor. All four Republicans want to end New York’s cashless bail law, but they sharply diverge on questions of abortion rights, the 45th president, and where “upstate” actually begins.
Our political reporters questioned each of the candidates in the races’ final weeks to get an idea of their positions. Here are edited excerpts from the interviews.
Kathy Hochul, 63, served nearly six years as lieutenant governor before assuming the governorship last August when Andrew M. Cuomo resigned. She has the official endorsement of the state’s Democratic Party.
Thomas R. Suozzi, 59, is a former Nassau County executive who is in his third term representing a Long Island swing district in Congress.
Jumaane D. Williams, 46, has been the New York City public advocate since 2019, and in 2018, he nearly defeated Ms. Hochul in the Democratic primary for lieutenant governor.
Suozzi: I will provide incentives to homeowners, vehicle owners, landlords, businesses and utilities to incentivize renewable energy and efficiency.
Williams: Unfortunately, this past legislative session was probably the worst for climate — just abysmal. As public advocate, I supported funding the Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act, including trying to urge the state to move from fossil fuels to renewable energy, including supporting the Build Public Renewables Act. Also, we need an immediate moratorium on “proof of work” crypto mining.
Hochul: I’m really proud that my first month on the job, I was able to make a significant commitment of $4.2 billion through a bond act, which we’re going to have on the ballot this November. We hope voters will support this to give us the resources to build climate resilience and to protect our environment. It’s about creating green energy jobs as well.
Also, we just authorized two transmission lines to bring clean energy power into New York City that is going to wean us off fossil fuels. These are the equivalent of two more Niagara power authorities. This is transformational. They’ll be operational by 2027.
Suozzi: I have a 15-point crime intervention and prevention plan to fix bail reform and give judges the discretion to consider the dangerousness of the defendants coming before them. I’ll address mental health not only for homeless people but for the over one million people suffering from severe mental health challenges. I’ll support community policing and violence interruption, and I will dramatically reform our schools to include the provision of health and human services.
Williams: I’m proud to have been a leader in this space, helping to get New York State from where we were in 2012 to where we were in 2018. Stops of young Black men went down. Use of force went down. Arrests went down. Complaints of use of force went down. And shootings and murders went down.
So on the supply side, we definitely need to see if we can pass more that prevents these guns from coming in the first place, but I think where we always don’t structure and fund properly is on the demand side to stop people from using these guns in the first place. Which is why we asked for $1 billion to be put in this budget specifically for gun-violence prevention and victim services. And we couldn’t get it.
Hochul: We just passed 10 nation-leading bills on gun safety, focusing not just on mass shootings but the everyday street shootings. We need some time for those to start having the effect that’s intended. But it’s also about making sure that our subways are safe, so people will go back to their jobs, and letting people know that, you know, there’s no tolerance for these crimes.
We can have justice and we can have safety. They truly can go hand in hand. We are not going backward on criminal justice reforms, but we’ve also made sure that we deal with the fact that it’s just too easy to get a gun. 
Suozzi: I think that’s a false choice. The most important thing is to increase ridership, which requires us to make the subway safer. People cannot afford a fare increase right now. Reducing services is antithetical to both our economic recovery and our climate change objectives. And we already have the highest taxes in the United States of America. So we have to use existing funds, including funds from the $1.2 trillion federal infrastructure deal that I helped negotiate.
Williams: I’m very surprised to hear some of the opposition from Albany for congestion pricing. That’s one way of trying to slow down the use of cars and actually raise revenue for the M.T.A. Everyone would benefit from a cleaner, more on-time subway system and, frankly, a bus system as well.
Hochul: The M.T.A. is the lifeblood. We will be focusing on ways to generate revenues with congestion pricing. That is back on track after a few hiccups with the federal government. We have no fare increases planned, because we want people to come back to work.
But also, people have to feel safe on the subways. We’re working with Mayor Adams and the N.Y.P.D., who are responsible for policing the subways.
Suozzi: I do not support any mandates for schoolchildren in the foreseeable future. The only circumstances I would consider would be if there was the emergence of a deadly new variant.
Williams: I think we have to continue to look at the numbers and have science guide us. We know we can’t just look at the Covid case numbers, but we have to look at the deaths and hospitalizations — all those numbers combined. We did wait as a state until it was too late before, and I think it cost people’s lives.
Hochul: We had a mandate in place. It was one of the toughest decisions I had to make early on. It’s my job to protect the schoolchildren and ensure we don’t close schools again.
Mask mandates? Only if we feel they will make a difference. 
Suozzi: No, we already have the most protective tenant protections in America.
Williams: Good cause is actually the baseline of what we should be doing. Just to clarify, if you own and occupy a four-family home, this doesn’t impact you at all. If you’re not owner-occupied or you have more than a four-family, you can still evict people, you just have to give a reason: nonpayment of rent, violation of lease, destroying of property or if you simply need it for your own family. All this is about is to prevent the eviction crisis from getting worse and protecting people.
Hochul: No, I don’t support that. I’m very concerned about the small landlords. Many of them have not been paid rent in a very long time.
Suozzi: The most important thing the state must do is save NYCHA housing. Second, we must have a new 421a immediately that caps the rate of return for developers below 10 percent and requires that all tax-incentivized housing be done with union labor.
Williams: This is another place where there’s a key distinction between our campaign and the current administration, which wants to build and preserve 100,000 units in the next five years. We want to build and preserve one million units in the next 10 years. And no one pays 30 percent or more of their income in rent.
421a was abysmal. If we’re going to use taxpayer’s money, we need to actually use it for the type of housing that the public needs. Of course you need additional money and better management for NYCHA and public housing across the state.
Hochul: We will be revisiting the version of 421a that I proposed, which will increase up to 30 percent how much of new builds would have to be affordable housing. Also, we needed to lower the income threshold so we could have more lower income people eligible for the benefit of living in these places.
In the meantime, we are starting a $25 billion affordable housing plan: 100,000 units, 10,000 supportive housing, as well as helping people cover their rent. We had over $1.6 billion out the door in rent relief to help people who are struggling and need rent just to get their head above water.
Suozzi: I would reduce contribution limits for the governor’s office, from what is currently $67,000 per person to the same as the federal limits of $2,900. I would require that any expenditure over $10 million that is not included in the governor’s, the Senate’s or the Assembly’s budget must go through a public hearing to avoid another Buffalo Bills taxpayer giveaway.
The only real way to make government more accountable and less corrupt is to have more people involved in the political process and more competition in politics.
Williams: You have to elect someone who hasn’t come from how Albany operates. So you have just a totally different view. I’ve always said I think the budget is probably the most important thing that New Yorkers understand the least. I’d love to have a more open conversation while the budget negotiations are going.
Hochul: Already what we’ve done with the FOIL requests. Public records were being withheld. We’ve unleashed the pipe of information that should have been going out to the public from Day 1. I believe in releasing taxes. I believe in releasing schedules. I believe in telling people how decisions are made. Also, our economic development projects — there needs to be transparency in terms of a database where people can look up: Is the public investment getting the return on the dollar that was promised?
How will you stop New York from bleeding residents?
Suozzi: Reduce crime and cut taxes.
Williams: The No. 1 reason people are moving away is New York is no longer affordable. You literally have the highest rents in the entire nation. We must make New York State more affordable when it comes to rent, when it comes to how much people are paid. And you do want to make sure that people are safe and feel safe.
Hochul: I’m finding ways to cut the tax burden, such as expediting the middle-class tax cut and giving property tax relief to people. We need to let people know that this city is coming back, and it’s coming back very quickly. We know there is no city like New York, and people have kind of lost it during the pandemic, during the tough times and concern about public safety. It’s our job to turn that around. We’re also going to continue looking out for communities of color that have been bypassed when there’s been recoveries. It’s not a real successful comeback until I feel all the people have been represented and shared in that.
Suozzi: Yes.
Williams: Andrew Cuomo would never support me.
Hochul: No. It’s time to look forward, not backward.
Suozzi: No. They are too high. I would cut income taxes by 10 percent.
Williams: There are working- and middle-class New Yorkers who’ve got too much of the burden of taxes. There are 120-some-odd billionaires who made $220 billion more during the pandemic; it’s their responsibility to do more. We have to have revenue raisers that can help ease the burden on working-class and middle-class New Yorkers.
Hochul: I think they’re high. We need to examine our tax structure. We made sure we capped the property tax at 2 percent. We’re focused on eliminating the reasons that people find it too expensive to be here. Many businesses can go anywhere they want in the nation, and it’s competitive. 
Suozzi: I believe that the agenda of some Republicans is fueled by white supremacy.
Williams: Unfortunately, too much of the Republican Party is fueled by supremacy, and there’s just no way around it. I’m hoping that at some point the party that lost itself in a cult of personality will stop. But many of us have been saying for a while that this was the route that the party would take.
Hochul: That’s a broad statement, to say that the entire agenda is fueled by white supremacy. But I will tell you white supremacy has reared its ugly head in a lot of ways, and the Republicans acquiesced to the assault on our nation’s Capitol. Where are the Republicans in the talks about the slaughter of Black shoppers in Buffalo? So I would say they’re complicit in it, many are complicit.
Suozzi: Because they’re failing to address their core concerns regarding crime and public safety, regarding taxes and affordability, and regarding the promotion of quality education for their children.
Williams: The Democratic Party has done a horrific job when it comes to discussing public safety. They just don’t know how to do it. So instead they go to Republican-light talking points. If the party would stop giving voters a boogeyman to vote against and give a vision to vote for, I think we would be much more successful.
Hochul: There’s fear because they’ve been targeted, especially after the pandemic. Donald Trump put a spotlight and blamed China, called it the China flu. They feel that Democrats need to do more to protect them against the street crimes and hate crimes.
Suozzi: One hundred percent aligned on crime reduction and public safety. I wouldn’t have made some of the appointments he made.
Williams: I’ve known the mayor for a very long time, so there are more parts to how we address the gun violence that we agree on. There’s probably a difference when it comes to whether we should be doing hybrid working.
Hochul: We’re aligned in our common desire to make cities safer. One hundred percent. At a personal level, I know he’s a vegan, and I don’t mind a good hamburger once in a while.
Suozzi: I don’t know if I would get a salt bagel with tuna fish or a poppy-seed bagel with lox, onions, tomato and schmear.
Williams: A raisin bagel plus lox, cream cheese and capers.
Hochul: I have a sweet tooth. I’d say a cinnamon raisin bagel, cream cheese and some places they would put maple syrup cream cheese.
Suozzi: Mario Cuomo. Loved him.
Williams: I’ve had issues with a lot of folks. But I’m hoping next year it will be Governor Williams.
Hochul: Mario Cuomo was a transformative governor.
Rob Astorino, 55, served as the Westchester County executive from 2010 to 2017 and was the 2014 Republican nominee for governor.
Andrew Giuliani, 36, is the son of the former New York City mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and worked in the White House for President Donald J. Trump.
Harry Wilson, 50, is a corporate turnaround specialist who served in the Obama administration and was the 2010 Republican candidate for state comptroller.
Lee Zeldin, 42, is an Army veteran who has represented Suffolk County in the State Senate and in Congress since 2011. He has the formal backing of New York’s Republican and Conservative Parties.
Zeldin: New Yorkers want access to clean air and clean water regardless of what party they are. There, unfortunately, has been a push inside the Legislature to set dates to hit particular targets without a plan on how to hit that target. I have a concern about the lack of supply that currently is being tapped into, as well as the rising energy costs.
They’re looking to pass a bill that would ban all gas hookups on new construction statewide. I oppose that. I believe that we need to start safely extracting our natural resources from the Marcellus and Utica Shales. Especially the Southern Tier. It would create jobs and generate revenue and revitalize communities, and I believe that we can enact the greatest tax cut in the history of the state.
Astorino: My approach is an all-of-the-above approach to energy. I agree with renewables, but I also think we can safely extract natural gas because we need it and potentially even site new nuclear power plants.
Wilson: I believe in an all-of-the-above energy policy and a focus on a smart and efficient transition to lower carbon emissions. What that means in practice is scrapping New York’s Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act and investing more broadly in nuclear, natural gas and renewables.
Giuliani: New Yorkers’ immediate need is affordable energy sources, which is why I support fracking. The Marcellus Shale covers the entire Southern Tier of New York, and it covers two-thirds of the landmass in the state of New York.
Zeldin: We should repeal cashless bail. Judges should have the discretion to weigh dangerousness and flight risk and past criminal record and the seriousness of the offense on far more offenses. I believe that we should repeal the Less Is More Act. Thousands of people have been released early who should be behind bars.
We should be doing more to support law enforcement, passing a law enforcement bill of rights. I oppose all efforts to defund, dismantle, abolish law enforcement.
Astorino: Repeal no-cash bail. Use tools for law enforcement that actually work, like stop, question and frisk. And fire Alvin Bragg and any prosecutor who chooses to not enforce the laws.
Wilson: Our Making New York Safe crime plan addresses four primary changes in policy. First, we would repeal bail reform. Second, we would support our great men and women in law enforcement with increased financial support. Third, we would fire rogue district attorneys who refuse to enforce the law. And fourth, we have a long series of additional reforms that we believe get to the root causes of the current spike in crime.
Giuliani: Bad policies like bail reform and defunding the police are making it impossible for the men and women in blue to protect and serve New Yorkers. Allowing criminals to get out of jail within hours of committing a crime is setting us up for one avoidable tragedy after another. I will reverse those policies and use my power to fire any activist prosecutor who is beholden to criminals rather than law-abiding citizens.
Zeldin: The security concerns are the biggest factor I’m hearing. The more people who feel safe and choose to ride it, that helps to stabilize the finances of public transit.
Astorino: We need to make sure that subways are safe so people actually want to use them. And we need a complete forensic audit of the M.T.A. to know how the dollars are being spent or wasted before we start throwing more money at that.
Wilson: We need a long-term turnaround plan for the M.T.A., rather than the short-term band-aid approach that’s been in place for the last several years. One, we have to improve public safety in the M.T.A. so that people feel safe using it. Second, we need a long-term capital plan that can really create a world-class infrastructure that is today driven by excessive costs, operations and maintenance capital expense.
Giuliani: People are avoiding the subway because it’s no longer safe. Fortunately, in New York the governor has more board seats on the M.T.A. than the mayor. I would use that power to increase the transit police presence around the subway so that riders won’t feel like they’re endangering their lives using mass transit. That needs to happen before we re-evaluate the M.T.A. budget.
Zeldin: I don’t support a mask or vaccine mandate for schoolchildren.
Astorino: No vaccine mandate for kids who attend school and no mask mandates either.
Wilson: I don’t support mask or vaccine mandates for school-age children.
Giuliani: I am opposed to mask and vaccine mandates, especially for children.
Zeldin: I do not. I believe that it’s the one-size-fits-all approach. Policies are enacted in Albany as if everybody owns 10,000 units, and it’s causing tremendous pain for New Yorkers, who are trying to achieve the American dream.
Astorino: No. We need to go back to if you’re into contract and property law and bankruptcy court, we cannot have a cancel rent culture. I would look to rent decontrol, a more market based approach, at the same time building more affordable housing like I did the Westchester.
Wilson: Generally speaking, I think the landlord’s have been suffering because of the policy constraints and have not been able to invest in their physical facilities. We need to return to a more market-based environment around housing and eviction policy.
Giuliani: Overregulation is crippling small businesses, including landlords, who are already at a disadvantage when it comes to evicting tenants who stop paying rent.
Zeldin: I don’t believe that 421a should have expired, and I support for 420a continuing.
Astorino: I think 421a or something similar needs to be re-enacted.
Wilson: I do think just given how far we are from affordable in New York City, there is a need for some level of subsidization to create the opportunity for more housing, but we need a much broader solution. We have to expand supply. To do that, you have to attack each of the underlying constraints, which range from zoning to time delays and approvals to construction costs to union contracts to create a lower cost approach.
Giuliani: Kathy Hochul didn’t have the support in the Legislature to extend 421a, but New York voters are in the process of re-evaluating whether being overtaxed, overregulated and underprotected is right for the Empire State.
Zeldin: The three-persons-in-a-room approach needs to end. That’s no way to run this government. You need more rank-and-file state legislators to be involved in the budget process and the crafting of legislation.
I support term limits in government. I believe that all of our statewide elected officials should be termed out at two terms of four years each. I would add press conferences. When you’re at the 11th hour of crafting a budget and there’s so many questions that the media has, the public has, that the Legislature has, as you’re agreeing to certain aspects of the budget, don’t keep it a secret.
Astorino: In Westchester, everything was posted online: meeting agendas, livestreaming. The governor needs to be more interactive with the public, which I would do through town hall meetings around the state.
Wilson: Within our policy plan, we have two broad buckets. The first is “how do we improve the quality of people in public life?” and the second is “how do we create accountability for those people?” On the first, we wanted to expand access to elections both for candidates and parties. We want to eliminate the LLC loophole and have penalties for it. We want to pass term limits: eight years for statewide elected officials and 12 years for legislative leaders. We want to have open primaries and expand the pool of voters who can participate, and we want to drive election integrity to make sure that there are properly monitored elections.
On the second piece of improving accountability, I support initiative, referendum and recall provisions. We need a public ethics watchdog to replace both JCOPE and Governor Hochul’s new entity.
Giuliani: Corruption and transparency don’t mix. I will drain the Albany swamp.
Zeldin: We have to reverse the attacks on wallets, safety, freedom and quality of education.
Astorino: Get crime under control, reduce regulations and foster an environment where businesses thrive, and reduce taxes dramatically.
Wilson: The underlying problems to me are crime, taxes and the cost of living.
Giuliani: No one wants to live where they feel unsafe. Cutting taxes and regulations as well as unconstitutional mandates will also make it more attractive to live here. And if you want families to stay, it’s imperative to increase the cap on charter schools and offer school vouchers. We also need to get back to educating our children instead of indoctrinating them with both age-inappropriate and divisive content.
Zeldin: New York has already codified far more than what Roe provided, so the law in New York State is exactly the same the day after the Supreme Court decision gets released. I opposed the legislation that was passed into law that codified late-term, partial-birth abortion and nondoctors’ performing abortion. We should have parental consent and informed consent, and we should also be doing more to promote adoption.
Astorino: I am pro-life. Nobody’s ever going to think otherwise. But I understand in New York, it’s very unlikely that abortion will ever be banned. That does not mean we can’t have some reasonable restrictions. Things like banning third-trimester partial-birth abortion, except to save the life of the woman, is reasonable. Encourage adoption, and get back to what Bill Clinton said: Safe, legal and rare.
Wilson: I’m pro-choice. I’ve said I will not make any changes to the abortion laws in the state.
Giuliani: I am pro-life. If Roe v. Wade is overturned, I would support ending late-term abortions.
Zeldin: I don’t support raising the age. I signed up for the military when I was 18. I don’t support a federal assault weapons ban. Red flag laws are something that has to be heard with the leadership of individual states. I disagree with New York’s law because it allows firearms to be taken away without notifying that firearm owner that there’s a hearing.
Astorino: Raising the age to 21 was found unconstitutional by the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco, and it’ll likely be the same here. I believe in red flag laws so long as there is due process. I’d also like to add mental health records to the background check. But I’m a strong supporter of the Second Amendment.
Wilson: I’ve been a staunch defender of the Second Amendment my whole life. I grew up in a rural town, where I started shooting when I was 8. The problem is not law-abiding citizens. The problem is three groups of people: criminals, the mentally ill with violent tendencies, and purveyors of hate, who should not have access to weapons. So that’s where we need to focus our attention, not on curtailing the rights of law-abiding citizens.
We have a red flag law and background checks that I do support and are not working because they haven’t been properly administered.
Giuliani: I support the Second Amendment. Restricting an American’s right to bear arms is unconstitutional.
Zeldin: Absolutely not.
Astorino: Radical progressives in the Democratic Party are tearing apart the economy, our individual rights and are using racism as a boogeyman. I detest when they say Republicans are white supremacists.
Wilson: No.
Giuliani: The notion that Republicans condone of white supremacy is a rumor perpetrated by some members of the Democratic Party and their mouthpiece, the mainstream media. That this is even a question says more about The New York Times than it does about any Republican I know.
Zeldin: Donald Trump.
Astorino: Donald Trump.
Wilson: I wrote in a conservative Republican, Nikki Haley.
Giuliani: Donald J. Trump
Zeldin: He did win. I have long expressed my concern that there were nonstate legislative actors in certain states that were changing the ways the election was being administered without getting approval from the state legislature against the plain text of the U.S. Constitution. I have never at any point ever made a statement calling him or the election illegitimate.
Astorino: I believe that there were issues with the election with regard to the rules being changed in the middle of the game, and the heavy hand of social media having an undue influence. But I do believe Joe Biden won the presidency, but now we’re paying the price for it.
Wilson: Yes.
Giuliani: I certainly have questions about the security of the election.
Zeldin: Yes.
Astorino: If he wants to, but you know, I’m focused on issues like crime in our cities and the economy and education, which is failing in New York. Those are the things that people were talking about, like inflation. I’d definitely accept the endorsement.
Wilson: I’m not seeking an endorsement. I’m not playing the politician game and seeking endorsements like some of my rivals.
Giuliani: I have campaigned for President Trump and would campaign with him. I’m proud to have worked in the Trump administration.
Zeldin: It seems like in a state of 19 million or so people that there seems to be about that 20 million different answers.
Astorino: If you ask people from Long Island and New York City, they say it begins in Westchester, which is totally wrong. I would say it begins in the northern part of the Hudson Valley after basically the M.T.A. line.
Wilson: I don’t like to divide the state. I actually think about a regional approach to the state. Western New York is very different from the Capital District, where I grew up.
Giuliani: A lot of people say it begins where Metro-North ends, but I would say if one identifies as an upstater, then go with it.
Zeldin: When I was a kid, I used to always get an egg bagel and cream cheese, and I still find myself sticking with the basics.
Astorino: I love bagels with strawberry cream cheese.
Wilson: Sesame with cream cheese. Some people like butter, but I never understood that.
Giuliani: We all know that real New York bagels don’t need to be toasted. Other than that, I’m not picky.
Zeldin: Hands down it would be Governor Pataki.
Astorino: It would have to be Pataki because he’s basically been the only Republican in my life. And I like him a lot personally.
Wilson: Pataki.
Giuliani: George Pataki.
Jesse McKinley contributed reporting.
By Reid J. Epstein
LINCOLN, Ill. — Darren Bailey, the front-runner in the Republican primary for governor of Illinois, was finishing his stump speech last week at a senior center in this Central Illinois town when a voice called out: “Can we pray for you?”
Mr. Bailey readily agreed. The speaker, a youth mentor from Lincoln named Kathy Schmidt, placed her right hand on his left shoulder while he closed his eyes and held out his hands, palms open.
“More than anything,” she prayed, “I ask for that, in this election, you raise up the righteous and strike down the wicked.”
The wicked, in this case, are the Chicago-based moderates aiming to maintain control over the Illinois Republican Party. And the righteous is Mr. Bailey, a far-right state senator who is unlike any nominee the party has put forward for governor in living memory.
A 56-year-old farmer whose Southern Illinois home is closer to Nashville than to Chicago, he wears his hair in a crew cut, speaks with a thick drawl and does not sand down his conservative credentials, as so many past leading G.O.P. candidates have done to try to appeal to suburbanites in this overwhelmingly Democratic state. On Saturday, former President Donald J. Trump endorsed Mr. Bailey at a rally near Quincy, Ill.
Mr. Bailey rose to prominence in Illinois politics by introducing legislation to kick Chicago out of the state. When the coronavirus pandemic began, he was removed from a state legislative session for refusing to wear a mask, and he sued Gov. J.B. Pritzker, a Democrat, over statewide virus mitigation efforts. Painted on the door of his campaign bus is the Bible verse Ephesians 6:10-19, which calls for followers to wear God’s armor in a battle against “evil rulers.”
He is the favored candidate of the state’s anti-abortion groups, and on Friday he celebrated the Supreme Court ruling that overturned Roe v. Wade as a “historic and welcomed moment.” He has said he opposes the practice, including in cases of rape and incest.
Mr. Bailey has upended carefully laid $50 million plans by Illinois Republican leaders to nominate Mayor Richard C. Irvin of Aurora, a moderate suburbanite with an inspiring personal story who they believed could win back the governor’s mansion in Springfield in what is widely forecast to be a winning year for Republicans.
Mr. Bailey has been aided by an unprecedented intervention from Mr. Pritzker and the Pritzker-funded Democratic Governors Association, which have spent nearly $35 million combined attacking Mr. Irvin while trying to lift Mr. Bailey. No candidate for any office is believed to have ever spent more to meddle in another party’s primary.
The Illinois governor’s race is now on track to become the most expensive campaign for a nonpresidential office in American history.
Public and private polling ahead of Tuesday’s primary shows Mr. Bailey with a lead of 15 percentage points over Mr. Irvin and four other candidates. His strength signals the broader shift in Republican politics across the country, away from urban power brokers and toward a rural base that demands fealty to a far-right agenda aligned with Mr. Trump.
For Mr. Bailey, the proposal to excise Chicago, which he called “a hellhole” during a televised debate last month, encapsulates the grievances long felt across rural Central and Southern Illinois — places culturally far afield and long resentful of the politically dominant big city.
“The rest of the 90 percent of the land mass is not real happy about how 10 percent of the land mass is directing things,” Mr. Bailey said in an interview aboard his campaign bus outside a bar in Green Valley, a village of 700 people south of Peoria. “A large amount of people outside of that 10 percent don’t have a voice, and that’s a problem.”
That pitch has resonated with the conservative voters flocking to Mr. Bailey, who seemed to compare Mr. Irvin to Satan during a Facebook Live monologue in February.
“Everything that we pay and do supports Chicago,” said Pam Page, a security analyst at State Farm Insurance from McLean, Ill., who came to see Mr. Bailey in Lincoln. “Downstate just never seems to get any of the perks or any of the kickbacks.”
The onslaught of Democratic television advertising attacking Mr. Irvin and trying to elevate Mr. Bailey has frustrated the Aurora mayor, whose campaign was conceived of and funded by the same team of Republicans who helped elect social moderates like Mark Kirk to the Senate in 2010 and Bruce Rauner as governor in 2014. Their recipe: In strong Republican years, find moderate candidates who can win over voters in Chicago’s suburbs — and spend a ton of money.
Mr. Irvin, 52, fit their bill. Born to a teenage single mother in Aurora, he is an Army veteran of the first Gulf War who served as a local prosecutor before becoming the first Black mayor of the city, the second most populous in Illinois.
Kenneth Griffin, the Chicago billionaire hedge fund founder who is the chief benefactor for Illinois Republicans, gave $50 million to Mr. Irvin for the primary alone and pledged to spend more for him in the general election. Mr. Griffin, the state’s richest man, will not support any other Republican in the race against Mr. Pritzker, according to his spokesman, Zia Ahmed. Mr. Griffin announced last week that his hedge fund and trading firm would relocate to Miami.
While Mr. Irvin, a longtime Republican who has nevertheless voted in a series of recent Democratic primaries in Illinois, expected an expensive dogfight in the general election, he is frustrated by the primary season intervention from Mr. Pritzker, a billionaire who is America’s richest elected official.
“This has never happened in the history of our nation that a Democrat would spend this much money stopping one individual from becoming the nominee of the Republican Party,” Mr. Irvin said in an interview after touring a manufacturing plant in Wauconda, a well-to-do suburb north of Chicago. “There are six Republican primary opponents — six of them. But when you turn on the television, all you see is me.”
Mr. Griffin said that “J.B. Pritzker is terrified of facing Richard Irvin in the general election.”
He added, “He and his cronies at the D.G.A. have shamelessly spent tens of millions of dollars meddling in the Republican primary in an effort to fool Republican voters.”
Mr. Pritzker said that ads emphasizing Mr. Bailey’s conservative credentials had the same message he plans to use in the general election. He said he was not afraid of running against Mr. Irvin or of the millions Mr. Griffin would spend on his campaign.
“It’s a mess over there,” Mr. Pritzker said in an interview on Friday. “They’re all anti-choice. Literally, you can go down the list of things that I think really matter to people across the state. And, you know, they’re all terrible. So I’ll take any one of them and I’ll beat them.”
The primary race alone has drawn $100 million in TV advertising. Mr. Pritzker has spent more money on TV ads than anyone else running for any office in the country this year. Mr. Irvin ranks second, according to AdImpact, a media tracking firm.
Far behind them is Mr. Bailey, whose primary financial benefactor is Richard Uihlein, the billionaire megadonor of far-right Republican candidates, who has donated $9 million of the $11.6 million Mr. Bailey has raised and sent another $8 million to a political action committee that has attacked Mr. Irvin as insufficiently conservative.
Presidential politics for both parties loom over the primary.
Mr. Irvin won’t say whom he voted for in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections and, in the interview, declined to say if he would support Mr. Trump if he ran for president in 2024. He called President Biden “the legitimate president” and said former Vice President Mike Pence had performed his constitutional duty on Jan. 6, 2021.
Mr. Bailey would not say if the 2020 election had been decided fairly or if Mr. Pence did the right thing.
Mr. Pritzker’s motivation to help Mr. Bailey in the primary may be informed not only by his desire for re-election but also by what many see as potential aspirations to seek the White House himself. Last weekend he addressed a gathering of Democrats in New Hampshire — a stop only those with national ambitions make in the middle of their own re-election campaigns.
As the primary draws near, establishment Republicans across the state are fretting about the prospect of Mr. Bailey dragging down the entire G.O.P. ticket in November.
Representative Darin LaHood predicted an “overwhelming” Bailey primary victory in his Central Illinois district, but warned that he would be toxic for general-election voters.
“Bailey is not going to play in the suburbs,” said Mr. LaHood, who has not endorsed a primary candidate. “He’s got a Southern drawl, a Southern accent. I mean, he should be running in Missouri, not in suburban Chicago.”
Former Gov. Jim Edgar, the only Illinois governor from outside the Chicago area since World War II, said Mr. Bailey’s rise showed that party leaders “don’t have the grasp or the control of their constituents like they did back in the ’80s and the ’90s.”
Mr. Bailey’s supporters say the real fight is for the soul of the Republican Party. To them, winning the primary and seizing control of the state party is just as important, if not more so, than triumphing in the general election.
Running for attorney general on a slate with Mr. Bailey is Thomas DeVore, his lawyer in the pandemic lawsuits against Mr. Pritzker. On the campaign trail, he wears untucked golf shirts that reveal his forearm tattoos — “Freedom” on his right arm, “Liberty” on his left.
“Whether or not Darren and I win the general election, if we can at least get control within our own party, I think long term we have an opportunity to be successful,” Mr. DeVore said at their stop in Green Valley.
And David Smith, the executive director of the Illinois Family Institute, an anti-abortion organization whose political arm endorsed Mr. Bailey, said the G.O.P. race was about excising the party’s moderate elements.
“This primary,” he said, “has got to purge the Republican Party of those who are self-serving snollygosters.”
Catie Edmondson contributed reporting from Mendon, Ill.
By The New York Times
The downfall of the constitutional right to abortion began 12 years ago, after Republicans swept state house elections and passed hundreds of restrictions, Kate Zernike reported this weekend.
In November 2010, control of state houses across the country flipped from Democrat to Republican: Democrats had controlled 27 state legislatures going in and ended up with 16; Republicans started with 14 and ended up controlling 25. A well-established network was waiting with model anti-abortion laws.
In legislative sessions starting the following January, Republican-led states passed a record number of restrictions: 92, or nearly three times as many as the previous high, set in 2005. The three years following the 2010 elections would result in 205 anti-abortion laws across the country, more than in the entire previous decade.
By Azi Paybarah
On the first weekend after the Supreme Court overturned nearly five decades of constitutional abortion rights, Democrats seized on the ruling to portray their Republican opponents as threats to women and their health care providers, while two sitting G.O.P. governors welcomed the decision, as they tried to emphasize that the matter is a local issue with more “debate” to be had.
Stacey Abrams, the Democratic nominee for governor in Georgia who is in a rematch with the Republican she narrowly lost to four years ago, told CNN’s “State of the Union,” that the public should “take into very real consideration the danger Brian Kemp poses to the life and welfare of women in this state.”
Ms. Abrams also told CNN that Mr. Kemp “intends to adds incest and rape as prohibitions.”
Tate Mitchell, a spokesman for Mr. Kemp, said in a statement that Ms. Abrams “is lying” and that Mr. Kemp supported the state’s law that includes exemptions for rape, incest, life of the mother, and ectopic pregnancies.
Ms. Abrams also appeared on “Fox News Sunday,” and said, “We cannot cherry-pick when we pay attention to the lives and safety of women.”
After noting Mr. Kemp refused to expand Medicaid in Georgia, Ms. Abrams said, “He has refused to support women at every stage of their lives when they are trying to make the best choices for themselves and their families.”
The CNN anchor Jake Tapper said Mr. Kemp had been invited to appear on the show. Mr. Mitchell said Mr. Kemp was unable to appear because he was at the Georgia Municipal Association conference in Savannah.
Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, Democrat of Michigan, told CBS’s “Face the Nation” that state lawmakers had already introduced legislation to “criminalize and throw nurses and doctors in jail” if they perform abortions.
And legislators, she said, endorsed a 1931 law making abortions in the state a felony “as have all of the Republican people running for governor. They want abortion to be a felony: no exception for rape or incest. That’s the kind of Legislature that I’m working with. That’s the kind of matchup I’m going to have this fall.”
Republican governors on the Sunday shows, while welcoming the court’s ruling, repeatedly emphasized that the debate and discussion around this issue will continue, framing it as a matter of states’ rights.
Gov. Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas said on NBC’s “Meet the Press” that although the ruling was something the “pro-life movement worked for over 40 years” to achieve, “we have to remember, this not a nationwide ban on abortion. Every state will have the ability to make its decisions.”
Later, Mr. Hutchinson tried to assuage concerns that other rights could be rolled back: “This is not about contraception. This is not about same-sex marriage: a very limited decision on this particular issue of abortion.”
And it is “very important right now to assure women that the access to contraception is going to be able to continue.” Later, when asked if, as president, he would sign a national law outlawing abortion, Mr. Hutchinson, who is considering a run in 2024, said no.
“I don’t believe that we ought to go back to saying there ought to be a national law that’s passed. We fought for 50 years to have this return to the states. We’ve won that battle. It’s back to the states. Let’s let it be resolved there.”
Another Republican, Gov. Kristi Noem of South Dakota, told ABC’s “This Week” that the Supreme Court ruling was “wonderful news,” and that her state would now ban abortions except to save the life of the mother. “But I anticipate there’ll be more debate and discussion” because the ruling “gave the authority back to the states to make these decisions.”
When asked what would happen if a South Dakota resident traveled to another state to get an abortion, Ms. Noem replied, “That certainly isn’t addressed in our statute today and so I think that’s things that there’ll be debate about but also, we’re having lots of debates in South Dakota.”
An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to an employee for Gov. Brian Kemp of Georgia. Tate Mitchell is a spokesman for Mr. Kemp, not a spokeswoman.
By Stephanie Lai
WASHINGTON — A group of Senate Democrats sent a letter to President Biden on Saturday urging him to take “bold action” on abortion rights, a day after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, the landmark case that legalized abortion nationwide.
Thirty-four senators signed the letter, which called on the president to “take immediate action” and “use the full force of the federal government to protect access to abortion in the United States.” The letter, led by Senator Patty Murray of Washington, emphasized the urgency of the issue, citing the numerous states whose trigger laws have already made abortion illegal and the potential for other states to swiftly follow suit.
“We need the president and all of his cabinet secretaries immediately to have detailed plans about what they can implement so that people can have the information they need,” Ms. Murray, the chairwoman of the Senate health committee, said in an interview. “It’s frustrating because with this decision in place, it is now imperative that women get the information they need today.”
This month, before the court’s ruling, more than 20 Senate Democrats sent Mr. Biden a letter urging him to issue an executive order that would defend abortion and reproductive rights. They suggested that the federal government could take steps to increase access to medication abortion and provide resources for people seeking out-of-state abortion care, such as travel vouchers, among other actions.
With an evenly divided Senate, Democrats have little hope of legislative action on abortion rights — leaving the president’s executive authority, however limited, as one of the few avenues on the federal level for trying to mitigate the effects of the court’s ruling.
While a bill focused on increasing reproductive rights and codifying the abortion rights in Roe passed the House last fall, it failed to clear the Senate last month in the face of opposition from all Republicans and one Democrat, Joe Manchin III of West Virginia. Mr. Manchin has expressed support for codifying Roe, but Democrats would still need the support of 10 Republicans to reach the 60-vote threshold needed to pass most bills in the chamber.
“We don’t have the votes to overturn this decision right now,” Ms. Murray said. “That is why the November election is so critical.”
Speaking to reporters on Air Force One on Saturday, the White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, said that Mr. Biden would continue seeking legal advice about what executive actions he could take. But she emphasized the need for congressional action in response to the court’s ruling.
“The reality is we have to get Congress to act to restore Roe, to make it law of the land,” she said.
