The Chinese capital relaxed pandemic rules at midnight on Monday, including a ban on dining in, after a partial lockdown that lasted more than a month.
By John Liu
Beijing residents eagerly indulged in a privilege that they had not enjoyed in weeks: dining inside a restaurant.
The Chinese capital relaxed pandemic rules at midnight on Monday, including a ban on dining in, after a partial lockdown that lasted more than a month. Although the closures were not as strict as in Shanghai, the authorities in Beijing had suspended some public transportation, forced some people to quarantine, and enforced work-from-home in much of the city. 
Yet even as schools and offices are opening in waves and public transportation is being restored, other measures remained in place to prevent the spread of the highly transmissible Omicron variant of the virus. Everyone must wear a mask, have their temperature check, and take P.C.R. tests for everyday activities like riding the subway or going to work.
The measures underscore the commitment of Chinese authorities to stamp out the virus completely, despite curbing economic growth and fueling anger among citizens. The steps have triggered limited and small protests. Still, some cities plan to carry out regular mass testing even in the absence of a local outbreak.
On Saturday, Liu Xiaofeng, deputy head of Beijing’s municipal disease prevention and control center, said at a news conference that the city’s overall epidemic situation was improving. But he warned that “decisive measures” were necessary to avoid a resurgence of cases.
The authorities said there were six confirmed cases on Sunday in Beijing and 86 reported across the country, down from over 29,000 new daily infections at the height of this year’s outbreak in mid-April. The majority of the cases during the peak were in Shanghai.
It is unclear how long the relief may last, with cases re-emerging in Shanghai as it struggles to reopen after two months of harsh lockdown. On Sunday, the city reported three local community infections, prompting health officials to send a warning to its 25 million residents. 
“The risk of epidemic rebound still exists,” Wu Jinglei, Shanghai’s health commissioner, told a Sunday news briefing. “We cannot relax yet, but must be highly vigilant.”
By Mark Landler and Stephen Castle
LONDON — Prime Minister Boris Johnson survived a tense vote of no confidence on Monday, fending off a mutiny that nevertheless leaves him reeling and presages a volatile period in British politics, as he fights to stay in power and lead a divided Conservative Party.
The vote, 211 to 148, fell short of the majority of Tory lawmakers needed to oust Mr. Johnson. But it laid bare how badly his support has eroded since last year, when a scandal erupted over revelations that he and his senior aides threw parties at 10 Downing Street that violated the government’s lockdown rules. More than 40 percent of Conservative lawmakers voted against him in an unexpectedly large rebellion.
Mr. Johnson vowed to stay on, declaring that the victory should put an end to months of speculation about his future. “It’s a convincing result, a decisive result,” the prime minister said from Downing Street after the results of the secret ballot were announced.
“As a government,” Mr. Johnson added, “we can focus and move on to the stuff that really matters to people.”
History shows, however, that Conservative prime ministers who have been subjected to such a vote — even if they win it — are usually drummed out of office, if not immediately then within a few months.
Mr. Johnson won a smaller share of his party’s support on Monday than either his predecessor, Theresa May, did in 2018, or Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher did in 1990, when they survived no-confidence votes. Mrs. May was forced out six months later. Mrs. Thatcher lasted only a few days.
And yet, Mr. Johnson is a singular figure in British politics, gleefully defying convention and often seeming immune to the rules of political gravity. With a comfortable majority in Parliament, his party is no danger of losing power. He could opt to ride out the storm, claiming, as he did on Monday evening, that he got a larger mandate than when he was first elected leader of the party in July 2019.
Still, for a politician who led the Tories to a landslide election victory in 2019 with the promise to “get Brexit done,” it was a bruising fall from grace — one that could expose him to a political insurgency in his party, an empowered opposition, and further electoral setbacks that weaken his credibility.
In two and a half years, Mr. Johnson has gone from Britain’s most reliable vote-getter — a celebrity politician who redrew the country’s political map — to a scandal-scarred figure whose job has been in peril since the first reports of illicit lockdown parties emerged last November.
As Britons paid tribute to Queen Elizabeth’s 70-year reign last week, they were turning against the chaotic tenure of their prime minister. On Friday, Mr. Johnson was loudly booed by the crowd at St. Paul’s Cathedral when he and his wife, Carrie, attended a thanksgiving service for the queen.
That moment may have crystallized the loss of public support for Mr. Johnson, an ethically flexible journalist-turned-politician whose peccadilloes were forgiven more often than not by a public he proved adept at charming.
Still, for now, Mr. Johnson remains in power, and under the party’s current rules, he cannot face another no-confidence vote for a year. The odds of removing him will depend on several wild cards.
Will his Cabinet turn against him, as Mrs. Thatcher’s did after the vote in 1990, precipitating her swift resignation? Will the party threaten to change the rules and hold a second no-confidence vote, as it suggested it might with Mrs. May, persuading her to negotiate her exit? Will Mr. Johnson gamble by calling an early general election, seeking a mandate from the public that he could not get from his party?
Mr. Johnson sought to deflect questions about a new election on Monday night, saying only, “I’m certainly not interested in snap elections.”
In 1995, Prime Minister John Major triggered, and won, a leadership contest in the Conservative Party, only to go down to a crushing defeat to Tony Blair and the Labour Party two years later. Given Britain’s economic woes and the Conservative Party’s weakness in the polls, some Tories fear a similar outcome this time.
Opposition leaders seized on the result to paint Conservative lawmakers as having endorsed the leadership of a lawbreaking prime minister.
“Conservative MP’s made their choice tonight,” said the leader of the Labour Party, Keir Starmer. “They have ignored the wishes of the British public.” Voters, he said, are “fed up — fed up — with a prime minister who promises big but never delivers.”
The result leaves Conservatives restive and divided, after a tense day in which senior members of the party sparred openly on social media. Some lawmakers argued that his position had become untenable.
Roger Gale, a Conservative lawmaker, expressed surprise at the size of the rebellion. “I think the prime minister has to go back to Downing Street tonight and consider very carefully where he goes from here,” Mr. Gale said to the BBC.
But one of Mr. Johnson’s defenders, James Cleverly, a minister in the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, said, “he’s won it comfortably and now we need to get on with the job.” He said of Mr. Johnson’s electoral track record, “There’s no other candidate that is going to get anything like that level of support.”
Mr. Johnson was greeted warmly when he addressed Conservatives earlier in the afternoon, with some lawmakers pounding their desks in gestures of support, according to those in attendance. But he also got challenging questions, and as the members drifted out of the committee room afterward, it was clear he had not convinced all those who opposed him to call off their mutiny.
“I told the prime minister that if he broke the law he would have to go,” said Steve Baker, an influential pro-Brexit lawmaker who has called on Mr. Johnson to step down. “He’s clearly broken the law, he’s clearly acquiesced in the law being broken, so I stick to my word that I gave on the record that he should go.”
Noting that he had helped Mr. Johnson become prime minister, Mr. Baker described it as an “awful moment.”
Mr. Cleverly said the prime minister “was in very much serious mode,” and that his speech was “light on jokes and heavy on plans and policy.”
“He’s actually got a plan for what he wants to do next, how we deliver on the promises we made in the 2019 general election,” he said, “how we continue delivering through really, really difficult times.”
The latest chapter of this drama began on Sunday when Mr. Johnson was informed by Graham Brady, the head of a committee of Conservative Party backbenchers, that the threshold of 54 letters calling for a no-confidence vote had been reached. Mr. Brady and Mr. Johnson then negotiated the timing of a vote, with the prime minister pushing to hold it quickly.
That gave Mr. Johnson a tactical advantage because it deprived would-be rivals of time to organize a challenge to him. One potential challenger, Jeremy Hunt, tried to move quickly, declaring on Monday that he would be “voting for change.” Mr. Hunt, a former health secretary and foreign secretary, lost out to Mr. Johnson as party leader in 2019.
Nadine Dorries, Mr. Johnson’s culture secretary and one of his most ardent defenders, bitterly criticized Mr. Hunt for “destabilizing the party and country to serve your own ambition.” In a post on Twitter, she said, “You’ve been wrong about almost everything, you are wrong again now.”
The timing of the vote was also dictated by Queen Elizabeth’s Platinum Jubilee, a four-day celebration that ended on Sunday. Mr. Brady was determined not to allow news of a no-confidence vote to overshadow the festivities. As a result, Britain’s political drama played out behind closed doors while the political establishment gathered to pay tribute to the queen in a series of public events.
After he had been told of the vote, Mr. Johnson and his wife, Carrie, attended a pageant at Buckingham Palace, where his face betrayed no signs of the brewing crisis. Several lawmakers who submitted letters calling for a vote asked Mr. Brady that they be postdated so they would not be seen as interfering with the jubilee.
During a star-studded concert on Saturday evening, Mr. Johnson watched performers including Alicia Keys and Queen while Conservative lawmakers pored over a memo from anonymous members circulating on their WhatsApp group, which warned that failing to eject Mr. Johnson would bring the party to ruin, according to a report in The Telegraph.
The blunt assessment of the memo, published by The Telegraph, was that “Boris Johnson is no longer an electoral asset.”
Megan Specia contributed reporting.
By Johnny Diaz
Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg said on Monday that he had tested positive for the coronavirus, the latest member of President Biden’s cabinet to be infected.
Mr. Buttigieg added that he was experiencing mild symptoms.
“I plan to work remotely while isolating according to C.D.C. guidelines, and look forward to when I can safely return to the office and the road,” he wrote on Twitter, referring to guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Mr. Buttigieg was not considered a close contact of Mr. Biden, a White House spokesman said on Monday. To be a close contact, Mr. Buttigieg would have to have been less than six feet away from Mr. Biden for 15 minutes or more in a 24-hour period, according to the C.D.C.
The Department of Transportation said on Monday that Mr. Buttigieg, 40, has been vaccinated and boosted.
Mr. Buttigieg is one of at least 15 people who have tested positive for the coronavirus after attending the Mackinac Policy Conference in Michigan last week, according to the Detroit Regional Chamber, which organized the event. It is difficult to determine exactly how or when someone was exposed to and infected with the virus.
“The individuals testing positive report being asymptomatic or experiencing mild symptoms, and we wish them a speedy recovery,” the Detroit Regional Chamber said in a statement on Monday. In all, there were 1,347 attendees and support staff at the event, which ran from May 31 to June 3. They had to submit proof of vaccination or a negative P.C.R. test to attend the conference.
Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, who also attended the event and spent time with Mr. Buttigieg, took a rapid test on Monday morning, “which came back negative,” according to Bobby Leddy, a spokesman. Mr. Leddy said that Ms. Whitmer, 50, “is fully up-to-date on her vaccinations, and is not currently experiencing any symptoms.”
Last week, Labor Secretary Martin J. Walsh and Interior Secretary Deb Haaland announced that they had also received positive test results.
Others in Mr. Biden’s inner circle who have tested positive in about the past month include Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken, Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra, and Susan Rice, the White House domestic policy adviser. Mr. Biden’s daughter, Ashley Biden, was also infected, in mid-May.
By Jesus Jiménez
The latest coronavirus wave that has affected most of the United States is showing signs of improvement in the Northeast.
More than 29,000 people are hospitalized with Covid-19 across the country, an increase of 16 percent over the past two weeks, and more than 3,000 of those patients are in intensive care.
But in northeastern states, hospitalizations have been declining. In Vermont, numbers have dropped by more than 40 percent over the past two weeks. They declined over 20 percent in Massachusetts and roughly 10 percent in Maine, Connecticut and New York.
Every other region is seeing a rise in hospitalizations, particularly so in the southern states of Alabama and Louisiana, where hospitalizations have risen by at least 70 percent.
Hospitalizations tend to be a more reliable indicator than caseloads, which could be significantly undercounted as Americans turn more to at-home tests that go unreported to county health officials. Case counts may also have been affected by reporting delays over the Memorial Day weekend.
Angela Rasmussen, a virologist at the University of Saskatchewan’s Vaccine and Infectious Disease Research Organization, said how cases play out this summer would depend on a number of factors.
“A patchwork of rising cases and the impact will depend on vaccination rates, demographics and the availability of health care,” she said.
Dr. Bill Hanage, an associate professor of epidemiology at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, said that the situation would most likely improve over the summer, but that another wave of cases could be expected after that.
“Things are likely to be somewhat worse, especially in the fall and winter,” Dr. Hanage said.
An earlier version of this article misstated where Angela Rasmussen is based. She works at the University of Saskatchewan’s Vaccine and Infectious Disease Research Organization, not Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health.
DealBook Newsletter
By Vivian Giang
The DealBook newsletter delves into a single topic or theme every weekend, providing reporting and analysis that offers a better understanding of an important issue in business. If you don’t already receive the daily newsletter, sign up here.
As long as work has existed, employers have tried to size up their employees’ commitment to their jobs. Are you on the fast track? The mommy track? The leadership track?
Now, if some corporate leaders have their way, there will be a new test for workplace devotion — and anyone who opts for remote work gets a failing grade. But can C.E.O.s really claw their way back to 2019?
This past week, Elon Musk issued an ultimatum to Tesla and SpaceX employees requiring them to return to the office for at least 40 hours per week — or lose their jobs. Mr. Musk, who is known for having camped out for weeks at Tesla factories, thinks remote work is an affront to productivity and personal commitment. Last month, he praised Chinese workers for “burning the 3 a.m. oil,” comparing them with American workers who, he said, are “trying to avoid going to work at all.”
Jamie Dimon said last month that working from home isn’t for people who want “to hustle.” The bank has been criticized for tracking employees’ ID badge swipes to monitor how often they were coming to the office, along with similar policing by rivals like Goldman Sachs.
Mr. Dimon believes JPMorgan’s work setup “will look just like it did before” by September or October. But he also admitted in a letter to shareholders that remote work “will become more permanent in American business.”
“Although the pandemic changed the way we work in many ways, for the most part it only accelerated ongoing trends,” Mr. Dimon wrote. As my colleague Lananh Nguyen reported, he didn’t sound particularly happy about it, ticking off the “serious weaknesses” of virtual work, including slowed decision-making and a lack of “spontaneous learning and creativity.”
The resistance to remote work has many facets, including the bottom line: Many organizations have made pricey investments in office real estate, which has led to the creation of vast economic systems that are ultimately reliant on having workers at their desks.
“I’m trying to fill up office buildings, and I’m telling JPMorgan, Goldman Sachs, I’m telling all of them, ‘Listen, I need your people back into office so we can build the ecosystem,’” Mayor Eric Adams of New York City said this week. The city, which is heavily reliant on tax revenue from massive Midtown offices, recently announced a strict policy of in-person work for city employees.
“How does that look that city employees are home while I’m telling everyone else it’s time to get back to work?” Mr. Adams added. “City employees should be leading the charge of saying, ‘New York can be back.’”
Beyond the bottom line, the back-to-office debate is about what kind of culture will prevail as the business world emerges from the pandemic. And for all of the power wielded by Mr. Musk, Mr. Dimon and Mr. Adams, they may be fighting a shift that is larger than any single company or city.
If the pandemic’s two-plus years of remote work experimentation have taught us anything, it’s that many people can be productive outside the office, and quite a few are happier doing so. That’s especially true for people with young children or long commutes, minority workers who have a tougher time fitting in with the standard office culture, or those with other personal circumstances that made working in offices less attractive.
“We still are struggling to let go of the ideal worker stereotype — even though that person, for a lot of people and occupations and demographic groups in the U.S., never really existed,” said Colleen Ammerman, the director of the Gender Initiative at Harvard Business School. “I think with remote work, and hybrid, we have the potential to truly move away from that and really rethink about what it means to be on a leadership track, what it means to be a high performer, and get away from that being associated with being in the office at all hours.”
Even as the pandemic has changed course, there are signs that the work-from-home trend is actually accelerating. One recent survey published in the National Bureau of Economic Research found that employers are now saying they will allow employees to work from home an average of 2.3 days per week, up from 1.5 days in the summer of 2020.
It’s not just the office — it’s also the commute. The Wall Street Journal reported this week that almost all of the major cities with the biggest drops in office occupancy during the pandemic had an average one-way commute of more than 30 minutes; and most cities with the smallest drops had shorter commutes.
And Americans are increasingly booking stays for longer than 30 days on Airbnb, Vrbo and Booking.com, according to Vered Raviv Schwarz, the president and chief operating officer of Guesty, a software management tool for short-term rentals. At first, industry experts thought the extended stays might be a pandemic blip. But it’s gone on for long enough that it may signal workers with jobs that can be done remotely are doubling down on working outside of the normal commute-to-work patterns.
At its heart, the battle over remote work is a test of corporate America’s definition of an ideal worker. For decades or even longer, that has been a person who prioritizes their job above all else and has no outside commitments.
It’s “an incredibly powerful story,” said Brigid Schulte, the director of the Better Life Lab program at the think tank New America. “It’s part of our culture. It’s part of our DNA.”
It’s probably not shocking that people who are lower on the org chart tend to be less enthusiastic about returning to the office than the senior leaders and executives who thrived in the in-person Before Times.
“For many C.E.O.s and managers, that’s how they worked. That’s how they succeeded and that’s the only way they know,” Ms. Schulte said. “All of this was completely false; it was totally a fake story we’ve been telling ourselves.”
What do you think? Should companies go back to how things were before the pandemic? Let us know: dealbook@nytimes.com.
By Knvul Sheikh
So, you got a positive result on your home test for Covid-19. What do you do next? In addition to everything else on your plate — isolating and notifying close contacts, taking time off work and rescheduling appointments — it’s good practice to report your test results.
And while home tests have made it easier and faster to screen yourself and get treatment, it is not always easy to report an illness. This confusion has meant that many cases are left out of official counts.
If you test positive at a clinic or another community testing site, those results must be reported to public health departments under the CARES Act. Some home tests taken under the supervision of a trained telehealth provider are also reported to government health officials. But if your rapid test doesn’t fall into one of these categories, it can be unclear what to do.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention “strongly encourages” everyone who self-tests to report their positive results to a health care provider, who may order a P.C.R. test or otherwise report the data to state authorities. But only a few state health departments, including those in Colorado and Washington, collect data from home tests. Others, like in Massachusetts and New York, allow individual county health departments to decide whether they want to collect home test results.
The result is that official case counts are becoming an increasingly unreliable measure of the virus’s true toll. In New York City, for example, at the height of the Omicron wave, officials logged more than 538,000 new cases from January to mid-March. But a survey of New York City adults indicated that there could have been more than 1.3 million additional cases that were never detected or never reported during that time.
Health experts are concerned that public reporting of home testing is too sporadic and unpredictable.
“We do need a better sense of the amount of Covid in the community as people and organizations try to plan their behavior,” said Dr. Robert Wachter, the chair of the medicine department at the University of California, San Francisco. “When I’m deciding whether to eat indoors, for example, I don’t care about hospitalization numbers. I want to know the chance that my waiter or table-mate has Covid.”
But reporting relies on people being able to access home tests in the first place, which may put people in already underserved communities at a disadvantage. Data published by the C.D.C. in April suggested that home testing was most common among people who were young, white, highly educated and wealthy.
Even among people who have access to home tests, some may be nervous about volunteering personal information to local health authorities, said John Brownstein, an epidemiologist and chief innovation officer at Boston Children’s Hospital who led the recent C.D.C. research on home test use. Others may be too sick or overwhelmed to deal with the administrative burden of calling, emailing or otherwise figuring out how and when to report their test results.
Developing standardized, easy reporting systems for home tests could help solve part of the problem, Dr. Brownstein said. And information gleaned from home tests could allow researchers to calculate a better Covid index even if there isn’t uniform participation from the public.
“You don’t need every single person reporting their home test in order for the data to be valuable,” Dr. Brownstein said. “You have to understand how representative the sample is and make appropriate adjustments.” By combining test positivity data with other indicators, such as imputed case rates, wastewater information and community demographics, scientists can better understand how virus transmission is changing and assist with continued prevention efforts, he said.
Given how important it is to track case counts, here are four easy ways you can report a positive home test result.
Some rapid test kits, like the BinaxNOW, iHealth and Lucira kits, include a way to report your results through a mobile app, which usually also has instructional videos for using the tests.
Last year, a pilot program run by the C.D.C. and the National Institutes of Health distributed more than 1.4 million home tests to households in Tennessee and Michigan and found that, while overall test reporting was low and fewer than 10,000 test results were recorded in companion apps, those who used the apps were more likely to report their test results to public health authorities in both states. About 75 percent of the app users in Tennessee reported results and 84 percent in Michigan reported theirs.
If you test positive at home, another way to report your result is to contact your primary care provider, which is what the C.D.C. recommends you do.
When calling or emailing your doctor, make sure you’re ready to share a few key details: the kind of test you took, the time you took it, the date you started experiencing symptoms and your vaccination status.
Your doctor may recommend taking a P.C.R. test for confirmation, and can provide a medical report to help you take time off from work or school. Your doctor can also help you track new or concerning symptoms, give advice about antiviral treatments and clear you to return to work once you have fully recovered.
Many local public health departments have ways for people to report their results online, though their methods for obtaining test data often vary from region to region. You can find your health department’s website and information through the National Association of County and City Health Officials directory.
Some reporting methods are straightforward, like the one in Marin County, Calif., which has a simple online form for reporting results. Residents of St. Louis County, Mo., can call in, email or submit their results online. In Washington, D.C., you can use an iPhone or Android app, in addition to the Department of Health’s self-reporting web portal.
Other health department websites are notoriously confusing to navigate or even understand. New York State’s Covid-19 resource page, for example, says that residents are not required to report their test results. A representative for the Department of Health said that this was because New York had used only results from laboratories or official testing providers “to analyze trends and report consistent data to the public” since the beginning of the pandemic. But some counties in New York, like Albany County and Tompkins County, allow reporting of home test results, which is separate from the data the state collects.
Although a national home test surveillance website does not exist, researchers from Dr. Brownstein’s group have developed a platform for crowdsourcing home test results called OutbreaksNearMe.org that is fairly intuitive to use.
Originally designed to track flu outbreaks, the site has expanded to help create maps and analyze Covid-19 case data submitted by volunteers. The site shares information with the C.D.C. and local public health agencies and makes it available to the public, Dr. Brownstein said.
“Home tests represent a huge change in how quickly people can identify an infection, how quickly they can get care and access therapeutics,” Dr. Brownstein said. “They are going to be a core way that health care is delivered in the future, so we need to make sure that we in public health keep up with testing data.”
