Advertisement
Supported by
The postponement of the trip to the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan comes as speculation swirls that the pontiff may be thinking of stepping down.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Elisabetta Povoledo
ROME — The Vatican said Friday that Pope Francis would postpone a trip to Africa because of problems with his knee, an announcement that came as speculation swirls that the pontiff may be planning to follow in the steps of his predecessor and step down.
Neither Francis nor his aides have said he plans to retire. But the pope, 85, has spoken openly about his health problems in recent years, raising concerns that he may need to slow down. The retirement speculation among Italian and Catholic media flared after the pope said recently that he would soon visit the tomb of Pope Celestine V, the first pope to resign. 
That speculation was also fueled by an unexpected announcement by Francis last month that he would name 21 new cardinals in late August, putting more people of his choice in position to elect his successor. He also said he was bringing the world’s cardinals to Rome at the same time “to reflect” on the new Constitution he introduced this year to govern the Vatican bureaucracy.
“The stated reason is to reflect on the Apostolic Constitution but many cardinals see it as an opportunity to get to know each other,” said Gerard O’Connell, Vatican correspondent for the Catholic magazine America. With this new crop of cardinals, Francis will have named well over half of those who will vote for his successor, but many don’t know each other. “He’s using this moment to bring them together,” he said, adding that the constitution was the road map Francis has set for the future, “the main thrust of Francis’ pontificate.”
The Vatican said Pope Francis would postpone his trip to the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan, a challenging journey to two war-torn states that had been scheduled for next month, because of continuing problems with his knee.
Francis began using a wheelchair about a month ago because of problems with his right knee, which has made it painful for him to walk or stand for long periods of time.
The postponement came “at the request of his doctors, and in order not to jeopardize the results of the therapy that he is undergoing for his knee,” a Vatican spokesman, Matteo Bruni, said in a statement.
He said the pope expressed “regret” that the trip had to be deferred and that it would be rescheduled “to a later date to be determined.”
The pope’s knee problems are just the latest in a string of health problems the pontiff has faced. Last July, he underwent surgery to remove part of his colon, which kept him in a hospital for 10 days. In February, Francis canceled a trip to Florence, Italy, after doctors told him to take it easy with his knee, and he also sat out Ash Wednesday celebrations in March. He has remained seated during other papal Masses, delegating the celebration. He also postponed a trip to Lebanon, originally scheduled for mid-June, “for health reasons,” according to Lebanese officials who announced the cancellation.
The pope also has problems with sciatica, a chronic nerve condition that causes, back, hip and leg pain, and makes him walk with a limp. Flare-ups of that condition have forced him to cancel or modify high-profile appearances.
The Vatican has never specified the ailment afflicting the pope’s knee. In an interview published in the Milan newspaper Corriere della Sera in early May, Francis said he had a torn ligament and had been prescribed “a series of knee injections.”
He said that the problem with his knee had been “going on for some time now — I can’t walk around anymore.” He added, as a joke: “Once upon a time, popes used to be carried around in their sedan chair. But a bit of pain can be humbling, a blessing in disguise.”
The rumors of the pope’s possible retirement emerged after Francis announced last week that he would travel in August to the central Italian city of L’Aquila, to visit the basilica that holds the tomb of Pope Celestine V, who resigned from the papacy in 1294, the first pope to do so.
In April 2009, Pope Benedict XVI also traveled to L’Aquila, just a few weeks after a devastating earthquake killed more than 300 people. During that trip, he stopped at the basilica, Santa Maria di Collemaggio, where he prayed in front of Celestine’s body. Four years later, Benedict stepped down, and his earlier gesture was interpreted as a sign that he had been thinking of resigning.
Though the Vatican has never been forthcoming about papal health issues, Francis has been more forthcoming on his mortality.
Speaking to reporters on a papal plane in 2014, he said: “I know this will last a short time, two or three years, and then to the house of the Father,” while in 2015, he said he saw himself serving as pope for about another five years.
Soon after he was elected, Francis praised his predecessor for having the courage to resign, but after his surgery last year, he told a Spanish-language radio station that he had never thought about quitting while suffering from poor health.
Francis had been scheduled to travel to Congo and South Sudan from July 2 to 7, with a schedule that included Masses and prayer meetings, as well as meetings with officials, priests and seminarians and visits to displaced people in camps.
In South Sudan, Francis had planned to travel to a camp for internally displaced people in Juba with the archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, and the Rev. Iain Greenshields, the moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.
Francis has repeatedly expressed his concern over the continuing conflicts in both Congo and South Sudan, praying for both countries in numerous Christmas and Easter addresses.
Preparations had been ramping up in Congo for his visit, and the country’s vast Catholic population had been encouraged to turn out in large numbers to welcome him.
Many Congolese took to social media to wish the pope a fast recovery.
Fighting between rebels and Congo’s military has intensified in the east of the country in the past few weeks, raising tensions with one of its eastern neighbors, Rwanda, which it has accused of supporting a Congolese rebel group.
Congo’s minister of communication, Patrick Muyaya, wished Francis a speedy recovery and said the country would be ready whenever the postponed trip took place, calling it a “visit under the sign of peace and reconciliation.”
In South Sudan, where the population has been stressed by flooding, a shortage of humanitarian aid, and continuing conflict, disappointment was also palpable.
“I feel so sad,” said Beatrice Wani-Noah, a former foreign minister of South Sudan. “The whole of South Sudan has been waiting and waiting,” she added. “His visit means a lot to the country, to the peace agreement, and to the citizens. We are all praying for his quick recovery,” she said.
South Sudan plunged into civil war soon after it gained independence in 2011, in a conflict that has killed at least 400,000 people. In 2019 in Rome, Pope Francis fell to his knees before the visiting leaders of the country’s rival factions, including the country’s president, Salva Kiir, in a dramatic gesture intended to cement a shaky peace deal.
“I’m asking you with my heart,” Francis implored Mr. Kiir and the opposition leader, Riek Machar. “Stay in peace.”
Ruth Maclean contributed reporting from Dakar, Senegal; and Declan Walsh from Nairobi, Kenya.
Advertisement
