By Patrick Healy and Adrian J. RiveraJune 21, 2022

	For our latest Times Opinion focus group, we wanted to explore how moderate voters who helped elect Joe Biden as president in 2020 were feeling about the state of America. In particular, we wanted to dig into their views about Democratic positions on sensitive issues like abortion, guns, trans rights, race and whether the country’s best days are behind it. Republicans are hoping to appeal to some moderates in the coming elections by portraying Democrats as exceedingly liberal and judgmental.


	As we prepared our questions, we thought there might be some tense exchanges and even hostility toward Democratic elites and cultural progressivism. But what we found were some encouraging signs for democracy: The focus group participants didn’t dwell on their differences from other Americans and sought to be positive about the country and empathetic toward people different from them. On the issue of trans rights, for example, most were accepting and felt that the government shouldn’t get involved in personal matters. Even as a trans-feminine participant and others wrestled with the issue of trans women competing in women’s sports, she said that though she expected “to hear such horrible things,” she was happy with the group’s openness.


	As concerned as they were about the economy, inflation and crime, our participants were not forlorn or cynical and wanted to find ways to overcome divisions on issues like guns. One such way might come in the form of an independent candidate in 2024. The voters described feeling trapped by the choice of presidential candidates in 2020 and put forth people like Andrew Yang and Dwayne Johnson as potential third-party candidates. Trapped though they felt, none of them said they wished they had voted for Donald Trump.


          What’s the most important issue facing the country today?
        

          Rising gas costs. I’ve never seen gas prices the way they are, and it’s overwhelming.
        

          Corporate control of our government.
        

          The violence, the hatred, the killing on the street, outside your house, everywhere.
        

          I’m big into investing, and I’ve been losing a lot of money. Gun control, inflation. There’s just a lot of things. Everything is out of control in the United States.
        

          The cost of housing, the cost of groceries. As a teacher, almost everyone I know has a side hustle right now.
        

          At least half my paycheck is dedicated to paying for my daughter’s day care. And then the other thing that I think is a major issue is the lack of tolerance that is just rampant with everyone.
        

          What do you mean by that?
        

          Within my own family, there are people who won’t even talk to each other anymore or go to certain family gatherings. Because you’re never just Kim, you’re never just Michael. You are that leftist person, or you’re that person who’s the far screaming right. There’s no such thing as gray anymore. Everything has to be extremes.
        

          Show of hands — how many people here think America’s best days are behind us? [One person raises a hand.] Steven, tell me why you think America’s best days are behind us.
        

          I don’t see any way out of this mess that we’re in. With social media and all the misinformation and conspiracy theorists running the country, I don’t think anything’s going to get better. I feel like every problem we have, if the solution isn’t going to work perfectly, then it’s not worth doing, you know what I mean? So nothing ever gets done.
        

          Yeah, I think we still have this idea of hope in this country. We have always known about bad people in other countries, bad leaders. And we have our problems with our leaders, no question. But we have a choice to make decisions and do what we want to do. And I think most people around the world don’t have that liberty.
        

          I like to believe in humanity. This is America. People risk their lives, bring their families across borders, illegally or legally, just to be here to have a chance.
        

          America has gone through worse than what we’re going through right now. There was the Great Depression. There were world wars. So I think I’m optimistic, too.
        

          Let me move on to a specific issue that has been coming up recently: abortion. Where do folks come down on this? Here are three options, and then we can talk about them. Raise your hand if you agree. How many people agree with Option 1? “I personally support abortion and think it should be legal.” [Nine people raise their hands.] How about Option 2? “I oppose abortion personally but don’t think the government should get involved in women’s decisions.” [Four people raise their hands.] What about Option 3? “I oppose abortion and think it should be illegal.” [Nobody raises a hand.]
        

          Yana, tell me why you voted twice. Let’s start there.
        

          Because of my faith, abortion is not something that I agree with, but I also don’t feel like the government should be able to tell me whether or not I should have a child or not.
        

          OK. Folks who went with Option 1?
        

          I don’t think I could ever have an abortion. But I’ve seen people that have been put in that situation where they’ve been raped, where they were going to have a child that was hooked on heroin. And it was not a tenable pregnancy. So that’s why I’ve always been 100 percent supportive.
        

          The Supreme Court is going to have a ruling on abortion sometime in the next month. What do you think is going to happen? How many people here think the Supreme Court will overturn Roe v. Wade?
        

          I don’t think it’s going to happen. There’s going to be protesters. I would highly advise them not to overturn. Otherwise, there’s going to be chaos.
        

          How do you think the right to an abortion might change where you live?
        

          So here in Maryland, I don’t think it’s going to change. What we saw in the preliminary stuff that was leaked is basically that they were going to turn this back over and make it an individual, state-by-state decision, which, in and of itself, may not necessarily be the worst thing. Abortion is, like, the last thing on my totem pole of things to worry about. We’ve got war. We’ve got oil problems. We’ve got way bigger fish to fry than babies maybe or maybe not making it.
        

          How important is this issue when you’re thinking about a candidate and how you’re going to vote?
        

          Scale of one to 10, I’d say a seven. You’re taking a right away from somebody.
        

          Yeah, it used to not be something that I actually focused on when I was younger. Now that I’m older and have a child, what am I preserving for her when she comes of age? When she has to be forced to make that decision, if she has to make that decision? And then on top of it, it’s a question of autonomy. It’s not that I don’t believe the government should have some rules and regulations in parts of our lives. They should. But if they’re willing to limit that much of my own self-autonomy, how much are they going to limit other people’s?
        

          We’re going to move on to another topic. How do you feel about the gun laws in this country? Give me one word or two.
        

          My word is “ugh.”
        

          Tell me about that.
        

          I’m in Utah. We’re a really conservative state. I’m a gun owner, and historically, I have been pretty against gun control. But I am getting overwhelmed and frustrated with what’s been going on in our country, and I want to see a change, and I want to see a drastic change with gun violence.
        

          Is there a law or policy or limit that you would find acceptable as a gun owner?
        

          I’m not, like, a huge gun guy. I just own a gun, right? So I’m not the kind of guy who’s ever, “They’re going to try to take away my guns!” I would gladly give away my gun for the safety of others.
        

          I think the issue isn’t so much that it’s the right to have a gun. It’s how you are able to obtain said gun. We lived in L.A.; it takes forever to get approved to get a handgun. But when we moved to Memphis, my husband literally went on his lunch break, showed up to a gun store, and in five minutes they said, here’s your gun. There’s got to be some form of balance.
        

          In the aftermath of a mass shooting, people sometimes say we should bring back the assault weapons ban. Other folks say this should be up to individual states. Where do folks come down on this?
        

          I think it should be all about age. I think they should be 21 to get an assault rifle, just like a handgun. And there should be waiting periods, I think, after you go and make the purchase, you should wait three to five days.
        

          I don’t know why you need an assault weapon in general, age or no age.
        

          A lot of these kids that shoot up schools end up doing so with their parents’ weapons, and their parents never face any repercussions for it. To me, if somebody commits murder with your weapon, then you need to spend your life in prison, too. If you need to have assault weapons, they need to be locked up where only you can have them. And every serial number on it, every one, needs to be registered with the government. And I say if you have one and it’s not registered, then you need to spend 10 years in jail. I think little kids’ lives are far more important than your need to go out and shoot a machine gun.
        

          I go to the range out here to shoot my gun, and there are a lot of people who have assault rifles. A lot of times, the guys out here treat it as a hobby — building a gun, making it awesome. It’s cool that it’s a hobby. But people don’t have hobbies of building bombs. That would be upsetting. That would be absurd. And it feels like we’re getting to the same territory.
        

          Let’s talk about issues around gender identity and sexual orientation. Some Americans have said they’re worried the Supreme Court could eventually reverse its decision to allow gay marriage. Is this something that concerns you?
        

          It would be really ridiculous to intervene in people’s lives this way. I don’t think it’s up to the government or their business.
        

          What’s next? Are we going to go backwards and take away women’s right to vote? Like, we’ve already tackled these hurdles and made it right for people to do what they want to do in this country, because we’re the land of the free. Why would we want to go back and start taking things away?
        

          Well, I am a part of the L.G.B.T.Q. community, so it would be devastating to me and all my friends’ and associates’ lives. It was just so joyful that we were moving forward. And it would be throwing us back to the ice age. I would feel like it’d be throwing us away.
        

          Some states like Florida are making it illegal for public schools to discuss at certain age levels L.G.B.T.Q. history, identity and rights. How do all of you think schools should handle teaching these issues?
        

          I’m a teacher, and I can tell you that most of what we teach is already so superscripted. If it’s not a standard, if it’s not on the syllabus, if it’s not on the weekly things-to-teach list, it’s probably not being taught. Georgia is one of those states where we don’t have tenure, so every year you have to be offered a contract from your principal. The average teacher that I know is not going to risk not being offered a contract for teaching something that they’re not supposed to be teaching.
        

          To outlaw teaching it would just be so sad. I think we need to breed compassion and understanding and acceptance for these kids who are maybe struggling and feel ostracized. Like, how many L.G.B.T. people, children commit suicide because they feel ostracized? I think it needs to be talked about and it needs to be pressed that you’re loved, you’re not different, you’re OK.
        

          Angel, you’re from Florida. Any strong feeling about how schools should handle this?
        

          I have a 5-year-old and a 3-year-old, so they’re going to be up at school pretty soon. So that law, I don’t agree with at all. It’s silencing a whole culture. You’re kind of hiding that information from a child. They’re going to start being curious. Maybe they’re like, “Well, nobody wants to talk about it because it’s bad.”
        

          How old do you want your kids to be when they start learning in schools about L.G.B.T.Q. history and identity?
        

          That’s difficult to discuss. I think when a child gets curious, you as a parent should be teaching them that being gay is not bad.
        

          What about the schools? Any thought about when the school should?
        

          It’s difficult. I don’t have that answer.
        

          Yeah, my daughter’s only 2-ish, so it’s not really something I’m pressed about. But when we start redacting parts of history and hiding things, you are going backwards as a society. We can’t hide things. Now whether or not it needs to be taught at age 5 or age 10, I think we need to probably do some more research on when children are really going to start asking those questions, because that would be an appropriate time to introduce it into the curriculum.
        

          Some states have been having debates about transgender teens and adults participating in sports or receiving counseling or hormone therapy — again, when they’re teenagers or adults. What comes to mind when you hear this debate?
        

          It’s a person’s experience. No one has the right to legislate how they feel, what gender they feel or what they do to affirm that gender. Now I don’t think having trans women compete against women — I mean, it’s science. They have an unfair advantage. But as far as legislating what they could do to affirm their gender as a teenager or adult, they just need to mind their own business.
        

          Let me just run through a few specific examples and get folks’ thoughts. Do you think transgender people should be treated as the gender they say they are?
        

          Absolutely. I mean, why not? Just help me out in understanding what that is, so that I can properly work with you on what you need from me.
        

          Yeah, I agree. They should be whatever gender they say they are. And people need to know how to use pronouns correctly. But, yeah, they should have all the rights that we all have.
        

          And then just to go to the point that was talked about just a minute ago, in terms of, should trans girls in high school be allowed to compete on girls’ sports teams? How do you see that?
        

          I think that they deserve compassion and respect and understanding, but I don’t know how to offer it in that instance.
        

          I do identify as a transgender person, and I would not ever enter a competition as a woman. I was born biologically male, and that would give me an unfair advantage. I don’t want to down-talk or talk against ones that are competing in women’s sports. I just — they are dominating them, and I think it is very unfair to the women that have been in these sports for all of their lives. It’s unfair, and if I were a biological woman, I would be pissed.
        

          Michael, can I ask, is there anything you think we should keep in mind or that Americans should keep in mind, just based on your perspective and your kind of lived experience here, as we talk about these issues as if they are issues. You also live them. This is your life.
        

          I am trans-feminine. I live my life as a female. But I don’t call myself a woman, because I was not born biologically female or a woman. I just, I want to be treated as a woman. My pronouns are “she, her and hers.” I’ve had the situation come up so much — “Oh, you’re not a woman, because you don’t have a womb.” And I never said that I was. And just the hatred that comes with it is just very unnerving. But this group seems to be very accepting, and I’m over here with a big smile on my face because everybody’s so nice. I was expecting to hear such horrible things, you know? And it’s very assuring to hear.
        

          Thank you, Michael. For everyone: What about teenagers who say they’re trans? Should they be allowed to get puberty blockers or hormone therapy and counseling on transition? There is a difference of opinion among some political leaders on this.
        

          Absolutely, absolutely. It is up to each individual. Politicians should just stay out of it. I mean, as long as I’m not hurting anybody, it is up to me as an individual.
        

          It should be up to the individual to make that decision. But if the legal guardian is against the child and the child wants to have the therapy, there needs to be something in place that allows the child to seek legal autonomy in those situations, because obviously that family home life isn’t necessarily the best one for them.
        

          I think the only thing I would mention is that if there are situations where those decisions cannot be reversed, that’s a complicated aspect for someone who’s not yet 18. So I think that that’s a tough challenge because all of us, our thinking about what we want to do can change over a period of time.
        

          Let’s talk about race and the way we talk about race. How many people say that the country is paying too much attention to the issue of race? [Nobody raises a hand.]
        

          How many people say we’re paying the right amount of attention? [One person raises a hand.]
        

          I don’t think we’re paying too much attention. I think it’s always been pushed under the rug.
        

          I think that we are getting more attention than ever, and I think more is better.
        

          I think that it’s the wrong type of attention sometimes, when you’re talking about Black Lives Matter. I think all lives matter. Or people will say, “Oh, well, you know, Black lives don’t seem to matter in communities where there’s lots of gun violence with Black people against Black people.” Why is there not a deeper conversation about why a certain demographic is being highlighted? I think it’s misguided attention and not necessarily for the right things.
        

          The next issue is the Jan. 6 committee hearings, looking into the breach of the Capitol and the disruption of counting the Electoral College results.
        

          I don’t care at all. I’m so tired of hearing about it. It happened. It was ridiculous. But, like —
        

          Why don’t you care at all?
        

          Because the police response, it was lackluster for who knows what reason. But one thing we know for sure is that the police response in D.C. and Uvalde needs to change.
        

          I think they’re just taking way too long. I’m waiting for politicians to get it. That’s what I want to see.
        

          Let’s shift gears. Can you name a Democratic leader or candidate that you admire?
        

          I really admire someone like Maxine Waters. She’s really, really vocal about what she believes. She’s one of those people who will take the hits when something she said is unfavorable. I really like Cory Booker. Him throwing his hat in for a presidential bid — he got lost in the shuffle when there were, like, 20 people.
        

          I like Beto O’Rourke. When I hear his rhetoric, it reminds me of when Obama was campaigning for president. I think he may be one to watch. And Ann Richards, the former governor of Texas, I think that she was very progressive for her time and would have made a wonderful president.
        

          I like Katie Porter. She’s a representative from California. She gets people on the floor of Congress, and she calls them out on all of their corruption and makes them answer for it. If people followed what she does, it would really open a lot of eyes to what’s really going on in this country.
        

          I really don’t admire any of them. I think they need to be thrown out. They’re there too long.
        

          Let’s turn to President Biden for a bit. What do you see as his strengths? What does he do well?
        

          Helping out the student loan situation, trying to help that is probably one of his bigger gains.
        

          For those who are trying to get a more unified United States, his calmness, his empathy — it’s all a lot of words, but I think he’s trying to bring back a little more hope.
        

          What about the flip side? Anything President Biden has not done well or any weaknesses that folks see?
        

          I think he’s just not pacing himself fast enough to respond to issues. I think he takes the long approach. But with social media, you have to move much faster. We’re used to that, particularly from Trump, where you get a response right away, good or bad. So things like student loans, whatever he’s going to do, why wait? Why hold off?
        

          How do folks feel — a couple of people — about your decision to vote for Biden in 2020?
        

          I felt trapped. I didn’t have a choice. I was trapped. Both candidates sucked.
        

          Does anybody see it differently?
        

          To tell you the truth, I have to agree. It’s not a trap, but I felt neither of the candidates were fit enough.
        

          Yana, can I ask you, if in the 2024 election, if it’s between Biden and Trump again in 2024, how would you vote?
        

          I’m still voting for Biden. Although there are plenty of things that he could improve on, I still would choose him as the better candidate.
        

          Any candidates you’d like to see run as a third party? Steven?
        

          Andrew Yang.
        

          I’m not trying to be funny, but, Dwayne Johnson, the Rock.
        

          I think maybe Cory Booker would be a good — if he would, if he ran on a third-party ticket.
        

          If you could do any one thing to make our country less divided, what would you change?
        

          Yeah, I’d give everybody a passport. I think that if people have a chance to meet other people, whether in other states or across the world, I think that would be all I want. I just want them to listen. I don’t want to force opinions down people’s throats. I want them to experience and figure that out and make the decisions on their own with that knowledge.
        

          Kind of similarly to the passport idea, I think everyone at some point, before they become confirmed in their home religion, whatever they were raised with, they should really make an effort to go to other churches, go to other religious organizations or meetings and just see how other people view the world. Having that experience broadens your mind.
        

          A change in the mass media would be good. Just more, like, complete honesty and true removal of bias and just to report on the facts as best you can.
        

          Take money out of politics.
        

          In the perfect world, I think we need to make sure that everybody has a good education. Teachers need a lot more pay.
        

          I don’t know why every civilized country in this world does ranked-choice voting and we do either/or. It’s ridiculous.
        

          Taking money out of politics and ranked-choice voting. That would just make things so much better.
        

          Finance classes to bring that wealth gap a little smaller between races.
        

          I’d like to take you and Patrick on the road, and if you do one of these in every community all over the nation, I think we’d really find out that we’re not as divided as people think we are. I think pretty much everybody wants the same things, and only after you sit down and talk to people do you realize everybody wants to be safe, everybody wants their kids to go to school and do well and everybody wants to be able to provide for their families. Maybe run a ticket with Donna and Robert for president 2024.
        
America in Focus seeks to hear and understand the views of cross-sections of Americans whose voices are often not heard in opinion journalism.
This focus group is moderated by a focus group veteran, Margie Omero, and the New York Times Opinion deputy editor, Patrick Healy. Ms. Omero does similar work for political candidates, parties and special interest groups. She chose the participants. (Times Opinion paid her for the work.)This transcript has been edited for length and clarity; an audio recording of the session is also included. Participants provided their biographical details. As is customary in focus groups, our role as moderators was not to argue with or fact-check the speakers, and some participants expressed opinions not rooted in facts.Illustrations by Lucinda Rogers.
Advertisement
