
Sign In


            Democrats, stop the bombings!
Manage Newsletters
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Kavanaugh’s Democratic assassins
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Jim Crow
OPINION:
On Tuesday, abortion activists firebombed a pro-life pregnancy center in Buffalo, New York — the third such bombing in three weeks.
The abortion terrorist group “Jane’s Revenge” claimed responsibility for the arson of a pro-life organization in Madison, Wisconsin, in May, and may have been associated with bombing the offices of Oregon Right to Life during the same month.
It has also vandalized and destroyed dozens of churches and pregnancy centers, according to LifeNews.com. In Buffalo, the group sprayed graffiti reading “Jane was Here” on the walls of CompassCare, a pro-life medical office and pregnancy center.
“If abortions aren’t safe, then you aren’t either,” the group wrote on the walls of the Wisconsin pro-life center it set on fire with Molotov cocktails. Jane’s Revenge then threatened more attacks in the coming weeks if the Supreme Court overturns Roe v. Wade decision on abortion rights.
“Wisconsin is the first flashpoint, but we are all over the U.S. and we will issue no further warnings,” the group warned in May.
CompassCare’s CEO Jim Harden told LifeNews his centers have been the target of violence for months both online and in person. Not only does the Democratic left not seem to care, he said, but they’ve increased scrutiny on the centers themselves while turning a blind eye to those carrying out the attacks.  
“Ironically, [New York Democratic Gov. Kathy Hochul] not only ignored the violence but instead earmarked $35 million in taxpayer funds to increase security at abortion clinics,” Mr. Harden told LifeNews. “Adding insult to injury, the New York legislature passed a bill investigating pro-life pregnancy centers precisely because they do not perform abortions.”
“I wonder if Gov. Hochul will veto the Pregnancy Center Investigation Bill? I wonder if [New York Democratic state] Attorney General Letitia James will investigate these cowardly criminals?” he asked.
I wouldn’t bet on it — it seems the only “terrorists” the U.S. Department of Justice cares to probe are angry parents upset with their school boards or those walking through the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2020.
No arrests have been made in Wisconsin’s firebombing, leading Now Wisconsin Family Action, the pro-life group whose building was targeted, to offer its own $1,500 reward for any suspects related to the attack.
“There is no room for hate in Madison, and we are actively working with our federal partners from the FBI and ATF to solve this case,” the Madison Police Department told local news affiliate NBC15. “Investigations into this type of incident are time-consuming, and involve painstaking analysis of evidence collected, witness interviews conducted and tips received.”
In other words, don’t expect any suspects to be identified — let alone convicted — anytime soon. The same goes for pro-abortion violence in Buffalo and Oregon.
In May, when Supreme Court Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr.’s draft opinion overturning Roe v. Wade was leaked to the media, lunatic liberal groups targeted the conservative justices’ homes and exposed their private addresses on social media. The Biden White House refused to condemn either the leak or the harassment and intimidation of the justices — pouring fuel on the fire.
Rachel O’Leary Carmona, executive director of the Women’s March, urged abortion activists to become “ungovernable” until the government legalizes abortion on demand.
“For the women of this country, this will be a summer of rage,” she tweeted in May. “Until our government starts working for us and codifies our right to an abortion, we will be UNGOVERNABLE. This is a fight for abortion rights. And it’s a fight we’ll win.”
Sen. Elizabeth Warren also amped up the rhetoric while speaking at a pro-abortion rally outside the Supreme Court in May.
“I am madder than hell and I am ready to fight,” the liberal Massachusetts Democrat told the crowd. “Are you ready to fight? … I’m mad and I’m ready to fight them to the end.”
Is it any wonder the Department of Homeland Security issued a memo last month anticipating a surge in violence once the Roe decision is handed down? Perhaps burning down or storming the Supreme Court and physically attacking the justices and their clerks?
It seems some forms of insurrection are welcomed — even encouraged — by the left.
It’s well past time to determine who is behind “Jane’s Revenge” and make some arrests. If the FBI can do its job dealing with the “Proud Boys,” surely its agents can do so just as well with leftist terrorist groups. If only they had the political will.
• Kelly Sadler is the commentary editor at The Washington TImes.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
                          Click
                            here for reprint permission.
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
