Advertisement
Subscriber-only Newsletter
Some watering holes are riskier than others.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Melinda Wenner Moyer
Our local water park opened over Memorial Day weekend, and of course the kids begged us to take them. My husband and I easily relented — we enjoy zipping down water slides on hot days, too — but it was as crowded as we’d ever seen it. Eyeing the wave pool as it teemed with sweaty adults and snot-encrusted kids, I couldn’t help but wonder what kinds of gross germs lurked in it. And what about other crowded pools and lakes in the summertime — are they more like cesspools than swimming pools?
It’s hard to get a clear answer to this question because nobody knows how many Americans get sick each year from germs they’re exposed to while swimming. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports between 20 and 60 infectious disease outbreaks related to swimming and recreational water use every year, which doesn’t sound like a lot, but those numbers represent “a fraction of what is actually happening out there,” said Michele Hlavsa, chief of the C.D.C.’s Healthy Swimming Program.
“We miss a lot of outbreaks,” she said, because people who get sick after they swim often don’t go to the doctor, let alone report their illness to local health authorities. And since people can travel long distances to visit pools, lakes, oceans and water parks, water-caused illnesses rarely get traced back to their source.
Still, most people don’t get sick after they swim — and none of us, thankfully, felt ill after our crowded Memorial Day adventure. But some watering holes, I learned, are riskier than others.
Among the known outbreaks caused by germs in U.S. pools, hot tubs and water parks between 2015 and 2019, one-third were traced back to hotels and motels. The C.D.C. isn’t sure why resort pools are so germ-laden, but one theory is that the person responsible for maintaining water quality at a hotel is also “responsible for 100 other things,” Ms. Hlavsa said, and sometimes shirks their pool maintenance duties.
When researchers at the C.D.C. conducted routine inspections of thousands of public U.S. swimming pools and hot tubs as part of a 2016 study, they found that 9.2 percent of pools, and 19.2 percent of hot tubs, violated disinfection requirements — for instance, by not having enough chlorine in them. Many of the pools’ pH levels were also at levels that didn’t meet recommended guidelines, which is worrying because pH affects how well chlorine disinfects. (The C.D.C. recommends that pools have at least 1 part per million of chlorine in them, and that hot tubs contain at least 3 parts per million. The pH of water should be between 7.2 and 7.8. You can buy chlorine and pH test kits or strips at hardware and pool supply stores.)
Even when pools do contain enough chlorine, the chemical doesn’t kill germs immediately, said Dr. Marirose Trimmier, a family medicine physician at the University of South Alabama College of Medicine, who recently co-wrote a research paper on swimming-related illnesses. Some microbes can, in fact, persist in chlorinated water for quite a while. The parasite Cryptosporidium, which was responsible for nearly half of all recent pool-related infectious disease outbreaks between 2015 and 2019 and causes diarrhea, fever and fatigue, can survive in chlorinated water for more than a week, Ms. Hlavsa said. Noroviruses, which are a common cause of stomach bugs, can also be chlorine-resistant, as can tiny diarrhea-causing parasites known as Giardia.
One thing that’s clear from the data is that hot tubs contain the grossest water of all: A whopping 70 percent of recent outbreaks were traced back to them, according to the C.D.C. Hot tubs can be germ-laden for several reasons, Ms. Hlavsa said. First, chlorine breaks down especially quickly in hot water, and the aerosolization of water from tub jets renders the chlorine even less effective, she said — not to mention, the jets can squirt germy water directly into your nose or mouth. (Some hot tub operators now use bromine, rather than chlorine, to kill germs, as it’s more heat-stable.) Also, certain bacteria grow quite well in hot water — like Legionella, the cause of pneumonia-like Legionnaires Disease, which recently killed two people in an outbreak in the Bronx.
Another germ that’s often found in hot tubs is Pseudomonas, a bacterium that causes body rashes, said Dr. Allen Perkins, a family medicine doctor at the University of South Alabama. This rash, which appears on the body as scattered red bumps, will typically appear 48 hours after a hot tub soak and will be worst on the areas of skin your swimsuit covered, because the suit traps the bacteria close to your skin, he said. These bacteria have been shown to be increasingly resistant to chlorine, too. Thankfully, most of these infections are treatable if you see a doctor.
Circling back to my beloved local water park: Just how gross are these popular attractions? Ms. Hlavsa said she wouldn’t be too concerned. “Actually, I am planning on taking my kiddos to a water park this coming weekend,” she told me when we spoke. Because water parks are operated by professionals, they are usually careful to follow disinfection guidelines, she said. I was also relieved to learn that in some states, including New York, the water used in splash pads, which spray water on users and are frequented by younger (i.e., germier) kids, are not only treated with chlorine, but also with ultraviolet light, which kills chlorine-resistant microbes.
Ms. Hlavsa pointed out that concerned water-park-goers (or pool-goers) should also be able to access public health inspection data, just as one can do for restaurants. As for where to find these records, it depends on what state you’re in, she said. Inspections may be done by the county, the city or another municipality. She suggested calling your local health department for more information.
If you’re planning to swim in a lake, river, stream or ocean, look for physical signs indicating that the water is either safe or unsafe for swimming. (Or check your state’s water quality conditions online.) This is especially important to do after heavy rain, because as it flows and drains, rain picks up everything it comes in contact with — including animal poop — and can deposit it, germs and all, into swimming areas, Dr. Perkins said. Avoid swimming in areas that have pipes draining into them, too.
If you have an open wound — even just a scratch — it’s also best to avoid swimming or wading, especially in saltwater where rivers flow into the ocean, Dr. Trimmier said. At the very least, cover wounds with a waterproof bandage. The bacteria Vibrio can enter the body through minor wounds and cause serious, but rare, infections.
Assess lake, river or ocean water, too, before you get in. “The rule of thumb is, if the water looks murky, don’t swim in it,” Dr. Perkins said. Don’t swim in it if it smells bad, either — and even if it smells fine, don’t drink it.
In general, use your common sense. Dr. Perkins said he once had a patient come see him with a terrible sinus infection. “Turns out he had made a bet that he could snort an oyster up his nose,” he said. “Don’t do that.”
Parenting a baby with a health complication is difficult in the best of times, but the ongoing formula shortage is making things much worse for such families. Many parents of premature babies, as well as parents of babies with other specific dietary needs, are driving many miles each day in search of the special formulas their children need to survive but that are often out of stock, and their mental health is taking a toll.
Read more:Parents of Premature Babies Struggle Amid Formula Shortage
We want to hear from you.Tell us about your experience with this newsletter by answering this short survey.
If you test positive on a home Covid-19 test, it’s important to report your results to health authorities so that they can keep track of official case counts. You can do this by accessing your test’s mobile app, calling or emailing your doctor, contacting your local health department and participating in crowdsourcing efforts.
Read more:Reporting Home Covid Test Results Can Be Confusing. Here’s How to Do It.
Here are some stories you don’t want to miss:
Find out if you’re experiencing parental burnout by taking this Parental Burnout Quiz.
Dani Blum talks to relationship guru Logan Ury, who says you’re probably dating all wrong.
Maggie Jones interviews Terrence Real, a family therapist, about his new book on using “enlightened self-interest” to strengthen relationships.
Elisabeth Egan talks to behavioral scientist Michael Slepian about his new book, “The Secret Life of Secrets.”
Anahad O’Connor discusses a new study that links weight-loss surgery to lower cancer risk.
And of course, we’ve got the Weekly Health Quiz.
Let’s keep the conversation going. Write to me at well_newsletter@nytimes.com.
Stay well!
Advertisement
