Advertisement
Supported by

To listen to this free New York Times Opinion podcast, follow these instructions.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Every opinion starts with a story. A narrative show hosted by Lulu Garcia-Navarro (@lourdesgnavarro). New episodes every Thursday. You can listen to the trailer here.
Available wherever you get your podcasts, including:
Apple Podcasts
Spotify
Google Podcasts
Amazon Music
Stitcher
TuneIn
Transcripts of each episode are available midday.
You can find all episodes of “First Person” at nytimes.com/first-person. Click the episode you want to hear and press the play button at the top of the page.
1. Open your podcast app. It’s a preloaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. You can also use your preferred podcast player.
2. Search for the series. Tap the magnifying glass search icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “First Person” and select it from the list of results.
3. Follow. Once on the series page, tap the follow button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when new episodes arrive.
4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to follow, click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.
1. Open your podcast app. There are a few available for Android. Any of them will be able to follow “First Person.”
2. Search for the series. Search for “First Person” and select it from the list of results.
3. Follow. Once on the series page, click on the word “follow” or the plus sign (this is different for each podcast player) to have new episodes sent to your phone free.
4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to follow, click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode.
Advertisement
