Advertisement
Supported by
For people grieving a loss or facing thoughts “about what could have been or what may never be,” there are ways to find solace.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Holly Burns
Father’s Day is complicated for Collie James. On one hand, it’s a day to celebrate with his two young sons “and get that wonderful hand-drawn card.” On the other, it’s a stark reminder that his firstborn child — Maddie, who died of brain cancer at age five in 2012 — isn’t there to sign it.
“It’s like I’m dividing the day between what I have and what I no longer have,” said Mr. James, 51, a lawyer in Capistrano Beach, Calif.
A survey by the National Retail Foundation in May found that 76 percent of Americans plan to celebrate Father’s Day this year. It’s the fourth most popular holiday for sending cards, according to Hallmark, with 72 million exchanged annually.
But for many people, the slew of ads, emails and social media posts surrounding Father’s Day can trigger painful feelings.
“These holidays can almost be like time machines,” said Rebecca Soffer, co-founder of the Modern Loss community and author of “The Modern Loss Handbook.” If you’re grieving someone, remembering past Father’s Days may conjure “a state of wistfulness or longing,” she said, even if the relationship wasn’t harmonious. For those dealing with infertility or stillbirth, the day can prompt distressing thoughts “about what could have been or what may never be.”
If you’re dreading Father’s Day — or any holiday or anniversary you find hard — you’re not alone. And while there’s no guaranteed solution to getting through the day, there are some things you can do to take the sting out of it.
You can’t dodge every ad pushing a hypothetical gift for a hypothetical dad. But in recent years, many companies have wised up to the fact that “Father’s Day and Mother’s Day look different for everyone and can bring up a range of emotions,” said Morgan Kois, director of brand marketing for Artifact Uprising, a photo printing site. This year, the company offered email subscribers the option to skip communications during those holidays. So far, around 1,000 people have taken them up on it.
“It’s easy to feel powerless when you’re in this season — and it really is a season, it’s not just the day itself, but the weeks leading up to it. Even taking a small action, like opting out of an email, can give you a sense of agency,” Ms. Soffer said.
While staying off social media means you’ll avoid posts you find upsetting, you don’t have to go quite so far. Twitter’s privacy settings allow you to “mute” keywords you don’t want to see, and Instagram and Facebook let you tweak your ad preferences based on topic.
In the week leading up to the holiday, make sure you’re getting ample sleep and exercise, said grief expert and therapist Claire Bidwell Smith. “When we’re in a good physical state, we can better regulate our emotions,” she said. Research has shown that poor sleep can take a toll on your mind and body and that exercise can improve mental well-being.
Mr. James has noticed that he’s uncharacteristically irritable on holidays that remind him of his daughter. “Set expectations with the people in your life about what these days mean to you and why you may not be yourself,” he advised.
Think carefully about how you want to spend the day, Ms. Soffer said. “Do you want to be invited to something, or would that be too hard?” If your friends will be busy with their own families on Sunday, “ask if you can hang out on Saturday so you still feel like you have a support system.”
There’s no reason you can’t still honor someone who’s passed, said Ms. Bidwell Smith, who still writes her dad a Father’s Day card, even though he died in 2003. Kristin Luna, 39, a writer in Tullahoma, Tenn., lost her father unexpectedly in January. She has started setting a place at the table for him on special occasions, with an Auburn University balloon in honor of his alma mater.
Kacie Reed’s father was recently diagnosed with inoperable Stage 4 cancer and this Father’s Day “will probably be his last one,” said Ms. Reed, 30, a stay-at-home mother in Greenville, S.C. However, because of their differing political opinions, “he’ll barely speak to me anymore,” she said. On a day that lauds idealized father-child relationships, Ms. Reed is unsure how to navigate a troubled one.
She’s not alone. A 2020 Cornell University survey of more than 1,300 people revealed that 27 percent of respondents were estranged from a family member, with the most common fracture (10 percent) between parent and child. “When we expect that a family is forever, or that parents unconditionally love their children and vice versa, it can be hard when that doesn’t manifest in our actual lives,” said Kristina M. Scharp, a professor at the University of Washington who studies difficult family transitions.
And it’s particularly tough on days like Father’s Day, when those cultural expectations “lay heavy on people,” Dr. Scharp said.
Studies have shown that giving to a cause that’s meaningful to you can help you feel happier. Make a donation to an organization, like the Boys and Girls Club, that pairs young people with adults they can look up to. Or use the day to celebrate “voluntary kin,” whom Dr. Scharp describes as “people you include in your life, who play supportive roles, who act like family.”
With certain holidays, “there is a perceived expectation of the right way to celebrate,” said William Chum, a psychotherapist in Woodside, N.Y., who specializes in cultural and identity conflicts. But if that doesn’t feel appropriate or appealing, it’s fine to just skip Father’s Day altogether. “Do things that invite peace and calmness,” he said. “Eat your favorite comfort foods. Watch your favorite shows.”
During their six-year struggle with infertility, Ryan Davis, 33, a social worker in Sturgis, Mich., said he and his wife have “felt jealous, sad and angry” on Mother’s Day and Father’s Day. The worst part? “You just feel so invisible.”
Grieving something you wanted to happen can be just as hard as grieving a person, Mr. Chum said. Ms. Bidwell Smith advised “leaning into spaces where other people are feeling the same as you,” by joining an online support group or listening to podcasts that deal with loss.
In 2017, Ms. Soffer started a Mother’s Day gift swap, where she matched strangers who were dreading the day, so they could exchange small presents and support each other. It was so popular that she now does it for Father’s Day too. “It’s just a nice way to create meaning out of the rubble,” she said. “You can say, ‘OK, at least there’s one element of this day I’m looking forward to.’”
You can create your own version by sending a group email or posting on social media “and just saying, ‘Hey, is this day hard for anyone else? Want to help each other through it?’” she said.
On a sensitive holiday, you can — and likely will — feel multiple emotions, Ms. Bidwell Smith said. “You can celebrate and feel joyful, but you can also feel angry, hurt, grieving, betrayed. You don’t just have to pick one. Let yourself feel all of it.”
Know also that you won’t necessarily feel the same way from year to year. “It’s trite to say, but it gets better,” Mr. James said. “It may not go away, but you learn to see these days coming.”
One Father’s Day, during their struggle with infertility, Mr. Davis’s wife gave him a token of hope: a pair of Star Wars socks that said “Best Dad in the Galaxy.”
This year, he gets to wear them on his first Father’s Day as a dad. The couple welcomed their adopted daughter, Ella, last month — and she was born on Mother’s Day.
The complicated days we dread “can feel like checkpoints, like ‘Oh, another year is here,’” said Mr. Chum. “Instead, reframe them as a chance to look back and think, ‘Wow, how far I’ve come since this day last year.’”
Holly Burns is a writer in the San Francisco Bay Area and a frequent contributor to The New York Times.
Advertisement
