Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Sun 5 Jun 2022, 9:01 AM The Dubai Criminal Court has sentenced a 43-year-old driver to life imprisonment for raping a 28-year-old African girl in a company vehicle. According to the investigation report, the driver deceived her by driving her to Al Ain city in his company's vehicle. According to case details, an African girl filed a police report stating that she had been sexually assaulted by an Asian driver after offering her a lift. Recounting the incident, she said that she wanted to go to Al Ain early morning that day, so she reached a public road to find a way to get there. The girl added that while she was waiting for a transport, a pickup driver stopped and inquired about who she waiting for on the roadside and where she wanted to go. The driver offered to take her to Al Ain after she told him about her plan, which she accepted. She added that she was surprised as the driver stopped on the side of the road -- after -- a few kilometres -- and asked her for a sexual favour, taking advantage of the empty road. After the driver sexually assaulted her, the girl managed to escape after she asked for some water and he opened the vehicle's door, giving her the opportunity to get out the pickup and run to the opposite side of the road for help. The victim stopped another vehicle and reported the incident to the police with the help of the female driver. According to a policeman's testimony, an investigation team was formed after the report, which managed to identify and arrest the suspect. ALSO READ: UAE new law: Life sentence for rape; can extend to death in case of minor victim The driver confessed to the crime during interrogations. He will be deported from the country after serving his sentence. Crime Group removed trackers from vehicles that belonged to businesses country-wide Crime1 week ago Crime RTA and police helped the man locate his bag and nab the accused Crime1 week ago Crime Officials also handled 201 cases of trafficking, promotion Crime1 week ago Crime The man was left permanently disabled after the accident Crime1 week ago Crime The campaign came as part of the police's efforts to enhance security Crime1 week ago Crime The accused also harassed a security guard Crime1 week ago Crime Authorities have launched awareness campaigns aimed at preventing crime Crime2 weeks ago Crime The boy was left in the care of a housemaid after his parents separated Crime2 weeks ago 