Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 11:40 PM Emirates Cricket Board has confirmed on Monday that the inaugural ILT20 League will be played between the window of January 6 to February 12 in 2023. The new League will be called “International League T20” or “ILT20”. India's Reliance Industries, Kolkata Knight Riders, Capri Global, GMR, Lancer Capital, Adani Sportsline have bought franchises in the new league. Sheikh Nahyan bin Mubarak Al Nahyan, Minister of Tolerance and Coexistence and Chairman of the Emirates Cricket Board, said the new league will help the sport flourish in the country. “Emirates Cricket Board is delighted to welcome Reliance Industries, Kolkata Knight Riders, Capri Global, GMR, Lancer Capital, Adani Sportsline, broadcaster ZEE and all other stakeholders to the newly established T20 League of UAE. Such illustrious, experienced names and entites as partners bodes well for the UAE T20 League. Through the commitment of these partners they have demonstrated confidence in the Emirates Cricket Board as we take the game into the future," Sheikh Nahyan said. “As we begin this long journey I am confident that together we will achieve new heights and in the process provide entertainment and excitement to the millions of fans around the globe who are waiting for the first ball of the  UAE T20 League to be bowled. “On behalf of ECB let me assure everyone that whilst being entertained on field with cricket, you will also be entertained by our traditional UAE hospitality off the field.” The six-team franchise-style League will be played over a 34-match schedule at the world-class venues of UAE. The tournament will also provide a valuable platform for Emirates Cricket to take developing their local talent to a higher level, where UAE-based players currently integrated in the Board’s program, as well as those identified by the High Performance Coaching and Selection Committee teams, will be given the opportunity to train and play alongside some of the world’s best players. Khalid Al Zarooni, Chairman, ILT20 said, “Emirates Cricket, and the UAE, have a proven history of identifying and embracing initiatives that underpin the success of the game. It is vitally important, that through this tournament UAE-based players continue to flourish which is one of the objective of this League. “We look forward to introducing to the world a T20 event that will provide unmatched competition and entertainment to the ardent followers of this game.” Dr. Tayeb Kamali, Chairman, Selection Committee - Emirates Cricket Board, said: “The annual ILT20 event presents an excellent exposure for our players given the highly intense and competitive nature of the league. Each of the six teams in the 34-match tournament provide a wonderful opportunity for our young cricketers to play competitive cricket with world-class players.” “Further, such a unique international league would play a big role in attracting and nurturing a larger pool of players who will go on to represent the UAE in the years to come. We look forward to the inaugural  event  and our players taking full advantage of the opportunity.” Cricket The most promising players received rewards after the intense and action-packed three days Cricket6 days ago Cricket Critics have questioned Pant's place in the Indian T20 team, four months ahead of the World Cup in Australia  Cricket6 days ago Cricket India reached 28 for two in 3.3 overs after being put into bat when a second rain interruption forced players off the field at the M. Chinnaswamy Stadium Cricket1 week ago Cricket Nissanka hits brilliant century as Sri Lanka beat Australia to take 2-1 lead in five-match ODI series  Cricket1 week ago Cricket The touring side won the first two matches before India bounced back to level the series at 2-2 to send the series to an effective final on Sunday Cricket1 week ago Cricket England trail New Zealand by 80 runs at stumps on Day Three Cricket2 weeks ago Cricket The win gives Pakistan 30 invaluable points in the ODI Super League, a qualification round for next year's World Cup in India Cricket2 weeks ago Cricket The wicketkeeper-batsman made 81 off 46 balls as the Proteas won the second T20I by four wickets  Cricket2 weeks ago 