Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Fri 3 Jun 2022, 11:31 AM Last updated: Fri 3 Jun 2022, 10:26 PM Mohammed Hanif Sikder, a Bangladeshi expat working as a taxi driver, survived a massive heart attack. On April 14, he was rushed to Aster Hospital in an ambulance after he suffered the attack around midnight. "I was sleeping in my room in Bur Dubai after my daily work. I experienced mild pain in my chest to which I woke up, drank water. I knew I was not well. But I could not understand what was happening to me,” he said. “After some time, the pain intensified. I quickly called my roommate. He was shocked to see me drenched in sweat," Sikder added. The 45-year-old underwent a series of tests that revealed multiple blocks in his left coronary artery which supplies blood and oxygen to the left side heart. Dr Naveed Ahmed, consultant cardiologist at Aster Hospital, Mankhool said that Sikder had a life-threatening condition. "The test results showed that he had multiple blocks ranging from 50-98 per cent in major arteries. His condition required an immediate procedure to clear the blockages and reinstate the blood flow into the heart,” Dr Ahmed said. Doctors informed him of the surgery and its complexities before operating. They successfully performed a minimally invasive procedure. ALSO READ: Dr Naveed said that Hanif's case establishes how critical hereditary risk factors are in developing cardiovascular diseases. "Hanif is the third in his immediate family to experience a heart attack. His father had succumbed to a heart attack years ago. His brother experienced the same a few years ago and is currently on medication," Earlier, he would experience difficulty with breathing after walking or any physical exertion. He has now resumed work. "I am good now. The doctor has asked me to stay physically engaged. So, I go for a walk in the morning and evening without any difficulty. I am grateful to the doctors and the medical team at the hospital for their exceptional care and treatment," Sikder said. Health The three-day Operation Smile UAE initiative will kick off on July 18  Health1 week ago Health Data can be used to create customised treatment plans and counselling for patients Health1 week ago Health While the lymphatic system is involved in several functions like regulating the immune system and transportation of fats, one primary function is detoxification Health1 week ago Health Her intestines were contorted, circling in loops and obstructing blood supply Health1 week ago Health Programme includes a variety of packages designed for individuals aged 18 years and above Health1 week ago Health This level of warning currently applies only to Covid-19 and polio Health1 week ago Health Sreevas suffered from critical condition pancytopenia with rare blood type Health1 week ago Health The disorder causes either temporary or permanent patchy hair loss that can affect any hair-bearing site of the body Health1 week ago 