Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Fri 3 Jun 2022, 11:20 AM Last updated: Fri 3 Jun 2022, 11:29 AM Vietnamese police have arrested a bear owner for the first time after netting a record haul of hundreds of bile bottles in Hanoi, a wildlife protection organisation said Friday. The communist country is a major hub for the illegal trade in wild animals and bears are kept to drain the bile from their gallbladders for use in traditional medicine. Authorities outlawed bile extraction in Vietnam in 2005, but bear farms were allowed to keep the animals they already had. Those convicted of extracting the bile can face prison sentences of up to five years. Hanoi police arrested a man from suburban Phuc Tho district, a prime location for bear farms, while he was carrying 350 bottles of bile fluid late last week. It’s believed to be Vietnam’s biggest ever seizure of bear bile, the Education for Nature from Hanoi said. “This is the first time a bear owner in Hanoi has been arrested and examined for criminal responsibility for the illegal transport and trade of bear bile,” Education for Nature deputy head Bui Thi Ha said in a statement. ALSO READ: The organisation said there were close to 150 caged bears kept at properties in Hanoi which represented half the total nationwide. The arrested man owned seven bears and was caught transporting the bottles in his car but it is not clear where the bear bile was destined. Vietnamese and Chinese believe bear bile can be used as a cure for bruises, cancer or prolonging longevity. Offbeat No priest was present to solemnise Kshama Bindu's wedding Offbeat2 weeks ago Offbeat The courtroom will need to be closed for fumigation after the incident Offbeat2 weeks ago Offbeat The cash was stuffed in envelopes inside a couch cushion Offbeat2 weeks ago Offbeat The slang word mixes 'ojisan', which means 'old men' in Japanese, and 'kyun”, meaning 'heart-throb' Offbeat3 weeks ago Offbeat The buyer says she plans to keep the farmhouse from the iconic horror movie open to the public Offbeat4 weeks ago Offbeat Jyoti Amge has a form of dwarfism called achondroplasia and will never grow beyond a certain height Offbeat1 month ago Offbeat Donald even has his portrait hung on the wall of his local McDonald’s Offbeat1 month ago Offbeat The 24-year-old told police he had gambled the money away at online casinos  Offbeat1 month ago 