Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Sun 5 Jun 2022, 8:22 PM Rafael Nadal pulled away to beat Casper Ruud 6-3, 6-3, 6-0 in the French Open final on Sunday for his 14th championship at Roland Garros and 22nd Grand Slam title overall, adding to two records he already owned. Nadal’s victory came two days after his 36th birthday and made him the oldest title winner in the history of the clay-court tournament. Ruud led 3-1 in the second set, a deficit that spurred Nadal to raise his level — he took the last 11 games. The Spaniard’s first triumph in Paris came in 2005 at age 19. No man or woman ever has won the singles trophy at any major event more than his 14 in Paris. And no man has won more Grand Slam titles than Nadal. He now is two ahead of rivals Roger Federer, who hasn’t played in almost a year after a series of knee operations, and Novak Djokovic, who missed the Australian Open in January because he is not vaccinated against Covid-19 and lost to Nadal at Roland Garros. Given his age, and, of more concern, the chronic pain in his left foot that has been an off-and-on problem for years, Nadal has said repeatedly in recent days that he can never be sure whether each match at Court Philippe Chatrier might be his last. Doesn’t really seem much reason to quit now, though, considering that he navigated his way past four French Open opponents ranked in the top 10 (No. 9 Felix Auger-Aliassime in the fourth round, No. 1 Djokovic in the quarterfinals, No. 3 Alexander Zverev — who stopped because of a foot injury — in the semifinals, and then No. 8 Ruud). Tennis I played with no feeling in the foot, with a foot asleep because of the anaesthetic injections into the nerve, Nadal said after winning the French Open  Tennis2 weeks ago Tennis I will ask myself if I am ready to do a major surgery which may not guarantee I will be competitive, he said after winnings his 14th French Open Tennis3 weeks ago Tennis Alexander Zverev had to pull out of the French Open semifinal mid-match after the injury Tennis3 weeks ago Tennis The 2020 Roland Garros champion faces Russian Daria Kasatkina in the semifinal on Thursday Tennis3 weeks ago Tennis 'Djokovic is one of the best players in history. Playing against him is always a big challenge' Tennis3 weeks ago Tennis Nadal puts his record of 109 wins and just three losses in Paris on the line against the defending champion in the quarterfinal  Tennis3 weeks ago Tennis It's the first since 1994 that two teenagers — Rune and Alcaraz — have reached the quarterfinal stage of a Grand Slam Tennis3 weeks ago Tennis The two champions will meet for the 10th time at Roland Garros and 59th time overall in a rivalry stretching back to 2006 Tennis4 weeks ago 