Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Partner Content By KT Engage 

 Published: Wed 1 Jun 2022, 9:58 AM Last updated: Wed 1 Jun 2022, 9:59 AM After a busy day of life, the task of what to cook can be overwhelming. And whilst ordering in is the easy option, it can be tricky when you want healthier options. On days like these, wouldn't it be great to have a personal Chef in your kitchen? FreshToHome has just the solution for you! With perfectly spiced and seasoned meats, flavourful dishes from around the world and taste-tested by our consumer panel, our dishes are authentic and taste "just like homemade". Our range is mouth-watering and will also save you from spending hours in the kitchen & shopping for ingredients. Our chefs add top-quality spices, seasonings, and ingredients to re-create your favourite meals to cook at home using our chemical and preservative-free meats. Our quality control team of customers, food technologist and nutritionist also check that our products are free from harmful ingredients, colours and additives. There are no shortcuts here, except convenience for our customers! FreshToHome's Ready-To-Cook range is: Try our Healthy Meal Challenge, using FreshToHome's Ready-To-Cook range. Meals are ready to eat in around 20 mins and serve 4. MONDAY Enjoy a falafel & pomegranate salad. Suitable for vegans and leftovers make the perfect lunch option. Shopping List: Get Cooking: TUESDAY: Take a trip around the world with our Prawn Trio. Savour the flavours of Spain with our sundried tomato and olive Prawn Gambas, spicy chilli, turmeric and garlic Tiger Prawn Skewers and enjoy traditional tandoori Prawn Skewers with cauliflower rice. Shopping List: Directions: WEDNESDAY: The week is halfway done and we're counting down to the weekend! Choose succulent chicken breast with some sweet potato wedges and fresh crunchy beans. Shopping List:  Directions: THURSDAY: Today's menu is Grilled Seabream with Stir-fry Veggies With a light texture, this fish has been marinated with clean ingredients like ginger, garlic, and lemon juice. Shopping List: Directions:  FRIDAY: The weekend is here! Serve a side of Nachos and a batch of Bun-less Burgers – delicious but still healthy! Shopping List:  Directions:  FreshToHome's Seafood is fresh from the coast and carefully tested to ensure it has no preservatives or chemicals added at any point in the process. As a company, our promise is 100% FRESH, 100% Natural and 100% No Shortcuts. If it isn't fresh, it isn't FreshToHome! With simple, no-fuss ideas from our Ready To Cook range, you can choose healthy foods to make at home. Visit us at www.freshtohome.com and try our products today. So, what are you waiting for? Place your order, grab your chef’s hat and take the Ready To Cook challenge and enjoy! 