Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Tue 7 Jun 2022, 1:51 AM Last updated: Tue 7 Jun 2022, 7:58 AM A two-year-old boy fatally shot his father in an accident after finding a gun, and the boy’s mother is now facing criminal charges, authorities in Florida said on Monday. Reggie Mabry, 26, was fatally shot late last month while he was playing a video game. The gun was fired by his two-year-old son in the home Mabry, his wife Marie Ayala, and their three young children shared in metro Orlando, according to an Orange County Sheriff’s Office report. “The gun was not properly stored,” Orange County Sheriff John Mina said at a news conference. “In fact, it was easily accessible, even to a two-year-old, and the result is a tragedy that no one in this community can really comprehend.” Ayala, 28, was charged with manslaughter by culpable negligence, possession of a firearm by a convicted felon, possession of ammunition by a convicted felon and violation of probation, Mina said. Both Ayala and Mabry had been on probation for child neglect and narcotics possession. ALSO READ: Ayala remained in jail on no bond on Monday, according to an online jail record. Online court records showed she was being represented by the public defender’s office but no further details were provided. Ayala told detectives that her five-year-old son told her that his two-year-old brother had fired the gun, but the older brother couldn’t explain how his younger brother had gotten hold of the weapon, the arrest report said. The children weren’t harmed and have been placed in the custody of the Florida Department of Children and Families. The tragedy could have been prevented if the gun had been properly stored, the sheriff said. “Now these young children have effectively lost both of their parents,” Mina said. “And a young child has to live his life knowing he shot his father.” World Over 1,000 people have died in the quake, at least 10,000 homes have been destroyed World19 hours ago World Putin has, in the past, ridden a horse bare-chested, shot a tiger with a tranquillizer gun World20 hours ago World Some stuck under rubble as rockets hit residential building, kindergarten World20 hours ago World Biden had signed an order in February to free $7 billion in frozen Afghan assets World23 hours ago World Bodies, some possibly as young as 15, were strewn across the floor with no visible injuries World1 day ago World Moscow officials say several hundred people could still be in Azot World1 day ago World Four explosions heard in capital city at around 6.30am local time World1 day ago World Baby among youngest victims of gun violence in Chicago World1 day ago 