I couldn’t imagine myself outside of cartoonish stereotypes like Apu from the Simpsons and Sacha Baron Cohen’s Borat
When Rami Malek speaks Arabic, he searches frantically for words. He speaks like an eight-year-old trying to repair the root of a dying tree. He speaks like a cellphone losing signal in a long tunnel. He speaks like me.
I started watching Mr Robot by mistake. Back in 2017, it was an obscure niche show on a network no one had ever heard of. It was weird and punk and anti-capitalist before TikTok had turned all the Zoomers into Marxists. It seemed too good to be true; a high-budget production in the aftermath of the Arab spring and Occupy Wall Street, proselytising about toxic consumerism and toxic masculinity, preaching to a choir of disillusioned millennials whose future was stolen by their property investor parents who pulled up the ladder before any of them had a chance to dream. It was a show about loneliness and mental illness and drug dependency, years before the glossy hedonism of Euphoria, but retaining a beating sincerity that was intoxicating and wounded.
It was only a matter of time before kids on the internet ripped Elliot’s monologue from the pilot episode about how capitalism destroyed every genuine notion we still held on to, and how America was an empire built on lies and the bones of third-world children. Then the rest of us started paying attention.
The show’s attitudes were all due to the understated genius of Sam Esmail, an Egyptian-American kid from the suburban ghetto of New Jersey, who had dreamt the full world of Mr Robot in its absolute form and pitched the show as a contained five-season arc. There was not a note out of place.
Sam was the nerdy perfectionist maestro the internet had been waiting for. But it was Rami Malek’s heart-wrenching introversion that grounded the show’s daring premise.
I never noticed just how Egyptian he looked until I saw his twin brother, slightly chubbier and unshaven, standing next to him outside the Oscars. Rami was just a cleaned-up version of a makwagy (the man who irons your clothes for you for a couple of pounds, usually on an ironing board outside your apartment block, then brings it up to you at the end of the weekend), with all the intensity of an Egyptian and the quiet of a first-gen immigrant kid thrown into the jaws of primary- school social life with no grasp of English. Yes, I’m projecting, and yes, that’s the point. It hurts to finally find representation on screen in your late twenties.
I didn’t have an Elliot when I was tumbling through high school. I had Osama bin Laden and the obnoxious and hairy tour guide from the first Mummy film played by Persian-British actor Omid Djalili. I rewatched it again recently and was aghast at the nonchalance of its racism. How was this normal for us growing up? How did we not flinch at the cheap jokes, the sea of robed and dusty Arab farmers yelling nonsensically, frothing at the mouth for blood? This is all I had growing up, and I often wonder what damage it did to my self-esteem, to the potential I saw for myself in the world.
Who could I become if I couldn’t imagine myself outside these cartoonish stereotypes?
For Malek, it took years of playing background White-passing characters in sitcoms and indie films. His most prominent role before then was as Ahkmenrah in Night at the Museum. At least he was Egyptian, right?
But then he was sidelined in the sequel in favour of cultural chameleon and Brown-whisperer Hank Azaria, who spent decades defending his obscene and lazy role as Apu from The Simpsons. He helped introduce high-school bullies everywhere to a cheap foreign accent they could imitate for guaranteed laughs at the expense of the poor foreign kid at the back of the class. Soon he was joined by Sacha Baron Cohen’s Borat, a caricature which somehow lives on as a respected and canonised example of comic genius and not a profoundly racist lowbrow punch-down. Cohen has carved his entire career on such gags, from his one-dimensional faux satirical appropriation of Black culture in Ali G, to his exhausting and redundant piss-take of the Arab world in The Dictator. All his material recycles familiar and tired stereotypes, which he lathers over his skin and dances, plucking cheap laughs at the expense of cultures that never feature in his films or speak with any agency.
I watched the Borat sequel with squinted eyes, trying to figure out why a film like this could still be celebrated. Maybe there was some hidden layer that I couldn’t grasp. An inside joke that everyone else was getting but me. But I could not find it. And yet Cohen has been lauded as an intellectual for shedding light on western antisemitism and homophobia, despite dragging other silenced people through the mud to do it. His films allow us to laugh at racist jokes the way we secretly want to, without feeling guilty. We feel superior to the dumb White Americans he fools into exposing their prejudices, while never being challenged about our own.
The problematic conversation around diversity and representation in film was summed up in a viral interview clip between Matt Damon and Effie Brown from 2015, in which Damon pushed back against the notion that power in Hollywood is concentrated in the hands of White directors, writers and producers, saying that because there were now plenty of actors of colour on screen, it wasn’t necessary also to have people behind the camera who weren’t White. It was easy for celebrities to champion inclusion, but when their own privileges were highlighted, many of them got defensive.
When Ridley Scott picked an all-White cast in his interpretation of the biblical story of Moses in Exodus: Gods and Kings, he justified it by saying there was no way he could finance a film by casting “Mohamed so-and-so”, and that those complaining should “get a life”. Christian Bale played Moses – opposite Joel Edgerton in a tan as the pharaoh and Sigourney Weaver as the pharaoh’s wife. When he was asked why a film that takes place in Egypt failed to employ anyone of Egyptian, north African or Arab descent, he responded: ‘If people start supporting those films … then financiers in the market will follow.’
Media mogul Rupert Murdoch jumped in: ‘Since when are Egyptians not White? All I know are.’
Despite the rich history of film in Egypt, which served for almost a century as the cultural and entertainment heart of the Middle East, it was too inconvenient to hire Egyptian actors to play main roles, or any role for that matter, in a story ultimately about Egyptian history and mythology. A few years later, Israeli actor and former IDF soldier Gal Gadot was announced in a starring role in an upcoming adaptation of Cleopatra. It was billed as a “feminist film”, told from the perspective of the ignored female voice in historical narrative. Without a hint of irony, my own people’s history was sidelined once again. Another group of White producers frolicking through other people’s cultures, clipping flowers from the shrub, and leaving the roots to rot.
Am I bitter? You bet. Am I surprised? Nope.
This is an edited extract from How to be a Bad Muslim and Other Essays by Mohamed Hassan (Penguin, NZ$35.00)
