Charges against former film producer relate to alleged assault in London in 1996, CPS says
Harvey Weinstein will face two charges of indecent assault allegedly committed against a woman in London in 1996, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) has announced.
After a review of evidence gathered by the Metropolitan police, the CPS gave the force the green light to charge the former Hollywood film producer on Wednesday.
Rosemary Ainslie, the head of the CPS special crime division, said: “The CPS has authorised the Metropolitan police to charge Harvey Weinstein with two counts of indecent assault against a woman in August 1996.
“Charges have been authorised against Harvey Weinstein, 70, following a review of the evidence gathered by the Metropolitan police in its investigation.
“The Crown Prosecution Service reminds all concerned that criminal proceedings against the defendant are active and that he has the right to a fair trial.”
The Met said the two alleged offences took place between 31 July and 31 August 1996 and that the alleged victim is a woman, now in her 50s.
It is not yet clear what the route to Weinstein being extradited and standing trial in a UK criminal court would be.
Weinstein founded the California-based independent film distribution and production company Miramax – combining the names of his parents Miriam and Max – with his brother Bob in 1979. The company was behind some of the biggest blockbusters of all time.
Miramax has been largely credited with the birth of the art house film boom and – with the release of Steven Soderbergh’s Sex, Lies, and Videotape in 1989 – it became the most successful independent studio in the US.
In June 1993, Miramax was bought by the Walt Disney Company in a deal that allowed the brothers to stay on in creative roles.
The director Quentin Tarantino’s cult classic movie Pulp Fiction, which was backed by Miramax, came out a year later. It made over $213m (£170m) at the worldwide box office on a budget of only $8m and went on to be awarded the Palme d’Or award at the Cannes film festival.
In 1997, The English Patient landed Miramax its first Academy Award for best picture. Two years later, Shakespeare in Love won seven Oscars, including a best actress award for Gwyneth Paltrow.
However, Weinstein developed a reputation as being difficult to work with and, after a string of successes, he hit a rough patch in 2005. Disney parted ways with the Weinstein brothers that year after disputes about budget and creative control.
The pair launched the Weinstein Company but the newly formed independent studio struggled initially to repeat their earlier successes. The Weinsteins attempted to regain control of Miramax in 2010 but failed.
By 2011, Weinstein was enjoying success and critical acclaim once again when The King’s Speech was nominated for a dozen Oscars and awarded best picture.
The following year he won several Golden Globe awards for films including My Week with Marilyn, Iron Lady, and The Artist, which would also go on to win best picture at the Oscars.
