
Sign In


            Its policies are not an accident, but meant to transition our country to socialism
Manage Newsletters
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Kavanaugh’s Democratic assassins
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Jim Crow
OPINION:
You can’t make fundamental change to a prosperous nation. That’s why Democrats are purposefully trying to destroy our country as we know it in their quest to change America into the world’s next failed socialist state. From the open borders disaster, the defund police violent crime spike, critical race theory, choking off domestic energy production, to trillions upon trillions in wasteful spending — none of it’s a mistake. In fact, it’s all part of the left’s grand plan.
And as President Biden and the Democrats’ irresponsible, anti-American policies create one crisis after the next for hardworking American families to deal with, they’re also busy breaking our institutions in Washington.
Look no further than the U.S. House Jan. 6 select committee’s abuses of power. Speaker Nancy Pelosi created a taxpayer-funded anti-Trump political committee that doesn’t reflect the will of the people for the first time in history.  
The committee consists of seven Democrats and two anti-Trump Republicans. It’s simply a matter of common sense to understand why this sideshow should have never been allowed to move forward, but the mainstream media and the Washington establishment turned a blind eye because the target is former President Donald Trump, the ultimate political outsider. And by now we’re all keenly aware that when dealing with Mr. Trump, the elites have decided that rules, precedent and the rule of law are no longer paramount.  
In a recent hearing in federal court, former Trump adviser Steve Bannon’s lawyers argued that his criminal contempt case should be thrown out because the Jan. 6 committee has broken House rules, destroyed over 200 years of precedent and is invalid. Judge Carl Nichols ruled against Mr. Bannon stating that the committee is valid because the full House voted in support of its contempt findings and therefore legitimized them. This is not an insignificant ruling. Going forward, lopsided committees can be formed and contempt votes can be the order of the day — as long as the party in power approves them by a simple majority on the floor of the U.S. House.   
Now that these new Pelosi rules are in effect and being enforced, House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy, who is in line to be the next speaker of the House when Republicans take control next year, should announce his intent to form a select committee on Biden family corruption, made up of nine Republicans and zero Democrats, and equipped with full subpoena, deposition and contempt authority as a matter of precedent. And when the first subpoenas land on Mr. Biden’s doorstep at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave., there is no executive privilege anymore — thanks to Mr. Biden.
When House Republicans held Obama Attorney General Eric Holder and former IRS official Lois Lerner in contempt of Congress not so long ago, no one ever really thought that the Justice Department would mount prosecutions and they were right. But if you’re a Trump associate like Peter Navarro and you don’t comply with a legally questionable Jan. 6 committee subpoena, get ready for leg shackles.
Will this heavy-handed treatment extend to Biden confidants, advisers and Cabinet members next year when the roles are reversed? I think we all know the answer to that question.
Congress isn’t the only institution that’s under attack by the radical Democrats. Across the street at the Supreme Court, justices’ lives are literally at risk over a pending decision that will likely overturn the disastrous Roe v. Wade abortion decision. Mr. Biden not speaking out against the plot to assassinate Associate Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh is dangerous and the left’s nonchalant attitude toward mobs gathering outside the homes of justices is disgusting. 
Meanwhile, the Jan. 6 committee is now targeting Ginni Thomas, the wife of Associate Justice Clarence Thomas, over her concern that the 2020 presidential election was rigged. This is nothing more than a shameful political tactic to pressure Justice Thomas to recuse himself from any Jan. 6-related cases in the future. Obviously, Justice Thomas should reject this unserious attack on his integrity.   To be sure, the anti-Trump Jan. 6 committee is all political, all the time. They’re misusing millions upon millions in taxpayer dollars in pursuit of their ultimate goal to deny Mr. Trump another run for the White House in 2024. But because it’s all political, cracks in the dam are starting to surface.
When Democrat Committee Chair Bennie Thompson recently announced that there would be no criminal referral of Mr. Trump, he did so because the Democrats must have data suggesting that move would have a negative impact on their core mission to remain in control of Congress. RINO anti-Trump committee Vice Chair Rep. Liz Cheney was quick to contradict Thompson — a remarkable sight — saying that no decision had been made about a potential Trump referral. This rift occurred because Thompson and Cheney have different political goals; Thompson wants to keep the House under Democrat control and Ms. Cheney wants to destroy Mr. Trump by any means necessary so she can run for president without him dominating the field.
As the do-nothing Jan. 6 committee hearings come and go, one thing remains clear. The flashy prime-time shows of rehashed news provided nothing for the American people except one brutal takeaway. The Democrat-controlled Congress — with the help of Ms. Cheney — would rather continue their yearslong war against Mr. Trump instead of starting a much-needed war on inflation. They have chosen poorly.
• David N. Bossie is president of Citizens United and served as deputy campaign manager for Donald J. Trump for President.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
                          Click
                            here for reprint permission.
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
