
Sign In


            One Democrat, Maine's Jared Golden, broke ranks to vote with Republicans in opposition
Manage Newsletters
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Kavanaugh’s Democratic assassins
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Five House Republicans broke ranks on Thursday and stared down the gun lobby by backing a Democratic-led effort to create a national “red flag” law. 
In a 224 to 202 vote, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi secured passage of the Federal Extreme Risk Protection Order Act. The legislation allows courts to issue extreme risk protection orders that ban individuals deemed dangerous from purchasing or possessing firearms.
“It’s not the video games. It’s not more people with violent tendencies. It’s the all-too-easy access to guns in America that makes firearms the number one cause of death for our children over age one,” said Mrs. Pelosi, California Democrat. “And it’s got to stop. “
The vote splintered Democrats and Republicans. Overall, five House Republicans backed the red flag bill, while one Democrat — Rep. Jared Golden of Maine — opposed it. 
GOP supporters of the bill included Reps. Brian Fitzpatrick of Pennsylvania, Anthony Gonzalez of Ohio, Chris Jacobs of New York, Adam Kinzinger of Illinois and Fred Upton of Michigan.  
Mr. Jacobs last week announced he would not seek reelection after suffering fierce GOP backlash for pledging to support gun control laws.


  
  
    SEE ALSO: Pelosi refuses to say if she’ll support a bipartisan Senate gun deal
  
  
Apart from allowing courts to confiscate guns from citizens who are deemed a threat, the bill also would incentivize states to adopt their own red flag laws. 
The bill was authored by Rep. Lucy McBath, a Georgia Democrat who is no stranger to gun violence. Her son was shot and killed in 2012 while sitting in the back seat of a friend’s car at a gas station.
“Today, we vote with the majority of the American people behind us,” Mrs. McBath said Thursday. “We vote to empower loved ones and law enforcement to help prevent mass shootings.” 
The legislation was opposed by gun rights groups that argued that red flag laws infringe on the right to due process. The bill is expected to be a nonstarter in the Senate.
A bipartisan group of senators, meanwhile, are working on a gun deal that could survive the evenly split chamber. The talks center on more money for school security, incentives for states to adopt red flag laws and expanding the background check system to include youth felony records. 
GOP lawmakers involved in the negotiations have ruled out a federal red flag law, though some are open to incentivizing states to adopt their own. 
“I would not support a federal mandate for [a] red flag,” said Sen. Thom Tillis, North Carolina Republican. “I do believe you can create a framework that would encourage [state] legislatures to consider it.” 
The compromise might not be enough to assuage House Democrats.
Mrs. Pelosi refused to throw her support behind a bipartisan Senate deal automatically. She said her decision would be contingent upon the quality of the proposal.
“I do trust the fact that they are talking,” said Mrs. Pelosi. “But again, the expectation is obviously they’re not going to get [something close to what the House] would pass.” 
Mrs. Pelosi said that nothing had been decided, but her support for a bipartisan compromise would hinge on how close it resembled the bills passed by the House, including the national red flag mandate. 
“My point is we’re only making history today if we make progress on the legislation. This is a strong package,” she said. “If we get some of it, it will save lives.”
• Haris Alic can be reached at halic@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
                          Click
                            here for reprint permission.
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
