Advertisement
Supported by
On Tennis
Nadal extended his men’s singles record of 22 Grand Slam tournament titles with a win in straight sets over the eighth-seeded Casper Ruud.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Christopher Clarey
PARIS — He fooled us again, which is, in itself, quite a feat at this stage of the game.
Perhaps Rafael Nadal really means it when he downplays his chances at Roland Garros, and there was certainly no fakery involved last month when he limped and grimaced through the final set of an early-round defeat at the Italian Open and sounded particularly weary of the grind and the chronic pain in his left foot.
Nadal did indeed find himself in unfamiliar territory as he returned to his favorite stomping ground of Roland Garros. He was very short on clay-court matches and without any clay-court titles this season as the tournament began. Novak Djokovic appeared to be regathering momentum. Carlos Alcaraz, a young Spaniard, seemed to be rising like a rocket. Nadal said Sunday that just to be able to play the tournament, he needed painkilling injections before every round that left his foot numb, as if it had fallen asleep.
But there is no wake-up call quite like Parisian red clay for Nadal. And on Sunday, after working his way through the loaded top half of the draw, he was much too much, even at less than his best, for the No. 8 seed Casper Ruud in the French Open men’s final, winning 6-3, 6-3, 6-0 in a match that lasted 2 hours and 18 minutes.
The victory secured Nadal his 14th men’s singles title at the tournament, extending a French Open record that looks more unbeatable with every passing spring.
He also extended his lead in the three-way major titles race with Djokovic and Roger Federer. Nadal now has a men’s record 22 Grand Slam singles titles, two more than Djokovic, whom Nadal beat in the quarterfinals here, and Federer, who at age 40 is still recovering from his latest knee surgery.
Sunday’s triumph, with Billie Jean King and King Felipe VI of Spain in attendance, also made Nadal, at age 36, the oldest man to win the French Open, surpassing his Spanish compatriot Andrés Gimeno, who won the title in 1972 at age 34.
“I for sure never believed I would be here at 36 being competitive again, playing in the most important court of my career one more time in the final,” Nadal said. “It means a lot to me, means everything. It just means a lot of energy to try to keep going.”
Nadal’s tone of late has been valedictory: He has repeatedly referred to the possibility that he could be playing his final French Open. But after slamming the door on Ruud on Sunday and then hugging him at the net, Nadal made it clear that this was not going to be the tennis equivalent of a walk-off grand slam.
“I don’t know what can happen in the future but I’m going to keep fighting to try to keep going,” he said as the sellout crowd of 15,000, clearly well aware of the speculation, roared its approval. But there are no guarantees, as Nadal later made clear at a news conference as he explained that he did not intend to continue playing tournaments with regular painkilling injections or with a numb foot.
“Everybody knows how much this tournament means to me,” he said. “That was the only way to give myself a chance here, no? So I did it. And I can’t be happier and I can’t thank enough my doctor for all the things he did during all my tennis career, helping me in every tough moment. But it’s obvious that I can’t keep competing with the foot asleep.”
In search of a longer-term solution, Nadal said he would undergo a procedure later this week known as radio frequency ablation, in which radio waves will be sent through a hollow needle inserted into the nerves in his left foot that are causing his constant pain. If the procedure works, which is far from certain, the heat from the radio waves could prevent the nerves from sending pain signals to Nadal’s brain.
“If that works, I’m going to keep going; If that does not work, then it’s going to be another story,” said Nadal, who ruled out taking more painkilling injections to play Wimbledon, which begins in three weeks.
Nadal said if the treatment was ineffective, he would have to ask himself hard questions about his future in the game and whether he wanted to risk foot surgery, which he has been told could impact his mobility “to be competitive again” and could “take a long time” to recover from.
“So let’s do step by step, as I did all my tennis career,” he said of the decision-making process, declining to rule out playing at Wimbledon.
He certainly looked ready for more tennis against Ruud, picking up speed and precision as the match progressed. Nadal was not at his best early and was at times far from his top form, losing his serve in the third game with two double faults and an off-rhythm forehand unforced error into the middle of the net. But Ruud was also struggling to find his way, looking edgy and restricted on the pivotal points in the opening set and then getting outplayed on the pivotal points in the later stages after he had worked through his nerves.
Ruud’s one genuine surge came at the start of the second set. He broke Nadal’s serve again to take a 3-1 lead but at 30-30 in the next game, Ruud lined up an inside-out forehand and perhaps sensing that excellence was required, went for just too much and missed. Nadal broke him back on the next point and would not lose another game: reeling off 11 straight and finishing off the victory with a backhand down the line in the sunshine.
Nadal is in the midst of one of his most remarkable seasons, despite the chronic pain that left him so downbeat in Rome and required intensive treatment in Paris.
After missing nearly all of the second half of the 2021 season because of the foot problem — he has a condition known as Müller-Weiss syndrome — he roared back to win the Australian Open, rallying to defeat Daniil Medvedev in a five-set final in January.
He went on to start the season with 20 straight victories before losing in the final of the BNP Paribas Open in March to the American Taylor Fritz, in part because of a new injury: a stress fracture in his ribs. That forced Nadal to take a six-week break and miss most of the clay-court season before returning in Madrid last month having practiced very little.
He was beaten by Alcaraz in the quarterfinals and then beaten by Denis Shapovalov of Canada in the round of 16 in Rome. But Nadal arrived at Roland Garros with his fabulous memories and his longtime physician, Angel Ruiz-Cotorro, who was able to help Nadal manage the pain and a very rough draw.
Nadal had to defeat four of the top nine seeds: No. 9 Felix Auger-Aliassime, No. 1 Djokovic, No. 3 Alexander Zverev and finally No. 8 Ruud in what turned out to the most lopsided of all those matches.
Nadal has not only won 14 French Open singles titles, he has won all 14 of the singles finals he has played at Roland Garros.
So many records. So much enduring excellence, and Ruud, an affable 23-year-old Norwegian, certainly needed no reminder of his opponent’s achievements as he walked into the Philippe Chatrier Court as the first Norwegian man to play in a Grand Slam singles final.
Ruud, who broke into the top 10 last year, has had two main role models as he emerged from a nation whose athletes are better known for excelling on snow than on clay. There was his father, Christian, who coached him and was a tour-level player ranked as high as No. 39 in 1995. And there was Nadal, with his extreme topspin forehand and hard-wired combativeness. Ruud began training regularly with his team at Nadal’s tennis academy in Majorca, Spain, in 2018 and even played — and lost — practice sets against Nadal.
He also has played golf with Nadal, thinking he was in for a relaxed experience only to discover that Nadal’s competitive streak was not restricted to the tennis court.
But Sunday was Ruud’s first chance to face Nadal on tour.
“To play Rafa in a Roland Garros final is probably the greatest challenge there is in this sport,” Ruud said.
That was before the final, and on Sunday afternoon after it was over in a hurry and a flurry of Nadal winners down the stretch, Ruud said he now knew “for sure” that it was the greatest challenge.
“It’s not easy, I’m not the first victim,” Ruud said to Nadal at the award ceremony. “I know that there have been many before.”
And not to get fooled again, but it will be intriguing to see, in light of Nadal’s age, health and increasingly nostalgic mood, whether Ruud will turn out to be the last.
 
Advertisement
