More than 75% of New Yorkers are at least somewhat concerned they will fall victim to violent crime, according to a survey released Tuesday, a sky-high figure showing a city put on edge by wild shootings, random robberies and subway carnage five months into Mayor Adams’ administration.
In the survey, 38% of respondents said they were somewhat concerned they would become a victim of a violent crime, and another 38% said they were highly concerned about the possibility.
The data points emerged in a Spectrum News/Siena College poll, conducted by phone during the last two weeks of May, that also found some 70% of New York City residents say they feel less safe than they did before the pandemic. Only 25% of New Yorkers reported an unchanged sense of security.
The survey’s publication arrived hours after a Brooklyn MTA bus driver was stabbed in the stomach by a passenger who forced his way onboard between stops, two days after a 52-year-old woman was randomly thrown onto subway tracks at a station in the Bronx, and less than two months after the smoky subway shooting in Brooklyn’s Sunset Park rattled the five boroughs.
New York City Mayor Eric Adams at the Fulton Street Train Station on Thursday, January 6, 2022, in lower Manhattan, New York. (Theodore Parisienne) (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
Police Department statistics suggest City Hall may be making inroads in its fight against gun violence. But violent crime rates across the board — from rape to robbery — have flared higher, according to police data, and some New Yorkers cannot help but wonder if they will be the next victim.
“I remember the ‘80s, and it’s starting to feel a little like that again,” said Daniel Glover, 47, of Washington Heights. “Like a sense that anything can happen.”
Adams, a former police captain who has made crime the central focus of his mayoralty, scored mixed reviews in the Siena poll. Twenty-nine percent of New Yorkers said Adams was doing a good or excellent job as mayor, and 64% said his performance was fair or poor.
And though 53% of respondents said they approved of the mayor’s style, 74% said his administration was doing a fair or poor job preventing crime. More than half said the city was headed in the wrong direction.
“New Yorkers are saying to him, ‘We’d like you to do a better job. Make me feel safer,’ ” said Don Levy, director of the Siena College Research Institute. “It is a challenging time to be a resident, and clearly it’s a challenging time to be the mayor.”
In the first five months of the year, burglaries were up 32%, robberies spiked 39% and hate crimes climbed 13% compared with the same point in 2021, according to the latest data from the NYPD.
Still, shooting incidents were down 10% so far this year, according to police records, and murders had dropped 9%. Those numbers come as welcome news for Adams, who has deployed controversial new anti-gun units.
[ Brooklyn MTA bus driver stabbed in clash with passenger who forced his way on board between stops ]
Responding to the poll, Adams said with a chuckle on Tuesday that a “C is not an A. But a C is not an F.”
“I think New Yorkers are saying, ‘We’re not going to say he’s bad — we’re going to say, Let’s see him do his job, because the guy has only been there six months, and he has already started to produce the product that we need,’ ” Adams told reporters in lower Manhattan.
“New Yorkers are hard judges and graders. We all know that,” he added.
Richard Aborn, president of the nonprofit Citizens Crime Commission, lauded the NYPD’s work on firearms, and said the mayor was on his way to fulfilling a campaign pledge to take weapons off the streets.
“Adams said he was going to be all over the gun issue, and he’s been true to that word,” Aborn said. But he added, “Robberies tend to be a random crime, and that’s scaring people — robbery is a very unsettling event.”
Compared with bloodier eras in New York City history, current crime rates are tame: the city is on pace to log less than one-fifth as many murders this year as it did in 1990. But historical comparisons offer cold comfort to anxious New York.
“I am scared to go on the trains,” said Edwin Carosco, a 38-year-old construction worker who lives in Middle Village, Queens. “I don’t feel safe. I don’t take the subway anymore.”
Charline Bossut, a cook who lives in Elmhurst, Queens, said bluntly, “I expect to be mugged.”
Charline Bossut (Emma Seiwell)
“I think public safety is getting worse,” said Bossut, 53. “I’m always aware.”
New Yorkers also appeared worried about targeted mass shootings after last month’s horrifying slaughters in Buffalo and Uvalde, Texas.
[ Woman, 52, shoved onto Bronx train tracks in caught-on-video attack ]
In the poll, almost 70% of New Yorkers said they were at least somewhat nervous that a gunman might target people in their neighborhood on the basis of their religion, race or ethnicity.
Last week, lawmakers in Albany rushed to toughen the state’s already muscular gun laws, passing a package of safety bills that Gov. Hochul signed Monday.
New York Governor Kathy Hochul signs new gun legislation into law, raising the age to purchase semi-automatic weapons to 21 as well as other measures to help stop gun violence in Bronx, New York on Monday, June 6, 2022. (Darren McGee / Office of the Governor)
Hochul fared slightly better than Adams in the Siena poll: 35% of respondents said she was doing a good or excellent job, and 54% said she was doing a fair or poor job. The governor said Tuesday that she understands the fears New Yorkers have about crime and that “there is more to do.”
In downtown Brooklyn, Sharon Fung said Tuesday that she was not “so worried” about crime, having grown up in the ‘70s, when the city was “a lot more crazy.”
“You just have to be street-smart, you just have to be a little bit aware,” said Fung, 60, a retired property manager who lives in Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn.
“If we’re all running scared,” she said, “our city will actually be worse.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
