Yoga balls — first called Swiss balls — were invented by Aquilino Cosani in 1963 to supplement gymnastic exercise. Today, they are used everywhere from yoga studios to physical therapists' offices. (BestReviews)
As we get older, stability in the center of our body becomes critical. The core muscles of the abdomen allow us to move about the world with ease, avoiding injury and the various aches and pains that can appear as we age. If hundreds of crunches or hours of planks don't sound appealing, you can up your workout by adding a yoga ball. These circular companions engage the deeper muscles of the body for exercises that can be less strenuous but still effective.
If you are looking for a durable, comfortable yoga ball, the Trideer Extra Thick Yoga Ball is a great option. With a little practice, it can even double as a chair.
Like yoga mats, yoga balls are another piece of equipment that provides support to your practice. Also known as stability or exercise balls, these come in different sizes. You should select a size based on your height.
The American Council on Exercise has the following height guidelines for selecting the correct size for you:
Most yoga balls are capable of holding an average-sized adult, but because you'll be moving around on the ball, weight capacity is measured differently. Simply holding 200 pounds is not enough. Look for yoga balls with a weight capacity of at least 500 pounds and up to 2,000 or more for really vigorous workouts.
Most yoga balls are made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC). Because PVC contains chlorine and phthalates, these may have an odor to them. If you prefer a more natural material, look for a rubber ball or one that is labeled as nontoxic. These may be less durable than PVC but are a good option if you are sensitive to chemicals.
Nothing ruins a relaxing session of yoga or a vigorous workout like a sudden pop that lands you on the ground. Look for yoga balls constructed using a honeycomb technique that increases their resistance to pressure and bursting.
Your stability ball won't be very stable if it's prone to sliding around as you rest your body weight on it. Some yoga balls feature a textured surface that grips onto the floor or your yoga mat, while others have ridges that stop the ball from rolling. If you find the ridges uncomfortable, stick with a textured surface.
Some yoga balls come with their own pump, while others are easily inflated with a bike pump or air compressor. Either way, you'll want a valve that accepts an inflation device as well as a stopper that prevents the ball from losing air when the device is detached.
Some yoga balls come with additional accessories for your workout, including:
The quality of the material, size of the ball and included accessories all affect the price. Expect to spend $13-$40.
A. When you first use your yoga ball, it will stretch and seem to deflate. This is normal. Inflate the ball and allow it to sit for a day or two. Then check the inflation and add air as needed.
Properly inflate your yoga ball by:
When you sit on your yoga ball, it will sink 2-3 inches. You want some give in the surface, but more than that means you’ll need to add air.
A. Yoga balls promote balance, increase flexibility and provide a full-body workout for both the smaller and larger muscles.
Try the following exercises:
Trideer Extra Thick Yoga Ball: available at Amazon 
Our take: In addition to its use as an accessory for exercise, this is sturdy and stable enough to double as a chair.
What we like: The construction is durable, and the honeycomb structure prevents bursting. It has a weight pressure capacity of 2,200 pounds. It's BPA-free. It comes in four colors and five sizes. It comes with a pump and other inflation tools.
What we dislike: The included pump does not work as well as it should.
GalSports Exercise Ball: available at Amazon 
Our take: This is an inexpensive option to see if a yoga ball works for you.
What we like: It is burst-resistant and made of nonslip, BPA-free material. The weight capacity is 2,000 pounds. It comes with a pump and is available in two colors and four sizes.
What we dislike: It has an exterior design that traps dirt, and some users found it was not as firm as other options.
UrbnFit Exercise Ball: available at Amazon 
Our take: This is a lightweight choice that gets the job done.
What we like: This has anti-burst, anti-slide material. It comes with a dual-action pump that inflates the ball quickly. It's available in 10 colors and five sizes.
What we dislike: It has the lowest weight capacity of any other option — just 600 pounds.
Sign up here to receive the BestReviews weekly newsletter for useful advice on new products and noteworthy deals.
Suzannah Kolbeck is a writer for BestReviews. BestReviews is a product review company with a singular mission: to help simplify your purchasing decisions and save you time and money.
BestReviews spends thousands of hours researching, analyzing and testing products to recommend the best picks for most consumers. BestReviews and its newspaper partners may earn a commission if you purchase a product through one of our links.
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
