Measure the dimensions of each desk drawer before you begin shopping for an organizer and keep these measurements handy while you browse. (BestReviews)
Most people have at least one “junk drawer” somewhere in their home that acts as overflow for miscellaneous items. That said, you don’t want your junk drawer to be one or more of the drawers in your desk. After all, your desk is meant to promote a sense of productivity and organization, which is why many choose an organizer for their desk drawers to prevent clutter.
If you're looking for a new organizer for your desk drawer, the Dotted Line Dylan Five-Piece Blended Wood Organizer Set is a perfect example. Together with the clean-lined design that supports easy removal and replacement of the boxes, this five-piece set is extremely helpful in achieving organization objectives.
Storage space needs aren’t one-size-fits-all. What one person considers sufficient storage space might seem like barely any to another person. This makes storage needs a very personal issue.
Take inventory of the items you use in your desk, from those you depend on daily to those that rarely leave the drawers. Once you’ve accounted for all items, think about how you prefer to group them together. For example, do you want to store paper clips in the same place as staples? Or do you prefer storing staples with your stapler? While these considerations may seem minor, they’ll make a big impact on how well the organizer for your desk drawer functions.
Similar to storage needs, the dimensions of desk drawers vary. They differ across not only multiple desks but also from drawer to drawer on the same desk. While you might be tempted to eyeball the interior of the drawers and make a guesstimate, doing so isn’t advisable. You could easily make an erroneous guess and wind up with a set that won’t fit in your drawers.
Instead, use a measuring tape to take the dimensions of each drawer. Do so before you begin shopping and keep these measurements handy while shopping. Compare the dimensions of your drawers to every desk drawer organizer you consider.
You might own a full set of permanent markers or none at all. Perhaps an electric stapler is imperative to your work or you can't get by without a calculator. Regardless, you should always account for the type of items you're storing. Doing so is important because the size and shape of the compartments in a desk drawer organizer must be suitable for your specific items. For example, you'll need at least one wide, square compartment for a calculator.
The vast majority of organizers for desk drawers are constructed of wood. From there, you’ll need to narrow down the material by the type of wood. Do you want yours to be made of 100% solid wood? Do you mind a natural-wood-and-manmade-wood blend? There are also different types of wood to consider. For example, bamboo is a great choice if you want an eco-friendly, strong wood that’ll look nice for years.
With regards to desk drawer organizers, storage capacity refers to not only the dimensions but also the number of pieces contained in the set. You’ll frequently see five-piece and six-piece organizers for desk drawers while shopping. However, while these options are widely available, they’re not the only ones. You might have to dig a bit deeper, but you absolutely can find sets with more or fewer pieces.
The dimensions of the storage space each box in the set provides are another consideration. If you need to store a large number of items in your desk drawers, it’s best to err on the side of caution and opt for more storage versus less.
Many organizers for desk drawers allow you to reconfigure the arrangement of the pieces. You can do so within the confines of the larger box. These sets give you a customized approach without the high cost of personalization.
In general, desk drawer organizers are relatively affordable. Well-made sets start around $25 and typically don’t cost more than $50 at the top end of the spectrum.
A. Treating the set well goes a long way in extending its longevity. Resist the urge to handle the pieces roughly, even if you're in a hurry or having a stressful day. Instead, handle them with care. You should also look into the gentlest type of cleaning products and tools for the material that composes the organizer. Wood in particular benefits from the application of appropriate cleaning agents.
A. You might notice, while shopping for a desk drawer organizer, some sets could easily fit items like silverware and even tools like screwdrivers. While you should always compare the dimensions of the drawer against those of the set, there's no reason why you can't repurpose a desk drawer organizer for use in the kitchen, bathroom or garage.
Dotted Line Dylan Five-Piece Blended Wood Organizer Set: available at Wayfair
Our take: Containing five organizer boxes in assorted sizes, this drawer organizer set is suitable for small, medium or large drawers.
What we like: The boxes in this set slide in and out easily due to the clean-lined design. Measuring two-and-one-half inches high by 15 inches wide by six inches in diameter, this set provides a solid amount of storage space. The blend of bamboo and manufactured wood makes it high quality yet affordable.
What we dislike: Durability was an issue for a couple of buyers, who reported the set fell apart after a short period of time.
Rebrilliant Five-Piece Bamboo Organizer Set: available at Wayfair
Our take: Constructed of renewable, eco-friendly and lovely 100% bamboo, this organizer set doesn't sacrifice quality despite its budget-friendly price point.
What we like: The pieces in this set are versatile enough to use together or separately in your desk drawers. You can fit everything from scissors to a calculator in the boxes, thanks to the differing sizes. The light-tone bamboo wood is both environmentally friendly and beautiful.
What we dislike: At least one buyer expressed that the organizer set was smaller than expected.
Millwood Pines Hardin Six-Piece Adjustable Drawer Organizer: available at Wayfair
Our take: The generous capacity of this drawer organizer, together with its ability to adjust, meets even the most pressing storage demands.
What we like: Generously sized at 2.6 inches high by 11 inches wide by 15 inches in diameter, this set won't leave you short on storage. It consists of six removable dividers ranging from short to tall. The set can expand up to 18 and three-fourths inches wide to perfectly fit the dimensions of your drawers.
What we dislike: Several buyers felt that quality control was an issue, citing damage upon arrival, splinters and rough edges.
Sign up here to receive the BestReviews weekly newsletter for useful advice on new products and noteworthy deals.
Megan Oster is a writer for BestReviews. BestReviews is a product review company with a singular mission: to help simplify your purchasing decisions and save you time and money.
BestReviews spends thousands of hours researching, analyzing and testing products to recommend the best picks for most consumers. BestReviews and its newspaper partners may earn a commission if you purchase a product through one of our links.
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
