Discovery
Adventure
Destinations
Collections
About us
50 Reasons to Love the World
Untold America
More
Coming to the end of a short, winding trail, I found myself standing in the extreme north-west corner of the contiguous US, a wild, forested realm where white-capped waves slam against the isolated Washington coast with a savage ferocity. Buttressed by vertiginous cliffs battling with the corrosive power of the Pacific, Cape Flattery has an elemental, edge-of-continent feel. No town adorns this stormy promontory. The nearest settlement, Neah Bay, sits eight miles away by road, a diminutive coast-hugging community that is home to the Makah, an indigenous tribe who have fished and thrived in this region for centuries.
The Makah are represented by the motif of a thunderbird perched atop a whale, and their story is closely linked to the sea.
"The Makah is the only tribe with explicit treaty rights to whale hunting in the US," explained Rebekah Monette, a tribal member and historic preservation programme manager. "Our expertise in whaling distinguished us from other tribes. It was very important culturally. In the stratification of Makah society, whaling was at the top of the hierarchy. Hunting had the capacity to supply food for a vast number of people and raw material for tools."
After reading recent news stories about the Makah's whaling rights and the impact of climate change on their traditional waters, I had come to their 27,000-acre reservation on Washington's Olympic Peninsula to learn more, by visiting a unique tribal museum that has just reopened after a two-year hiatus due to Covid-19.
The imposing statues outside the Makah Museum wear distinctive cedar-bark rain hats (Credit: Brendan Sainsbury)
Due to a trick of fate, Makah history is exceptionally well-documented. In contrast to other North American civilisations, a snapshot of their past was captured and preserved by a single cataclysmic episode. In 1970, a brutal Pacific storm uncovered part of an abandoned coastal Makah village called Ozette located 15 miles south of Cape Flattery. Part of the village had been buried by a mudslide that was possibly triggered by a dramatic seismic event around 1700, almost a century before the first European contact. Indeed, recent research argues that ancestors of the Makah – or related Wakashan speaking people – have been present in the area for at least 4,000 years, which, if proven, would change our understanding of prehistory in the Olympic Peninsula and Vancouver Island.
Miraculously, the mud had protected embedded organic matter by sealing it off from the air. As a result, thousands of well-preserved artefacts that would normally have rotted – from intact woven cedar baskets to dog-hair blankets and wooden storage boxes – were able to be painstakingly unearthed during a pioneering archaeological dig.
Due to the suddenness of the event and the exceptional levels of preservation, scientists hailed the find a "Western Pompeii" and the Washington Post called it "the most comprehensive collection of artefacts of a pre-European-contact Indian culture ever discovered in the United States".
Anxious the material might be engulfed by the sea and lost, the tribe called in Richard Daugherty, an influential archaeologist at Washington State University who'd been involved in fieldwork in the area since the 1940s. Having good connections with Congress, Daugherty helped secure federal funding for an exhaustive excavation.
Makan petroglyphs can still be seen at Wedding Rocks, just south of the Ozette archaeological site (Credit: Natalie Fobes/Getty Images)
"Dr Daugherty was instrumental in the excavation work," recounted Monette. "He was very progressive and interested in working alongside the tribe in the process. He worked to gain financing for 11 years."
The Ozette dig lasted from 1970 until 1981 and ultimately unearthed around 55,000 artefacts from six beachside cedar houses covered by the slide. The Makah, like many indigenous groups, have a strong oral tradition, with much of their history passed down through storytelling, song and dance. The evidence unearthed at Ozette affirmed these stories and added important details.
"It was a spectacular place to excavate; the preservation and richness was extraordinary," recalled archaeologist Gary Wessen, a former field director at the site who later wrote a PhD dissertation on the topic. "Ozette is what we call a primary deposition. We have all these materials preserved in the places where they were actually used. It helps tell us more about the social and spatial relationship of the people who lived in the houses."
While much of the material dated from around 1700, some of it was significantly older. Indeed, archaeologists ultimately determined that multiple mudslides had hit Ozette over a number of centuries. Beneath one of the houses, another layer of well-preserved material dated back 800 years. The oldest finds so far have been radiocarbon-dated to 2,000 years and there are middens in the area that are at least 4,000 years old, according to Wessen.
From the outset, the Ozette dig was different to other excavations. Tribal members worked alongside university students at the site, and, early on, it was decided that the unearthed material would stay on the reservation rather than be spirited off to distant universities or other non-indigenous institutions. In 1979, the tribe opened the Makah Cultural and Research Center in Neah Bay with a museum to house a "greatest hits" of the collection. The 500 pieces currently on display represent less than 1% of the overall find.
"The tribe was very assertive of their ownership and control of the collection," said Monette. "A lab was developed in Neah Bay. For the museum, we hired Jean Andre, the same exhibit designer as the Royal BC Museum in Victoria. We decided to tell our story seasonally with sections on spring, summer, fall and winter."
The museum includes a reconstruction of a wooden Makah house among hundreds of other artefacts (Credit: Brendan Sainsbury)
The result, which has only recently reopened, is a beautifully curated space. Outside on a verdant lawn, I was welcomed by a reconstruction of a traditional wooden Makah house and two large statues wearing distinctive cedar-bark rain hats. Inside, where I met Monette, the assembled exhibits left no doubt about the tribe's maritime prowess. I saw 13ft whaling harpoons, wooden paddles and seal skin buoys. A large central space was taken up with two red cedar canoes guarded by a giant whale skeleton. We proceeded through a mock-up of a dark wooden Makah house with an opening that looked out over a hyper-realistic diorama of the seashore at Ozette.
I was particularly enamoured by the artistry of many of the carved wooden objects. There was a dorsal fin of a whale studded with hundreds of sea otter teeth, and an unusual figurine of a woman lying prostrate in the act of childbirth. These artefacts, along with ornate seal clubs and delicate combs, testify to a remarkable level of craftsmanship.
"The Makah were skilled woodworkers," said Wessen. "They exhibited levels of sophistication regarding technology that weren't appreciated before."
There are several elements about the Ozette project that make it one of the most important archaeological finds in North America to date. The sheer size of the collection coupled with the scale of the effort to recoup it was unprecedented. Then, there's the calibre of the preservation, which, at times, was almost surreal. Wessen recalled excavators using fire hoses to blast the clay off vegetation entrenched in the mudslide. In the process, they exposed green leafy alder branches to sunlight for the first time in more than 300 years. As the oxygen hit, the leaves would quickly turn black, but for 15 to 20 seconds, workers were treated to a glimpse of a bright green leaf from 1700.
Tribal elders were integral in helping archaeologists understand the meaning of many of the artefacts and how they were used. In the 1970s, there were still a dozen or so native speakers alive in Neah Bay. The knowledge of these elders perfectly complemented the scientific expertise of the archaeologists. Wessen remembers this sharing of ideas as a powerful experience. "When archaeologists and elders work together, we get a more complete understanding of the past," he said.
The Makah are represented by the motif of a thunderbird perched atop a whale (Credit: Brendan Sainsbury)
Neah Bay today has a population of just more than 1,000 people and an economy based mainly on fishing. After returning to the town from my blustery walk out to Cape Flattery, I sought shelter in a small waterfront joint called Calvin's Crab House and watched as the weather swung capriciously between sun and rain.
Just outside, a small monument marked the site of Fort Núñez Gaona, a colonial outpost established by a Spanish lieutenant called Salvador Fidalgo in 1792 as the first non-native settlement in the north-western US. Although the Spanish only stayed for four months, their presence marked an important historical watershed, the moment in which two cultures intersected and learned to live alongside each other in a new and different world. Uniquely, Ozette offers us a time capsule of Native life before the changes prompted by European contact.  
With the weather closing in, I decided against visiting the archaeological site, which is isolated and difficult to reach without a car. Unlike Pompeii, there are no ruins to walk around – although the surrounding beaches are spectacular – as the site was backfilled in 1981. All that remains today is an abandoned ranger station, a small memorial shed and some indigenous petroglyphs carved on rocks.
As to whether there's anything else down there, Wessen speculated there might be, but admitted that there's still more research to be done on the existing artefacts first: "The Ozette collection in its entirety has not come anywhere close to having its full research potential realised," he said.
--
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.



Discovery
Adventure
Destinations
Collections
About us
50 Reasons to Love the World
Untold America
More
In the garden of an abandoned monastery, on an ancient cemetery island in the Venetian Lagoon, I found myself surrounded by life. A man bustled past with a wheelbarrow full of brambles; two women sat on the ground, tending to flowering grapevines about to burst into fruit. Preparations were afoot on the Isola di San Michele for Venice's festival season, and Laguna nel Bicchiere, a non-profit organisation devoted to the propagation of Venetian viticulture, would be providing the wine.
"In late spring and early summer there are quite a few festivals," explained Colleen McCann, a long-time member of the organisation, as she showed me around San Michele's vineyard. "Each campo [city square] has its own different celebration, and on the solstice in June there's three days of festivities at the [Church of San Giovanni in] Bragora. We go there and offer people an ombra [small glass] of wine, with the idea being to let the city know about Venice's historical vineyards."
In addition to the vineyard we were standing in on San Michele, Laguna nel Bicchiere currently preserves three others – with origins going back centuries – on the Venetian islands of Giudecca, Sant'Elena and Vignole.
Laguna nel Bicchiere, an organisation devoted to the propagation of Venetian viticulture, preserves the vineyard on San Michele (Credit: Daniel Stables)
Laguna nel Bicchiere is not a commercial operation – they can't sell the wine, only give it away – and the vineyards are staffed by enthusiastic volunteers, motivated purely by the revival and preservation of Venetian winemaking. In the name of research, amid the mighty oak barrels of the monastery's cellar, I tried a couple of ombras myself. The wine was the colour of honey, rich and robust – tangibly imbued, even to my dilettante palate, with the salty taste of the lagoon.
Venetian winemaking has a long history that has been documented as far back as 2,500 years ago; until 1100, there was even a vineyard in the Piazza San Marco­. That's despite the unique challenges associated with growing vines on islands prone to flooding, where saltwater lies just a few feet beneath the shallow earth. Stressed vines produce the best wines, though, according to winemaking wisdom, and this was certainly seen to be the case for Venice's indigenous dorona grape. The golden wine it produced was prized above all others by wealthy Venetians in centuries past, including by the doges – Venice's powerful heads of state.
"Archival research shows that the dorona was considered the doges' favourite variety because of its golden colour and the quality of the wine made from it – balanced and structured," said Valeria Necchio, a Venice-based food writer.
The dorona's dominance was not to last, however. "The diseases that spread across Europe at the turn of the last century – phylloxera, powdery and downy mildew – took a huge toll on the overall production and on the economy of the islands that were devoted to winemaking, like Mazzorbo, Sant'Erasmo and Le Vignole," said Necchio. "The workforce was redirected from fieldwork to factory work – for example, in the glass furnaces of Murano."
Venissa's vineyard is enclosed by ancient walls and towered over by a medieval bell tower (Credit: Daniel Stables)
The ease of importing wine from more reliable terroirs won out, and dorona wine was replaced on Venetian tables with those from elsewhere in Italy and beyond. In the 1950s and '60s, tourism came to further displace agriculture as the predominant industry in the lagoon. Then, most devastating of all, came a catastrophic high tide in 1966, which caused the worst flood in the history of Venice and drowned the few remaining vines. Venetian wine, along with the dorona grape itself, was a thing extinct, consigned to the history books.
Or so it was thought.
In 2002, local winemaker Gianluca Bisol was exploring the island of Torcello when he noticed an unusual golden grape gleaming on a gnarled vine in a garden beside the Byzantine Church of Santa Maria Assunta. "It was an accidental discovery, but when I saw those three dorona plants for the first time, a great emotion came over me," said Bisol. "It was immediately clear to me that they were different from any vines I'd seen before. Nicoletta, who looked after the garden, told me that indeed they were different – a native grape variety from the Venetian Lagoon. I was mesmerised."
Unsure if it could be true, Bisol arranged for DNA tests, which confirmed the grapes were indeed the storied dorona.
After poring over historical viticultural texts and scouring local vineyards and gardens, Bisol discovered a total of 88 surviving dorona vines on Torcello and the surrounding islands. A key player was Gastone Vio, a farmer on the island of Sant'Erasmo, who provided scores of dorona vines to the Bisol family and whose planting techniques had enabled the survival of his crop through the flood of 1966. "Thanks to the conversations and exchanges I had with other growers and winemakers working in the lagoon, I learnt more about what I had to face in order to bring back this time-honoured Venetian tradition – viticulture," Bisol said.
Honouring two more Venetian traditions, Venissa's hand-blown wine bottles display hand-beaten gold leaf (Credit: Awakening/Getty Images)
He learned how the vines needed to be planted far apart, to allow the roots to grow sideways to avoid the saltwater; and how wells had to be dug hundreds of feet deep to reach the fresh water needed to flush the vineyards. Bisol found a medieval monastery on the nearby island of Mazzorbo with a walled vineyard and put to work what he had learned. Ten years and much experimentation later, the first vintage of his Venissa wine was produced.
Gianluca's son, Matteo Bisol, now oversees operations at Venissa, and he met me off the boat to show me around Mazzorbo. In contrast to the tumbledown vineyards of San Michele, Venissa is a swanky commercial enterprise – a Michelin-starred restaurant and luxurious lodgings have been added to their portfolio in recent years. However, they share one of Laguna nel Bicchiere's fundamental principles. "We're really serious about the quality of the wine," Matteo told me. "But for us, it represents something way bigger: bringing back a part of the history of Venice to the lagoon after we almost lost this wine."
The rediscovery of the dorona has ignited a revival in Venetian wine. Laguna nel Bicchiere now grows a mixture of dorona and other, non-indigenous, grapes, and produces mixed-grape wines. Venissa's whites are made with 100% dorona grapes, and their vineyard is the only one dedicated solely to its commercial production. The limitations of the lagoon mean it will always remain a boutique enterprise; the estate produces 3,500 bottles per year, which are sold mainly in the immediate area.
Venissa's dorona wine has won acclaim for its full body and bold, dry taste, thought to be very similar – thanks to the dorona grape's unique profile and traditional, organic growing methods – to the wine so prized by the doges. It carries an unmistakable hint of saltiness, and pairs extremely well with the lagoon ingredients served in Venissa's restaurant, like oysters, lavender and Sant'Erasmo honey.
Drainage ditches cross Venissa's vineyards to combat the saltwater from the lagoon (Credit: Awakening/Getty Images)
As we wandered through the vineyards, Matteo pointed out a large canal dug between the vines to rid them of floodwater from the lagoon. Crouching down, he signalled towards some tiny tufts of green, gamely sprouting amid the vines. "This is a sea herb; this one's samphire; this is erba stella [buck's horn]. These three grow only in a salt environment. If we move a little bit higher" – he pointed a few inches to the left – "here we still see some of the sea plants, but we can also see the margarita [daisy]; this is a mixed area. If we go here, this is the freshwater version: normal land, not salt land, just a few inches away. It's all very stressful for the vine, but it's important for the quality of the wine that the vine needs to struggle. No pain, no gain."
That philosophy was tested to its limits this year, which marks another milestone in the dorona grape's proud history of near-extinctions and triumphant resurrections. "We were very afraid at the beginning of this current season, because the vines are still suffering from the 2019 high tide – the second biggest ever," Matteo said. The vines survived – just – but in 2021, they struggled even more than in 2020. "All plants keep substances in reserve, which they use to survive after difficult years; we didn't know at the beginning of 2022 if the vines would have enough to survive. We were very happy, because the grapes showed us their resilience once again."
Venetian wine is an improbability; but then, so is Venice itself. "For us, the dorona is a symbol," Matteo said. "Venice is really the struggle of the human being to create a city in the middle of a lagoon. Dorona, in this terroir, in this situation – it's a great metaphor for the genius of the Venetian people, who were able to create something amazing in a situation that was almost impossible."
BBC Travel's Forgotten Foods offers hope for the world's "lost" foods through chefs and purveyors who are bringing them back to life though cooking and cultivation.
--
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.


