A Dallas woman who tricked her boyfriend, who suffered a traumatic brain injury while serving in the Army in Iraq, to murder her husband was sentenced Tuesday to life in prison.
Jennifer Faith, 49, pleaded guilty in February to interstate commerce in the commission of murder-for-hire for the October 2020 shooting death of her husband, Jamie Faith, in a deal that saw prosecutors drop an obstruction charge, according to the Department of Justice.
Faith convinced 49-year-old Darrin Ruben Lopez, a disabled Army veteran whom she referred to as her “one and only love,” to kill Jamie, prosecutors said, She used two fake email accounts, one masquerading as Jamie Faith and one as her friend, to convince Lopez that her husband was physically and sexually abusing her. Included in the emails were stock images of physical abuse that she downloaded off the internet.
On the morning of Oct. 9, 2020, seven months after Faith and Lopez started dating, she and her husband left their house to walk the dog. A minute later, Lopez, who had driven in from Tennessee, allegedly drove up and shot Jamie Faith seven times, then fled the scene in a black Nissan Titan pickup truck with a “T” decal on the back window.
Jennifer Faith took a guilty plea. (Dallas County Sheriff’s Deparment)
“I turned around and I just saw this person shoot and shoot. I couldn’t believe — I didn’t know him. Like, why?” she said, sobbing. “A lot of shots, five, six, maybe, I feel like. And he just kept going, and I’m like, stop it!” Faith told the Dallas Police Department at the time.
“And then I saw the person turn and like, just, dark eyes, coming toward me. And so I started — I yelled no, and I started to run. And he tackled me to the ground. He was trying to attack me the whole time I was screaming.”
Faith took the proceeds from a “Support Jennifer Faith” GoFundMe fundraiser to pay off two credit cards she opened for Lopez. She filed for $629,000 in death benefits. She also texted Lopez to scratch the decal off his car when police started publicizing the missing vehicle.
“I woke up in a bit of a panic… Something is eating away at me telling me you need to take the sticker out of the back window of the truck,” she texted him. “I don’t normally overreact like this… really think you need to get that sticker off ASAP, like today.”
In January 2021, when investigators began asking questions, Faith told Lopez they needed to come up with cover stories.
“Ms. Faith put on quite a performance in the wake of her husband’s murder. She poured out her sob story to reporters and law enforcement, then headed home to orchestrate her coverup,” U.S. Attorney Chad Meacham said in a statement Tuesday.
“But crocodile tears didn’t stop the feds. We were committed to getting justice for Jamie, and with the Judge’s imposition of a life sentence this afternoon, we’re one step closer.”
United States District Judge Jane J. Boyle called Faith “pure evil” before handing down the life sentence.
Lopez has been charged by the state with murder and on a federal gun charge and has pleaded not guilty to both.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
