A pair of teen suspects wanted in connection with the mass shooting in a popular Philadelphia entertainment district were arrested in Virginia on murder charges.
Three people were killed and another 12 injured when gunfire broke out on South Street, a popular spot packed with entertainment venues and night life, including a range of bars, restaurants and businesses.
Quadir Dukes-Hill, 18, has been charged with murder in the shooting death of Alexis Quinn, a bystander struck amid the chaos late Saturday night. Nahjee Whittington, who was 17 at the time of the shooting but has since turned 18, is also facing a count of murder, his in the death of Minners, who was also an innocent victim and celebrating his 22nd birthday at the time, according to the Philadelphia Inquirer.
Philadelphia Police Investigators work the scene of a fatal overnight shooting on South Street in Philadelphia on Sunday. (Michael Perez/AP)
The third person killed in the violence was identified as one of the gunmen, 34-year-old Gregory Jackson. Authorities now believe the deadly incident was sparked by a brawl between Jackson, his friend, 34-year-old Rashad Vereen and 23-year-old Mika Townes. It’s not clear whether Vereen knew Townes or why he threw a punch as they passed each other on the street, police said.
At one point during the fight, Jackson allegedly pulled out a firearm and walked toward the pair, prompting Townes to do the same. They fired off a total of 17 rounds between the two of them, including one that left Townes critically wounded. He stumbled to the ground, but was still ultimately able to shoot and fatally strike Jackson.
The shooting victims were, from left, Gregory Jackson, Kristopher Minners and Alexis Quinn. 
Across the street, 18-year-old Quran Garner, an alleged friend of Townes, unleashed several more rounds from a homemade “ghost gun,” prosecutors said. He was shot by responding officers and fled from the scene. He was later taken into custody and transported to a hospital for treatment.
Police said that Dukes-Hill and Whittington, each standing in different spots when the fist fight first broke out, also whipped out their guns and opened fire, escalating the chaos.
Neither teen was eligible to purchase a handgun in Pennsylvania while Townes and Jackson were both licensed to carry their weapons.
Rashaan Vereen, left, and Quran Garner face charges in the deadly mass shooting on South Street. 
On Monday, U.S. Marshals arrested Vereen on a series of charges, among them attempted murder and aggravated assault counts. Garner meanwhile is facing two counts of both aggravated assault and aggravated assault on law enforcement.
Authorities said all suspects wanted in connection with the Philadelphia shooting are now in custody. Dukes-Hill and Whittington remained behind bars in Richmond, but are awaiting extradition back to Philadelphia, where they will be formally charged and arraigned on murder charges.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
