ANAHEIM — The days of using spot starters are finally behind the Mets.
Thanks to the return of Tylor Megill, the Mets rotation already looks more complete, and that’s with Jacob deGrom and Max Scherzer still sitting on the injured list.
On Tuesday, for the first time in two weeks, the Mets will finally play a game at Citi Field again. They open a seven-game home stand beginning with three against the Brewers and four against the Marlins before going back on the road to Houston and Miami.
Chris Bassitt will take the hill on Tuesday against Milwaukee, followed by David Peterson on Wednesday and Megill on Thursday to close out the series.
The Mets rotation is looking more complete with Tylor Megill's return. (Mark J. Terrill/AP)
Mets manager Buck Showalter said he wanted to give his starters an extra day of rest following their 11-day road trip on the west coast, giving them the opportunity to readjust to the eastern time zone. It also allows David Peterson to jump back into the rotation.
Peterson (3-0, 3.00 ERA) figures to remain in the starting five until Scherzer or deGrom return.
Eduardo Escboar is on a five-game hitting streak, batting .450 with five runs, three doubles, a triple, a home run, and six RBI in that span. Over his last 18 games, Escobar—the Fogo de Chao fanatic—is batting .33 with 12 runs, seven doubles, a triple, three home runs, 15 RBI and a .898 OPS.
“Another testament to trusting him,” said Showalter of Escobar. “Guys, when they get into their early 30s, they know what’s right and wrong.”
Showalter said he debated taking Escobar out of the lineup in the late-innings of the Mets’ blowout loss to the Angels on Saturday, but the skipper didn’t want to mess with his good timing at the plate.
Against lefties in particular, the switch-hitting Escobar is slashing .328/.362/.641. His production over the past few weeks has helped the Mets keep their first-place lead over the NL East, but his leadership in the clubhouse also goes a long way. J.D. Davis, Pete Alonso and Brandon Nimmo all said Escobar’s hot streak has been fun to watch because they understand how hard he works behind the scenes.
“I watch his mentality and the work he puts in,” Showalter said. “He’s been the same guy every day. Eddy could be 0-for-20 and he’s still the same guy. That’s not easy to do.”
Mets reliever Colin Holderman was placed on the 15-day injured list with a right shoulder impingement. The right-hander said he isn’t too concerned about the injury because he caught it early. Former Met Dellin Betances, on the other hand, was forced to miss a couple of months on the IL with the same injury. But Holderman believes he can return after a minimum stay on the shelf.
Holderman was terrific across his first nine relief appearances for the Mets this season, posting a 0.82 ERA with 14 strikeouts in 11 innings. He said he first felt his shoulder impingement during his most recent outing against the Padres, when he walked three batters and allowed three earned runs while making just one out.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
