They have medals already, all of them, medals with numbers on them, badges, if you will, that they pin beside their hearts.
But they need something more, especially in these trying times, when a police officer is literally dragged down the street, and targets are figuratively painted on their backs“We ask a lot of our officers,” Police Commissioner Keechant Sewell said. “When things go wrong, we ask you to make it right. When the situation has gone too far, we ask you to bring it back. When someone is in harm’s way or a neighborhood is oppressed by crime, violence and disorder, we see to them. When you wear that shield and do your job there is none better. And, today we add medals to some of those shields.”
NYPD Commissioner Keechant Sewell speaks during the medal Ceremony at the NYPD Police Academy in Queens Tuesday morning. 

 (Luiz C. Ribeiro/for New York Daily News)
Sewell and Mayor Adams, a former police captain, honored the finest of Finest on Tuesday at the department’s annual medal day, where cops are recognized for courage and commitment in the service of the city.
Even in the midst of a gun violence epidemic and random acts of subway mayhem, city cops were saluted for being the last line of defense, and for keeping the city safe.
“There are days we feel like we are all alone,” Adams told the crowd at the New York City Police Academy in Queens. “Why are we doing this? We’re doing it because we believe in it. We’re doing it because we know that what stands between safety and those who want to destroy our city, are the heroes we are acknowledging today and the heroes that are performing this job.”
Adams flashed a photo of Robert Venable, a close friend and fellow officer, who was shot and killed in 1987 as he and five other cops tried to arrest two armed men at an abandoned building in Brooklyn.
Mayor Eric Adams holds a picture of late Police Officer Robert Venable, a friend who was killed in a 1987 shootout in Brooklyn. (Luiz C. Ribeiro/for New York Daily News)
Adams evoked his buddy’s memory as he and Sewell draped medals around the necks of brave officers.
That included Det. Dalsh Veve, who suffered a brain injury in 2017 when a teenage driver dragged him for three blocks after approached a car in East Flatbush. The 40-year-old continues to receive round-the-clock care.
“This means a lot to Dalsh,” said the detective’s wife, Esther Veve. “This wasn’t just a job. This was his passion. So for him to have witnessed this day, for me to be by his side and my daughter to witness it, I think it was definitely an achievement in his career.”
As his daughter, Darshee, wore her daddy’s hat, Veve’s former commanding officer Joseph Gulotta, now Commanding Officer of Detective Borough Brooklyn South echoed the mayor’s sentiments about lenient judges.
Justin Murrell, the driver who dragged Veve, served just 14 months in prison. He was arrested again in May and charged with leading police on a chase in a stolen car.
“I know that really took its toll on the family,” Gulotta, 50, said. “It’s very sad.”
.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
