Jets offensive coordinator Mike LaFleur is like a kid on Christmas morning.
LaFleur spoke to reporters on Wednesday after OTA practices with a childish delight as his facial expression beamed anytime someone mentioned the new weapons he was gifted during the offseason.
The offensive optimism is sky high because of the toys LaFleur possesses to build an offense full of talented transformers to attack defenses.
But he isn’t looking ahead as he’s taking each day in stride to develop the offense instead of worrying about Week 1.
“What I’m anxious for right now is just seeing how good we can get through these OTAs. September is a long way away, even putting the pads on for training camps is a long ways away,” LaFleur said. “So right now the focus is just each and every individual to get as good as they can. Connect as much as they can in terms of off the field and obviously on the field with the timing aspect of it, particularly from the pass game. 
“That’s kind of what these OTAs have turned into. It’s turned into more of a passing camp. Just the focus being on right now to get as good as we can.”
Jets' offensive coordinator Mike LaFleur (John Minchillo/AP)
The Jets gifted LaFleur two tight ends during free agency in Tyler Conklin and C.J. Uzomah who combined for 110 receptions, 1,086 yards and eight touchdowns. That’s a massive upgrade from the talent-depleted unit from 2021 when the group combined for under 550 yards receiving.
The running game can morph into race cars by producing explosive plays after adding the No. 36 overall pick in Breece Hall from Iowa State, who shredded defenses on the ground for 50 touchdowns and almost 4,000 yards in his college career. Gang Green already has second-year back Michael Carter, who led the team in yards from scrimmage with 964 in 14 games and should be better in 2022. The rest of the group features Ty Johnson, who scored four TDs, and Tevin Coleman can provide that veteran leadership.
Then Gang Green wrapped a bow on LaFleur’s presents by bolstering the receiving corps with the addition of the No. 10 overall pick in OSU’s Garrett Wilson, to pair with Elijah Moore, Corey Davis and Braxton Berrios.
All those weapons should help Zach Wilson, which will make LaFleur’s job easier to help develop the second-year QB, which is the most important thing for the Jets trajectory as an organization.
LaFleur has a bunch of toys to operate with so the challenge of meshing the unit together will be a fun obstacle for the second-year coordinator.
“Hope it’s not too difficult, but there is only one ball and I’m sure we’ll have that conversation in the room at some point,” LaFleur said. “But ultimately, if you got the right guys, organically, it all figures itself out and they’ll understand it. 
“Guys just want to move the ball and have success. You want to provide that success, but each and every week could be a little bit different.”
The first team offense’s passing attack struggled during the short period of 11-on-11. In the first round of reps, Wilson went 1-for-5.
Wilson opened up with a pass over the middle that was behind Davis that fell to the grass. His next pass to Moore was also an errant throw over the middle that was too far out in front that led to Moore colliding with a defender.
The next play was a roll out, but Wilson didn’t like what he saw and held the ball. He eventually chucked it deep to Berrios, which fell incomplete. Next play, he tossed a pass to Garrett Wilson and that also hit the ground.
So it was a slow start.
Wilson eventually got on track with a pass to Moore on a quick timing play.
The next round of 11-on-11, he was better in the short amount of reps as he completed passes to Moore and Berrios.
He was crisp during 7-on-7.
Joe Flacco had the highlight of the day with a deep bomb to Berrios for a touchdown.
It’s early, but Conklin seems to have a leg up on Uzomah on who will be the lead dog in the tight end room. Conklin’s presence in the pass game has been evident over the middle of the field.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
