HOUSTON – Dominic Smith wasn’t expecting to be called up to the Mets earlier this week.
Smith spent nearly three weeks with Triple-A Syracuse following his May 31 demotion to the minor leagues. The Mets called him up this past Monday when MLB forced all teams to trim the number of pitchers allowed on the active roster to 13. Seth Lugo went on the paternity list, and Smith rejoined the big-league club.
He started at first base against the Astros on Wednesday, while Pete Alonso batted fourth as the designated hitter.
Smith played in 15 games for Syracuse, slashing .266/.347/.438 with two home runs, 10 RBI, six walks, three stolen bases, and 12 runs scored. Smith didn’t exactly treat his demotion to the minors like it was a wake-up call. The Mets first baseman just embraced it like it was another part of his baseball career.
“When it initially happened, you obviously are a little bit disappointed,” Smith said on Wednesday. “That’s just a part of the game. I felt like I could go down there and just work on my swing and work on myself and play every day. Just have some fun. Continue to compete at a high level and also teach some of the younger guys. It was a good experience to go back down there and just play. It was an interesting couple of weeks.”
Dom Smith was surprised to be sent down to Triple-A, and also surprised when he got the call up. (Christopher Pasatieri/Getty Images)
Smith was struggling at the plate in the weeks before his demotion. He was hitting just .200 with a .581 OPS and 11 strikeouts across 20 games in May. Still, Smith wasn’t expecting to be sent down to Triple-A because he said he was improving in other hitting metrics, like his chase rate and hard-hit contact.
“I didn’t really think it would really happen,” he said. “I didn’t put much thought into it. I didn’t get the results every time, but I was improving in a lot of areas. It was a little bit shocking, but I understand the business of it. I understand the game.”
Mets manager Buck Showalter spoke to Smith once he was called back up about his role with the club, which Smith greatly appreciated. The first baseman said Showalter made sure Smith was “OK as a person first” before he was “OK as a baseball player.”
“He didn’t have to do that,” Smith said of the Mets skipper. “For him to take the time and make sure that I’m OK, that really meant a lot to me.”
But Smith has the same mentality he’s always had. There’s no chip on his shoulder or hard feelings about the demotion. He’s not thinking about what the decision to send him to Triple-A means for his future, or lack thereof, with the Mets.
It remains possible Smith is a trade candidate for the Mets since he doesn’t have a clear role on the team. But if Smith can get hot at the plate, that would change his outlook, and that’s what the first baseman is focused on for now.
“I just want to be here to do anything that I can to help the team win,” Smith said. “That’s my plan. I don’t want to be a distraction in any way. I just want to come here and help the boys play some good baseball.”
Jeff McNeil (right hamstring tightness) is expected to be back in the starting lineup on Friday or Saturday against the Marlins. The second baseman was out of the lineup for the second straight day on Wednesday as the Mets continue to be careful with McNeil’s legs.
Seth Lugo (paternity leave) was delayed in Atlanta on the way home this week and missed the birth of his son. Lugo is expected to rejoin the team on Friday.
Max Scherzer (left oblique strain) is still a possibility to start for the Mets on Sunday in Miami. Showalter had yet to speak to the ace as early as Wednesday morning, but Scherzer is certainly ready to rejoin the rotation. He pitched 3.1 innings and threw 65 pitches in his first rehab start for Double-A Binghamton on Tuesday.
Taijuan Walker will start the series opener against the Marlins on Friday, followed by Chris Bassitt on Saturday.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
