In eastern Ukraine, U.S. officials say, Moscow is likely to end up with more territory, but neither side will gain full control of the region. China and India are snapping up Russian crude, bolstering Moscow’s economy.
Follow the latest updates on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Ukraine urges civilians to flee the occupied south ahead of a promised counteroffensive.
The U.S. attorney general visits Ukraine and names a veteran prosecutor to help investigate Russian war crimes.
The U.S. confirms the death of an American presumed to be the second killed on the battlefield in Ukraine.
Asia is buying discounted Russian oil, making up for Europe’s cutbacks.
As Russia renews shelling in Kharkiv, the civilian death toll is growing, officials say.
Backers of an international nuclear arms ban meet, with Putin’s threats on their minds.
A top Ukrainian government official has made an urgent plea for hundreds of thousands of people living in Russian-occupied parts of southern Ukraine to evacuate in advance of a potential Ukrainian counteroffensive, working to prepare the public for a bloody struggle on another front even as Russia makes steady gains in fierce and costly battles in the east.
In trying to take back territory in the south, Ukrainian officials are facing deep challenges. Russia has been dug in for months in parts of the region, complicating evacuation routes for civilians and forcing Kyiv to decide how much damage it is willing to inflict on towns and cities that — even if an eventual counteroffensive is successful — it would have to rebuild.
“Please, go, because our Army will definitely de-occupy these lands,” said Iryna Vereshchuk, Ukraine’s deputy prime minister. In one sign of the dilemmas facing Ukraine, she indicated that civilians might first have to flee to Crimea, which was seized by Russia in 2014 and has been a key staging ground for Moscow’s invasion.
Russian forces have intensified searches at checkpoints in the region and are preventing civilians from traveling to Ukrainian-controlled areas. The safest escape route for many of the 500,000 people still estimated to be living in the Kherson region may be to head south to Crimea, she said.
“We know that today it is almost the only humanitarian corridor available, if it can be called that, that can be used to leave,” Ms. Vereshchuk said at a news conference on Monday. “So, if possible, get out of there, especially if you have children.”
From Crimea, she urged people to make their way to another country where they can reach out to the local Ukrainian consulate. She did not elaborate on how Ukrainians would be able to leave from Crimea.
While it is not clear when or if Ukraine will launch a broad offensive, it has been staging limited counterattacks that have put the Russians on the defensive. Ukrainians are now battling Russian forces trying to hold defensive lines less than 12 miles from the city of Kherson — the only regional capital to fall to Russian forces since the Feb. 24 invasion.
The Russians have used indiscriminate, heavy bombardments to level whole towns and villages before infantry troops move in to claim the ruins. But like other towns and cities that fell quickly in the first days of the war, Kherson was spared the kind of widespread destruction that has defined the Russian advance.
Now the Ukrainians are wrestling with complicated calculations in the fight to reclaim lost lands.
Ukrainian officials have stressed how important it is to keep the local population on their side — a task that may be complicated after months of Russian occupation and propaganda. The Russian Ministry of Defense said on Tuesday that it had repaired the last of seven television towers in the Kherson region to broadcast Russian channels.
The Ukrainian military also hopes to use local residents behind enemy lines as a force multiplier by staging sabotage operations, scouting enemy targets and generally creating a hostile environment for occupation forces.
That could include attacks like one over the weekend on three Russian soldiers as they sat at a waterfront cafe in Kherson. Two were killed and a third had to be transported to a hospital in Crimea for treatment after they came under attack by an unidentified gunman, according to the Ukrainian military southern command.
Ukraine would also need to assess how much damage it is willing to inflict in any effort to retake Kherson, since, if it succeeds, it would fall on Kyiv to rebuild. “If the city is demolished, then why liberate it?” asked Oleksandr Samoilenko, a Kherson official.
But the Russians have had months to fortify their positions.
“It will be very, very difficult to open a humanitarian corridor when there are children there,” Ms. Vereshchuk said. “It was difficult in Mariupol, and in the Kherson region it will be even harder.”
Military analysts have cautioned that it could most likely be several weeks before the Ukrainians get enough more powerful weapons and ammunition needed to wage a wide offensive in the south. But Ukrainian forces continued to set the stage for a broad assault. And on Tuesday, Oleksii Reznikov, Ukraine’s defense minister, said that the country’s military had received a long-awaited delivery of howitzers from Germany, with trained Ukrainian crews. 
The Ukrainian military’s southern command said on Tuesday that Russia was being forced to “resort to desperate means” to hold onto its outer defensive ring, including launching a “massive missile strike.”
There were no reported casualties and the region’s air defense systems limited the damage, according to the military.
— Marc Santora 
WASHINGTON — Attorney General Merrick B. Garland said during a surprise trip to Ukraine on Tuesday that a veteran prosecutor known for investigating former Nazis would lead American efforts in tracking Russian war criminals.
Mr. Garland’s visit, part of scheduled stops in Poland and Paris this week, was intended to bolster U.S. and international support in helping Ukraine identify, apprehend and prosecute Russians involved in war crimes and other atrocities.
His overseas travel comes at a particularly tense moment in his tenure at the Justice Department, on a day of dramatic congressional testimony about the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol that prompted many Democrats to renew their call for him to prosecute former President Donald J. Trump and his allies.
Mr. Garland met for an hour with Ukraine’s prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova, in the village of Krakovets, about a mile from the border with Poland, to discuss the technical, forensic and legal support that the United States could provide, department officials said.
“The United States is sending an unmistakable message” to those who have committed atrocities, Mr. Garland said: “There is no place to hide.”
“We will pursue every avenue available to make sure that those who are responsible for these atrocities are held accountable,” he added.
After the meeting, Mr. Garland said he was tapping Eli Rosenbaum, the former director of the Justice Department’s Office of Special Investigations, to create a war crimes accountability team that would work with Ukraine and international law enforcement groups.
Mr. Rosenbaum, 67, is best known for his work for the World Jewish Congress in the 1980s investigating the hidden history of Kurt Waldheim, a former United Nations secretary general whose army unit was implicated in war crimes against Jews and Yugoslavian partisans during World War II.
His work, during a 36-year career in the department, and in stints outside government, earned him the nickname “Nazi hunter” from historians, a sobriquet he dislikes.
In the department’s criminal division, Mr. Rosenbaum has also been instrumental in the prosecution and deportation of Nazis living in the United States and Jews who committed atrocities against their own people in concentration camps. In recent years, his portfolio has taken on a broader mission, as former Nazis die off, and now includes a wider array of human rights cases, at home and abroad.
The new team will include Justice Department staff members and outside experts. In addition to offering assistance to Ukrainian officials, the department said in a statement that Mr. Rosenbaum would investigate “potential war crimes over which the U.S. possesses jurisdiction, such as the killing and wounding of U.S. journalists covering the unprovoked Russian aggression in Ukraine.”
This line of work is, in a sense, part of Mr. Rosenbaum’s family business. His father, Irving, escaped Dresden in 1938, the year of the Kristallnacht attacks against Germany’s Jewish population, joined the U.S. Army, eventually served in an intelligence unit that interrogated German soldiers — and collected information at the Dachau concentration camp.
Mr. Rosenbaum was set to retire before Mr. Garland asked him about a week ago to lead the new unit. He agreed immediately, according to a senior Justice Department official with knowledge of the exchange.
The department is also assigning additional personnel to expand its work with Ukraine and other partners to counter Russian use of illicit financial methods to evade international sanctions — detailing a Justice Department expert to advise Ukraine on fighting kleptocracy, corruption and money laundering, officials said.
“We will pursue every avenue available to make sure that those who are responsible for these atrocities are held accountable,” added Mr. Garland, whose own family immigrated to the United States after fleeing antisemitic pogroms in Eastern Europe in the early 1900s.
After stopping in Poland, Mr. Garland flew on to Paris, where he was scheduled to join the homeland security secretary, Alejandro Mayorkas, in a series of bilateral meetings with European counterparts to discuss efforts to combat terrorism and carry out a strategy of holding Russia accountable for its brutal invasion of Ukraine.
Mr. Garland and Ms. Venediktova last met in May in Washington.
In April, Mr. Garland and the F.B.I. director, Christopher A. Wray, said they would work with investigators and prosecutors in Ukraine, a signal that the Biden administration intended to follow through on its public condemnation of atrocities committed by Russian forces that have been documented during the war.
His team has also been working with the State Department to provide logistical support and advice to Ms. Venediktova and the leaders of other ministries in Ukraine.
“We’ve seen and have determined that a number of war crimes have been committed by Russia’s forces,” Beth Van Schaack, the State Department’s ambassador at large for global criminal justice, said at a briefing in Washington last week.
“What we are seeing is not the results of a rogue unit,” she added, “but rather a pattern and practice across all the areas in which Russia’s forces are engaged.”
— Glenn Thrush 
The U.S. State Department on Wednesday confirmed the death of a man believed to be the second American killed fighting in Ukraine.
The department identified the man, Stephen Zabielski, as a U.S. national who died in Ukraine but gave no further details. An obituary in the Recorder News in Montgomery County, N.Y., said Mr. Zabielski was a 52-year-old Florida resident and had died fighting in Ukraine in mid-May.
Mr. Zabielski’s death would mark the second American killed in combat in the war after Willy Joseph Cancel Jr., 22, a former Marine infantryman and a resident of Kentucky whose family said he was killed in late April fighting alongside the Ukrainian military.
The confirmation of Mr. Zabielski’s death also comes after a Kremlin spokesman said this week that two American fighters who had gone missing in Ukraine had been taken into custody. Alex Drueke, 39, and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, 27, were U.S. military veterans who had volunteered to fight in Ukraine.
A third American volunteer fighter may also be missing in action, the State Department said last week.
“We once again should take this opportunity to reiterate to Americans the inherent dangers of traveling to Ukraine,” said Ned Price, a State Department spokesman. “We understand certainly that there are Americans across this country — millions of Americans across this country — who feel motivated to support the righteous and the noble cause of the Ukrainian people.”
Mr. Zabielski’s family could not immediately be reached for comment.
Thousands of largely unregulated volunteer foreign fighters have flocked to Ukraine, only some of whom have been accepted into the Ukrainian Army’s International Legion.
Maham Javaid contributed reporting.
— Victoria Kim 
A surge in demand from Asia for discounted Russian oil is making up for the sharply lower number of barrels being sold to Europe, dulling the effects of the West’s efforts to punish Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine and keeping revenue flowing to the Kremlin.
Most of the additional oil has gone to two countries: China and India. China’s imports of Russian oil rose 28 percent in May from the previous month, hitting a record high and helping Russia overtake Saudi Arabia as China’s largest supplier. And most of the increase went to India, which has gone from taking in almost no Russian oil to bringing in more than 760,000 barrels a day, according to shipping data analyzed by Kpler, a market research firm.
Although South Korea and Japan have cut back on Russian oil, those volumes are a fraction of what is being bought by China and India.
“Asia has saved Russian crude production,” said Viktor Katona, an analyst at Kpler. “Russia, instead of falling further, is almost close to its prepandemic levels.”
Russian oil is being sold at a steep discount because of the risks associated with sanctions imposed to punish Russia for its invasion of Ukraine. Even so, soaring energy prices have led to an uptick in oil revenue for Russia, which took in $1.7 billion more last month than it did in April, according to the International Energy Agency.
Although it remains to be seen how much Asia will continue buying the oil as Europe weans itself off Russian energy, the shift has allowed Moscow to maintain its production levels and defy analysts’ expectations that its output would plunge. And it has offered another indication of the support Russia enjoys from China, whose top leader, Xi Jinping, has offered to deepen cooperation with Moscow despite its invasion of Ukraine.
Russian crude sales dropped by 554,000 barrels a day to Europe from March to May, while Asia refiners increased their take by 503,000 barrels a day — nearly a replacement of one for one. Of those, 165,000 barrels are going to China from eastern Russian ports instead of the Baltic and Black Sea ports that traditionally supply Europe. Russian sales to India reached a record 841,000 barrels a day in May, eight times the annual average from last year.
J.P. Morgan commodities experts estimate that China can buy an additional million barrels of Russian crude a day as China recovers from Covid and attempts to add to its strategic crude stockpiles on the cheap. Russian Urals crude is selling for a $30 discount to Brent.
The combination of discounted Russian crude and higher prices at the pump also means that Indian refiners are doubly profiting, according to analysts. Some of the oil products re-exported by India went in shipments bound for the United States, Britain, France and Italy, according to the Finland-based organization Center for Research on Energy and Clean Air.
There was the hope that threatened sanctions against those who insured Russian shipments would stick. But while financing shipping vessels has increased costs, the discounts are so steep that China, India and other Asian buyers are buying.
Once they refine oil into diesel, no one can distinguish whether the products that are sent to Europe and elsewhere come from Russian crude. JP Morgan estimates that Russia can find shipping capacity to transport about three million barrels a day of oil to Asia, and state-run Indian and Chinese insurers will take care of the insurance.
“Those molecules, a lot of them are Russian,” Jeff Brown, the president of F.G.E., an energy consulting firm, said of the refined oil that is being re-exported to the West. “That’s the core tension — they want to punish Russia, but they don’t want oil prices to go up.”
— Victoria Kim and Clifford Krauss 
The high global demand for Russia’s oil and gas is prompting Russian officials to declare that the West’s efforts to limit the country’s energy revenues have been a failure.
The head of the Russian energy giant Gazprom, Aleksei Miller, quipped at a marquee economic conference in St. Petersburg last week that he bore no ill will against Europe, because even as the continent’s imports of Russian natural gas fell “several tens of percent,” prices rose “several-fold.”
“I won’t bend the truth if I tell you that we bear no grudge,” he said.
This month alone, Russia’s Finance Ministry estimated, the government coffers were expected to receive about $6 billion more in oil and gas revenues than anticipated because of high prices. European sanctions on Russian energy, meanwhile, have turned out to be less severe than some economists expected, while Russia has been successful in redirecting its oil to non-Western markets like India and China.
Still, the sanctions are likely to exact more pain on the Russian economy later this year, while the stubborn strength of the ruble — a consequence of plummeting imports into Russia — is reducing the benefits that Russia reaps from its energy exports.
“Things are much better than the worst case, and probably even better than the base case,” Yevgeny Nadorshin, the chief economist at the PF Capital consulting company in Moscow, said of Russia’s energy revenues. “Unfortunately, the most difficult period is only beginning.”
Russia has sharply reduced how much budget data it shares publicly, making it hard to quantify how much it is spending on the war. And analysts say there is no evidence that President Vladimir V. Putin is under immediate pressure — economic or otherwise — to wind down his military campaign.
But Mr. Nadorshin said that the high-level data the government does release indicated that it was trying to rein in spending across the board. And evidence of shortfalls in the Russian Army’s equipment, with volunteers scrambling to deliver first-aid gear and other basic items to the troops, shows that there are limits to the Kremlin’s ability to finance the war effort.
“The government’s readiness to spend is clearly suffering, despite the bravado of the official pronouncements,” Mr. Nadorshin said. “It’s not hard to guess that in terms of procuring weaponry, not everything is going well.”
— Anton Troianovski 
Despite the West’s attempts to punish Russia with embargoes on its energy sources, Russia has shown a rapid ability to divert its oil from Europe to other markets, especially China. And even though the sales are deeply discounted, high oil prices mean that Russia is making plenty of money and its oil production has stabilized.
But even as China buys up Russian crude — Russia has now replaced Saudi Arabia as China’s top source of foreign oil — as much as a third of Russia’s refining capacity is idle. The sector is geared for the domestic market, and the government has an export quota system that it applies to Chinese companies.
With global diesel and gasoline markets tight, China could satisfy much of the world’s demand with millions of barrels of refined fuel if it decided to. This is particularly important for global diesel markets, where inventory stocks are so low that parts of Europe could run out of the fuel, which is vital for agriculture, shipping and construction.
According to Rystad Energy, a consultancy, Russian crude oil exports are down only slightly worldwide because of large increases in sales to India and China. In May, India and China received roughly 2.4 million barrels of Russian crude a day, half of Russia’s exports. China imported 800,000 barrels by pipeline and 700,000 more seaborne, and Russia has replaced Saudi Arabia as India’s No. 2 source of foreign oil after Iraq.
The Russian oil that is flowing into Asia is replacing Middle Eastern oil, which is finding its way to Europe. That is creating heightened competition among OPEC members, particularly Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Iraq. The expected flood of Gulf oil to Europe is a reversal of the collapse that came in 2018 when the Trump administration reimposed sanctions on Iran.
Iraq is cutting its prices to Europe, in part because it has to compete with better-quality Persian Gulf crudes. (Iraqi crude is high in sulfur, presenting challenges to European refiners that are tooled for lower-sulfur Russian crude.) To reach Europe, Iraq also has the obstacle of needing to ship through the Suez Canal, which does not have the capacity to allow transit of fully laden super tankers. And Iraq must compete with Russia for Indian sales, which are traditionally Iraq’s biggest market.
A bloc of OPEC and its allies, including Russia — known as OPEC Plus — worked because Russia was focused on European markets while the Gulf States were focused on China. Now, suddenly, the Gulf States are in competition with Russia for Asian markets. That could well disrupt OPEC Plus as Russia tries to undercut Middle Eastern crude in China and India. And Russia could lose clout in the Middle East and oil markets.
In the meantime, Russia’s dependence on China as a market, and China’s dependence on Russia for cheap oil, could strengthen their relationship and set off further tensions between Beijing and Washington.
Russia needs China more than China needs Russia, so China is likely to increasingly gain the upper hand. That puts Beijing in the middle of the Washington-Moscow relationship, much as it stands in the middle of the United States’ relationship with North Korea. That position could, at least potentially, give Beijing leverage.
— Clifford Krauss 
While fierce battles continue for the Donbas region in Ukraine’s east amid warnings of a Ukrainian counteroffensive in the south, Russian shelling in and around Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, in the northeast of the country, has grown more intense in recent days.
Fifteen civilians were killed and 16 were wounded in Kharkiv during daytime shelling, Oleg Sinegubov, the head of the Kharkiv regional administration, said on Tuesday. Russian forces were firing “en masse on residential areas in Kharkiv,” he said on Telegram.
“The occupiers are deliberately beating residential areas where there are no military facilities,” he said. “This is real terrorism against civilians.”
The civilian death toll included an 8-year-old girl from the village of Bezruky. In the Kharkiv region alone, 43 children have been killed by Russian forces and 130 have been injured, according to Mr. Sinegubov’s post. Kharkiv’s mayor, Ihor Terekhov, said this week that shelling had grown worse in the city, which was being hit “night, morning, day.”
In his nightly address to the nation, President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine referred to the shelling. “It simply destroys, simply kills,” he said, adding that, “the Russian army is deaf to any rationality.”
Last month, Ukrainian troops appeared to have pushed Russian forces back from the city, even as far as the border, about 25 miles away. But Russia does not appear to have given up on its efforts around the city, using railway lines around Kharkiv to supply troops that appear to be preparing for an assault on the city of Sloviansk, according to the Institute for the Study of War, a research group based in Washington.
Russian forces may also be trying to keep their opponents occupied and spread out along the vast front line, reducing Ukraine’s ability to concentrate on the fight for Sievierodonetsk, a focal point of the eastern front, or on the counteroffensive in the southern Kherson region.
The Russian military’s struggles in Ukraine have led to the replacement of its commander of airborne forces, Andrey Serdyukov, according to the Institute for the Study of War, which cited the Russian news media. In its latest assessment, the institute said Moscow might be “in the process of radically reshuffling the command structure of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, indicating a possible purge of senior officers blamed for failures in Ukraine.”
In eastern Luhansk, the number of civilians injured and killed by overnight Russian shelling is yet to be determined, Serhiy Haidai, the region’s military governor, said on Facebook. “The shelling lasted through the night and all of yesterday,” he said. “More than 10 multistory buildings, private houses and the police department building were destroyed.”
Last week, Amnesty International issued a report accusing Russian forces of launching “a relentless campaign of indiscriminate bombardments against Kharkiv.” In May, the United Nations’ International Organization for Migration estimated that 23 percent of the more than eight million Ukrainians who have fled to other parts of the country were from the Kharkiv region.
— Maham Javaid 
After pulling back its forces from around Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, Russia’s grinding campaign to seize the eastern Donbas region has increasingly focused on the battle for Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk, twin cities on opposite banks of the Siversky Donets River.
Those cities, largely reduced to rubble and emptied out in waves of evacuations, have been called “dead cities” by President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, whose forces are trying to defend them at the street level.
But even where Ukraine has succeeded in pushing the Russians back, the scars of war linger. Around Ukraine’s two largest cities, Kyiv and Kharkiv, residents have been returning to streets lined by charred husks of buildings.
The battle is now converging on the eastern region, familiar ground for both Ukrainian and Russia-backed forces who have been fighting there, in trenches and with artillery, since 2014. Russia’s steady assault and Ukrainian efforts at counterattacks have led to yet another round of evacuations, as thousands flee the region in anticipation of an escalation in fighting.
— The New York Times 
Russia ratcheted up its confrontation with the European Union over Lithuania on Tuesday, summoning the E.U. ambassador in Moscow to protest the actions of the Baltic state, which has blocked some rail shipments to the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad.
The E.U. ambassador to Moscow, Markus Ederer, and other bloc officials said that Lithuania was simply carrying out newly implemented European Union sanctions on Russia for its invasion of Ukraine.
Mr. Ederer urged Russian officials to refrain from “escalatory steps and rhetoric,” said Peter Stano, a spokesman for the European Union. “He conveyed our position on Russia’s aggression against Ukraine and explained that Lithuania is implementing E.U. sanctions and there is no blockade,” Mr. Stano said in Brussels.
Russia’s Foreign Ministry was hardly appeased, saying that Lithuania’s actions “violate the relevant legal and political obligations of the European Union” and represent an “escalation.”
“We demanded the immediate restoration of normal Kaliningrad transit,” the ministry said. “Otherwise retaliatory measures will follow.”
Kaliningrad is an unusual legacy of World War II. Formerly the port of Königsberg, the capital of East Prussia, it was captured by the Soviet Army in April 1945 and was ceded to Moscow after the war. It has no direct land connection to the rest of Russia, but is sandwiched between the NATO members Poland and Lithuania, and is heavily armed with Russian missiles that can carry either conventional or nuclear warheads.
The narrow, 60-mile passage to Kaliningrad, known as the Suwalki Gap, has long been considered a possible flashpoint for Russian pressure and one of the most vulnerable parts of NATO territory.
Nikolai Patrushev, the secretary of Russia’s Security Council and a key ally of President Vladimir V. Putin, said Lithuania’s recent actions showed that Russia could not trust the West, which he said had broken written agreements over Kaliningrad. “Russia will certainly respond to such hostile actions,” he told the state news agency RIA, without offering details.
“Appropriate measures are being worked out in an interdepartmental format and will be taken in the near future,” he said. “Their consequences will have a serious negative impact on the population of Lithuania.”
The Lithuanians, like the other Baltic states, have been open in their defiance of Russia and support for Ukraine. “It’s ironic to hear rhetoric about alleged violations of international treaties from a country which has violated possibly every single international treaty,” Lithuania’s prime minister, Ingrida Simonyte, said on Tuesday.
“There is no Kaliningrad blockade,” she said. “Lithuania is implementing E.U. sanctions.”
— Steven Erlanger 
Backers of a global treaty that bans nuclear arms met Tuesday for the first time since the pact took effect last year, with worries about Russian threats to use such weapons in the Ukraine conflict weighing heavily in the background.
The meeting of member countries and supporters of the pact, the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, held in Vienna, is meant to assess the progress in the nearly five years since it was negotiated at the United Nations.
No nuclear-armed power, including the United States or Russia, has signed or ratified the treaty, with some calling it naïve, but proponents argue that if a vast majority of countries ratify the pact the shaming effect on the holdouts would make nuclear conflict much more unlikely.
Anti-proliferation advocates point to the near-unraveling of the Iran nuclear agreement, North Korea’s hints of renewed testing, and, perhaps most ominously, the bombast of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia when he ordered the invasion of Ukraine in February and put his nation’s nuclear forces on alert.
“The once unthinkable prospect of nuclear conflict is now back within the realm of possibility,” António Guterres, the United Nations secretary-general, said in a video message at the meeting.
In a reminder that both Russia and NATO have nuclear arsenals, Mr. Putin said when he ordered the invasion that “no one should have any doubts that a direct attack on our country will lead to the destruction and horrible consequences for any potential aggressor.” He also said that Russia is “one of the most potent nuclear powers and also has a certain edge in a range of state-of-the-art weapons.”
Mr. Guterres was among those who said Mr. Putin’s words and actions had underscored the “bone-chilling” possibility that nuclear weapons could actually be used.
Peter Maurer, the president of the International Committee of the Red Cross, a longtime advocate of the prohibition treaty, told the meeting it was important to focus on the horrible consequences of any nuclear weapons use “at a time when, against the backdrop of the conflict in Ukraine, nuclear deterrence theories seem to be regaining vigor and apparent legitimacy.”
The treaty, which became international law in January 2021, three months after the 50th ratification, now has at least 65 ratifications, according to the International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons, the Geneva-based group that pushed for the treaty and won a Nobel Prize in 2017 for that work.
The treaty outlaws nuclear weapons use, threat of use, testing, development, production, possession, transfer and stationing in a different country. For nuclear-armed nations that choose to join, the treaty outlines a process for destroying stockpiles and enforcing the countries’ promise to remain free of nuclear weapons.
— Rick Gladstone 
When the Kremlin’s chief spokesman said on Monday that two Americans captured while fighting for Ukraine should be “held responsible for the crimes they have committed,” it was an unmistakable signal that Moscow might prosecute them as terrorists or war criminals and hand them a harsh sentence.
That is what happened earlier this month, when two Britons and a Moroccan who had fought for the Ukrainian armed forces were sentenced to death in Russian-occupied territories. Prosecutors had accused them of “training for the purpose of carrying out terrorist activities” and doing so “for a fee,” making them mercenaries.
British officials denounced the proceeding as a sham show trial, while rights advocates called it a clear violation of the rules of war. “Such trials against prisoners of war amount to a war crime,” a spokeswoman for the United Nations’ human rights office said the day after the sentencing.
Russia seems to be taking a similar position with the captured American fighters, Alex Drueke, 39, and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, 27, maintaining that the men are not members of the Ukrainian army and are not entitled to protection as prisoners of war. The stance seems calculated to intimidate thousands of volunteers who flocked to Ukraine to defend its democracy.
In an interview with NBC News on Monday, the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, said that the two men were “soldiers of fortune” and had been involved in shelling and firing on Russian forces.
Before embarking on the mission that ended in their detainment, Mr. Drueke and Mr. Huynh were part of a small team of international volunteers working for the Ukrainian intelligence service.
The Geneva Conventions, which Russia has signed and which govern the law of war, state that captured volunteer fighters may also be considered prisoners of war. Lawrence Hill-Cawthorne, an associate professor of law at the University of Bristol, said that even volunteer fighters not embedded in the Ukrainian military would be entitled to P.O.W. protection if they were openly carrying arms while fighting.
Mr. Drueke’s aunt, Dianna Shaw, said she remained hopeful. “We are cautiously optimistic that his captors will do the right thing and treat them according to international expectations,” she said.
— Carly Olson 
The ruble cemented its unlikely status as the world’s best-performing currency, rising to new multiyear highs this week. Since collapsing in the weeks after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which triggered sweeping international sanctions aimed at crippling the Russian economy, the ruble has come roaring back.
On Tuesday, it traded at its strongest level against the U.S. dollar since June 2015. It has gained about 35 percent so far this year, beating every major currency, and has more than doubled from its post-invasion low.
Note: Scale is inverted. A rising line indicates a stronger ruble.
Source: FactSet
By The New York Times
Although Russia’s economy has held up better than many expected, the outlook is gloomy, with double-digit inflation and most economists predicting a deep recession. But capital controls imposed by its central bank, including those that forced exporters to exchange some of their earnings into rubles, have increased demand for the Russian currency.
Higher earnings from oil and gas exports, which have surged as prices rise and demand in Asia makes up for cutbacks in Europe, have kept the ruble elevated. At the same time, Russian imports have fallen sharply, partly the result of many foreign companies pulling out of Russia, which also support the ruble.
In late February after the invasion, the ruble crashed to its weakest-ever level against the dollar, and Russia’s central bank more than doubled interest rates, to 20 percent, as part of its moves to stop the outflow of rubles from the economy. Since then, some restrictions have been loosened and rates have been cut back to 9.5 percent, where they were set before the invasion. But the ruble continues to strengthen, which helps ease inflation but also puts pressure on Russia’s budget, which relies on energy sales that are often denominated in dollars.
— Jason Karaian 
