The Group of 7 nations is considering a proposal on oil price caps as they struggle to limit global economic havoc. A Russian missile strike hit a crowded shopping mall in central Ukraine, killing at least 16 people. 
Follow live news updates on the Russia-Ukraine war.
The G7 faces dueling pressures: Penalize Russia while easing their nations’ economic pain.
A missile strike hits a crowded shopping center in central Ukraine.
After Monday’s mall airstrike, shocked residents grapple with the destruction, the dead and the missing.
Lithuania blames Russia for cyberattacks, citing threats over cargo restrictions.
The U.S. will buy Ukraine an advanced air defense system, an official says.
Civilians should immediately evacuate a Ukrainian city that is under fire, a regional official warned.
NATO will sharply increase the number of troops on standby.
A Russian court says Brittney Griner’s trial will begin on Friday.
KRUN, Germany — Struggling to choke off the revenue that enables Russia to finance its invasion of Ukraine, and hoping to shield consumers at home from the war’s economic pain, leaders of the Group of 7 nations on Monday moved close to embracing an aggressive but untried plan to manipulate the price of oil, the largest commodity market in the world.
The plan — which would allow Russia to keep selling oil to the world but would sharply limit the price — is an acknowledgment that the embargoes the United States and allies swiftly imposed on Moscow’s lucrative energy exports have not dented Russian oil revenues. And they have driven up gasoline and other fuel prices, prompting consumer backlash in the United States and Europe.
At the same time, the broader economic sanctions the West put in place to try to cripple the Russian economy have so far fallen short, though economists forecast that it will shrink almost 10 percent this year. The ruble has fully recovered from sharp early losses.
Militarily on Monday, Moscow pushed forward with slow but steady gains in Ukraine’s east, imposing heavy casualties on Ukraine’s army, while also maintaining persistent shelling of cities both on the Black Sea coast and in the north near the Russian border.
On Sunday, the G7 leaders said they were banning imports of Russian gold, another sign that the West is looking for new ways to isolate Moscow from the world financial system.
The effort to put a price cap on Russia oil is the brainchild of Janet L. Yellen, President Biden’s Treasury secretary. The details are likely weeks or more away from being finalized, requiring intense negotiations by G7 finance ministers, private companies and leaders of countries in Latin America, Africa and elsewhere that buy Russian oil.
And there is no guarantee that the plan will come together quickly, or at all, or that it will succeed as the G7 leaders hope.
There is also a potential political downside in Europe and possibly the United States: To succeed, the plan will need to give China, India and other countries that have not joined the G7 in opposing Russia’s invasion of Ukraine the ability to buy oil at a much lower price than America or much of Europe can.
But American officials believe that the details of the plan could be worked out quickly, and that the plan could drive down both Russia’s revenues from oil and the price per barrel on global markets.
“I think it can be done relatively quickly,” Jake Sullivan, President Biden’s national security adviser, told reporters at the summit.
Ms. Yellen is an economist by training, and her idea rests on a sort of economist’s logic: that countries will seek to pay as little as possible for a crucial commodity like oil, no matter where their leaders stand on the Ukraine war.
It also rests on an idea that might seem jarring to anyone who watched Mr. Biden and allies take aim at Russian oil exports soon after its president, Vladimir V. Putin, launched the invasion of Ukraine. Instead of seeking to drive Russian oil off the world market, the price cap would try to keep Moscow’s oil exports flowing — but at a cut rate.
The United States has already banned Russian oil, and in coming months European allies will prohibit most Russian oil exports. The Europeans will also reduce their own gas imports from Russia by the end of the year. Any price caps would not interfere with these existing bans.
Despite the sanctions, Russia’s revenues from oil sales have been on the rise, a function of soaring fuel prices, while consumers around the world have faced mounting pain at the gasoline pump.
— Jim Tankersley and Matina Stevis-Gridneff 
KREMENCHUK, Ukraine — Hundreds of people were out shopping, chatting and meeting with friends in a shopping mall in central Ukraine on Monday, a rare moment of normalcy amid the horror of war. Then a Russian missile struck.
The attack left at least 16 dead and at least 10 missing at the shopping mall, near a railway station in the industrial city of Kremenchuk, located in Ukraine’s central Poltava region.
“People just burned alive,” Denys Monastyrskyi, Ukraine’s interior minister, said in an interview.
In four months of conflict characterized by indiscriminate violence, the strike was just the latest vivid and bloody example of Russia’s willingness to target civilians at a nonmilitary site, with people going about their daily lives.
The strike on Kremenchuk came after Russia, in a sudden escalation, fired more than 65 missiles at Ukraine over the weekend. On Monday, a strike in the northeastern city of Kharkiv killed five people and wounded 22, according to the local authorities.
Group of 7 leaders meeting in Germany called the mall attack a “war crime” in a statement Monday night. Previous Russian targets have included a theater, a maternity hospital and people waiting in line for bread.
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine dedicated most of his nightly address on Monday to the strike, calling it “one of the most defiant terrorist attacks in European history.”
“Only totally insane terrorists, who should have no place on earth, can strike missiles at such an object,” Mr. Zelensky said, adding, “Russia will stop at nothing.”
In Kremenchuk on Monday, smoke filled the air after the attack and the ground was hot, as workers tried to clear the rubble and local residents desperately searched for the missing, according to city council officials.
Ukrainian officials said that as many as 1,000 people could have been inside the building at the time of the strike, though the exact number was not clear.
The Amstar mall, located in the city’s center, is not far from an industrial facility that is believed to be use to repair tanks. Until Monday, the center of the city had not been hit — Russian forces had only hit industrial targets and an oil refinery.
“When they hit infrastructure or factories, we can understand that someone was given the coordinates,” Olha Usanova, a deputy mayor of Kremenchuk, said. “This is just destruction of civilians. I have no words for this horror.”
Serhiy Kruk, the head of Ukraine’s emergency services, was quoted on Telegram as saying that “so far,” 16 people had been killed and 59 injured, 25 of whom were hospitalized.
The nearest bomb shelter to the mall was across the street, but “not everyone made it,” Mr. Monastyrskyi said. He said that an air raid siren had sounded, but many people ignored it.
Videos shot after the strike and posted online showed a fire raging as emergency workers frantically tried to extinguish the flame and civilians loaded the injured into ambulances. Footage that appeared to be captured by people running for the exits showed them navigating a thick cloud of debris and dust as they clambered over broken windows, doors and crumbling walls.
By Monday evening, Ukrainian media reported that 115 firefighters had managed to put out the massive blaze and rescuers were continuing to search through the debris for survivors.
Ukraine’s Defense Ministry said the strike had been carried out by a Russian X-22 missile weighing nearly 2,000 pounds, and had been fired from Russia’s Kursk region, near the border.
Kremenchuk had a population of almost 220,000 people before Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine began in late February.
Dmitry Polyanskiy, a deputy Russian ambassador to the United Nations, suggested on Twitter that the explosion and fire had been caused by the Ukrainians themselves. He described it as a “provocation” by Ukraine intended to keep attention on the country before an annual meeting of NATO countries in Madrid starting on Tuesday.
— Valerie Hopkins, Ivan Nechepurenko, Megan Specia and Dan Bilefsky 
KREMENCHUK, Ukraine — Late into the evening on Monday night, the Amstar shopping mall was still smoking as hundreds of firefighters and emergency workers sought to clear away the rubble.
“This is a shock for all of us,” said Olha Usanova, a deputy mayor of Kremenchuk, in central Ukraine, where a Russian airstrike left at least 16 people dead, more than two dozen hospitalized and many others injured.
“The worst thing is that this is a shopping mall,” she added. “Any of us could have been here.”
Sitting along the Dnieper River, Kremenchuk is a major Ukrainian industrial hub with factories that produce railway cars and trucks. It is also home to Ukraine’s largest oil refinery, which has been targeted repeatedly by Russian missiles, according to the local news media, part of Moscow’s strategy to destroy the country’s fuel production and storage infrastructure.
The attack came as Russia has ramped up its missile strikes in the past three days, a show of force during the meeting of the Group of 7 nations and ahead of a NATO summit this week.
Ms. Usanova said one of her City Council colleagues had been inside the mall during the attack. He had been taken to the hospital, and was unconscious, unable to breathe on his own.
Dmytro Kravchenko, another member of the City Council and a deputy mayor, said that a friend of his was unable to reach her son, who worked in the Comfy.ua store selling technology and home appliances.
“He is unreachable as his phone has no signal,” said Mr. Kravchenko. “She fears the worst.”
He pulled up a photo of a 20-year-old woman who was killed in the strike. Her body was covered by a cloth, but her burned legs were visible. She was identified by her white sneakers.
He showed another photo of a blackened female body on a stretcher. 
In the exposed facade next to the parking lot, some of the wares of a sporting goods store were still hanging on the shelves above the rubble, while destroyed mannequins littered the floor. Workers piled corrugated metal in the center of the parking lot faster than dump trucks could be filled to remove it.
“This is just one large mass grave,” Anton Geraschenko, an adviser to Denys Monastyrskyi, Ukraine’s interior minister, said as he surveyed the site.
Many residents came to examine the destruction of one of the city’s biggest shopping centers.
“I used to come here to shop all the time,” said Yana Medveditskaya, 23, who lives nearby. “They had a pet store, a great cosmetics store and a playground. Like any mall.”
Her friend Oleksandr Dun, also 23, said he had come to the scene just after the strike and witnessed chaos. He had returned in the evening in the hopes of helping with the rescue efforts.
“I saw bloody people; I saw just body parts,” he said. “People took off their own clothes to cover the dead.”
— Valerie Hopkins 
Just days after Moscow threatened retaliation against Lithuania for placing restrictions on cargo traffic to the isolated Russian territory of Kaliningrad, computer hackers “linked to the Russian state” attacked dozens of Lithuanian government and private organizations, the Baltic nation’s deputy defense minister said.
The digital onslaught, which Lithuania warned would likely continue and even intensify in coming days, appeared to mark the beginning of what Russia said last week would be painful measures against the NATO nation for restricting the transportation of certain goods by rail to Kaliningrad.
The Russian exclave on the Baltic Sea is sandwiched between Lithuania and Poland, another NATO nation, hundreds of miles from the Russian mainland to the east.
NATO forces in Lithuania do not expect Moscow’s threats to result in military action because Russia’s armed forces are already severely stretched in Ukraine. But the sudden flare-up along a sensitive fault line between East and West has nonetheless put nerves on edge at a time of growing tensions between Russia and the American-led alliance.
Lithuania insists it has imposed no cargo ban and accuses Russia of lying. It says it has restricted just 1 percent of the goods that pass by rail through Lithuanian territory in response to European Union sanctions over the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Russia has nonetheless responded with fury, claiming that Europe had imposed an illegal “blockade” on its westernmost territory, formerly part of the German region of East Prussia and seized by Moscow at the end of World War II.
Margiris Abukevicius, Lithuania’s vice minister of national defense responsible for cybersecurity, said a wave of cyberattacks hit Lithuania’s state railway, airports, media companies and government ministries on Monday, in a coordinated barrage by hackers known to be associated with the Russian state. The assault involved mostly so-called distributed denial-of-service attacks, which involve hackers flooding the servers that run a target’s site with internet traffic until its falters or collapses under the load.
A Russian hacker group known as Killnet claimed responsibility for the attacks on its Telegram channel, demanding that the Lithuanian authorities “immediately withdraw their decision to ban the transit of Russian cargo between Kaliningrad Region and Russia.” The group said it was “not affiliated with any law enforcement authorities” and mocked the Lithuanian authorities as “stupid ducks” known for “making up garbage.”
During a visit to Kaliningrad last week, Nikolai P. Patrushev, the head of the Kremlin’s Security Council and one of President Vladimir V. Putin’s closest advisers, warned that Russia would “certainly respond to such hostile action.” He did not specify what Russia’s response would be, but said it would “have a serious negative impact on the population of Lithuania.”
The European Union has sought to defuse the crisis by tentatively proposing that Lithuania lift restrictions on transporting Russian goods to and from Kaliningrad, even those covered by European sanctions. But this has met with resistance from several countries in the bloc that do not want to relax measures in order to pacify Russia.
The European Commission, the bloc’s executive arm, had been expected to issue precise guidelines on Monday about restrictions on cargo to Kaliningrad, but it delayed its decision amid bickering among member nations.
Tomas Dapkus in Vilnius contributed reporting.
— Andrew Higgins 
The United States will announce this week that it is sending Ukraine an advanced air defense system, U.S. officials said on Monday, ramping up President Biden’s pledge to give the country the military equipment it needs to defend against Russian aggression.
The Biden administration will buy Ukraine a NASAMS system — an advanced, medium-to-long-range surface-to-air missile defense system — that will allow Ukraine to defend its forces from greater distances, an official familiar with the decision said.
The United States will sign a contract with the manufacturer of one of these systems to purchase it for Ukraine, the official said. 
Mr. Biden’s decision to authorize the new system came just a day after Russia fired missiles into Kyiv, the capital of Ukraine, as leaders of the Group of 7 wealthy nations were beginning a summit in Germany.
Jake Sullivan, Mr. Biden’s national security adviser, told reporters at the G7 summit that the United States intended “to finalize a package that includes advanced medium- and long-range air defense capabilities for the Ukrainians,” but said he would provide further details only once the contract with the manufacturer was signed. 
He said the package would include “some other items that are of urgent need, including ammunition for artillery and counter battery radar systems.”
The equipment will be paid for from the emergency funding that Congress passed to assist Ukraine, the official said.
When Russia first invaded, Ukraine pleaded with the United States and other European countries to provide fighter jets or enforce a no-fly zone over the country to counter Russia’s air force. Mr. Biden and other leaders rejected those options, fearing they could spark a broader confrontation with Mr. Putin.
Providing Ukraine with more sophisticated air defense missiles falls short of the original requests from President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. But officials said the system will help Ukraine defend against Russian attacks by the air, including from cruise missiles like the ones that hit Kyiv on Sunday.
Mr. Sullivan told reporters that Mr. Zelensky’s first request to the G7 leaders when he addressed them by video on Monday was for help in better defending against Russian airstrikes, like the one that rocked a Kyiv apartment building on Sunday.
“At the top of his mind was the set of missile strikes that took place in Kyiv and other cities across Ukraine,” Mr. Sullivan said, “and his desire to get additional air defense capabilities that could shoot down Russian missiles out of the sky. So the president was able to be positively responsive to him on that.”
The United States had already agreed last month to provide Ukraine with advanced rocket systems that could target enemy tanks and other military equipment from a distance of about 50 miles.
Mr. Biden announced his intention to give Ukraine those systems at the end of May. But administration officials said at the time that the president had authorized the advanced weapons only after assurances that Ukraine would not use them against targets inside Russian territory.
— Michael D. Shear and Jim Tankersley 
LVIV, Ukraine — The all-too-familiar blare of an air raid siren signaled rockets within striking distance of this city in western Ukraine on Monday afternoon. It was the fifth time in less than 48 hours.
With each siren, nerves have grown more frayed.
The dozens of missiles launched by Russian forces into Ukraine over the weekend have raised anxiety, even in the relative peace of the country’s northwest. The air raid alarms that had grown sporadic are becoming more frequent, renewing fears that it may only be a matter of time before missiles target civilians in what have been considered Ukraine’s safest cities.
Staff members at the Lviv National Art Gallery, who had recently returned to work when the gallery reopened last month after being closed for weeks, walked with purpose into the basement along with a handful of visitors to wait out the alarm on Monday. The women, who normally keep an eye on the museum’s visitors, gathered in one corner of the basement and turned to their phones, scrolling for updates on where missiles had been fired or checking in with family members.
In some ways this precaution has become routine, but it took on a new level of urgency after a weekend filled with strikes that triggered alarms over large swathes of the country several times a day.
Many in Lviv watched in horror as explosions rattled a residential area of the capital, Kyiv, on Sunday morning, destroying three floors of a nine-story building. One person was killed and two others injured.
On Saturday, some 50 missiles rained down across the country, hours before President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia met with President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko of Belarus in St. Petersburg.
“It was a bit calmer before the weekend, and there were fewer air alarms,” said one museum worker, Mariia Kunor, 65. “And now, we feel bigger anxiety for ourselves, our children, and our grandchildren.”
When the siren began wailing on Monday afternoon, Andriy Sadovyi, the mayor of Lviv, shared a photo of the huge swath of the country covered by the alarm, which was triggered by rockets launched from Belarus. He asked, “Belarusians, where’s the brotherhood and being a good neighbor?”
Liudmyla Posliedova, 72, another of the museum employees, said that every siren now raised fears that a missile could strike Lviv, which has been spared the worst of the war.
“After all of the things happening in Kyiv,” Ms. Posliedova said, “we’ve felt so sorry for people, the women, children who lost apartments or houses.”
She added that she also feared for all of the internally displaced people from the east of the country who had come to Lviv for shelter and must again deal with the stress that the sirens bring.
“The more air alarms we have, the more anxiety we have, and nothing helps ease that,” said her colleague, Lesia Sannytska, 62.
Elsewhere in the city, pedestrians walked to underground street crossings to wait out the siren, clutching their phones and looking for updates that would give them a sense of whether or not there had been any strikes nearby. Others leaned against archways to get out of the streets — even as countless other pedestrians continued about their day.
Halyn Telep, 59, said that up until last week, it seemed that everyone had calmed down a bit.
“And now, of course, the feeling of anxiety is growing,” said Ms. Telep, one of the museum workers. “What can we do? We are constantly worried.”
— Megan Specia 
LVIV, Ukraine — Civilians should immediately leave the Ukrainian city of Lysychansk, the region’s governor said on Monday — an indication of the gathering pace of the Russian onslaught in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine.
“Due to the real threat to life and health, we call for an evacuation,” Serhiy Haidai, the military governor of Luhansk Province, wrote on the Telegram social messaging app. “Save yourself and your loved ones.”
The statement was a marked change of tone for Mr. Haidai who has for weeks had spoken of Ukraine’s control of the city on the Siversky Donets River.
Moscow is attempting to secure the whole of the eastern Donbas region, made up of Luhansk and Donetsk provinces, and has concentrated its forces there and deployed its long range artillery, which is superior to Ukraine’s, to shatter towns and cities.
But following the capture last week of Sievierodonetsk, the city on the other side of the river from Lysychansk, Russian forces have stepped up their assault on Lysychansk. The city is the last major urban center in Luhansk that Moscow does not control. The Ukrainian military said in a statement on Monday that Russian forces were trying to blockade Lysychansk from the south.
The retreat of Ukrainian forces from Sievierodonetsk represented the most significant loss for the Ukrainian military since Russian forces seized Mariupol a month ago after a similarly brutal campaign of heavy shelling and street fighting left that southern port in ruins. The Donbas makes up about nine percent of Ukraine’s land, but is an important industrial region for the country.
Russia launched 49 missile strikes and air attacks in Luhansk over the past 24 hours, Ukrainian police said on Monday, destroying 23 targets including two churches in Lysychansk.
The exiled mayor of Sievierodonetsk on Monday painted a bleak picture of life for those who remain in a city where government officials estimate that 90 percent of the buildings have been destroyed.
“There’s no good news I can share with you,” the mayor, Oleksandr Striuk, said during a virtual news conference.
Between 7,000 and 8,000 civilians — out of a prewar population of 160,000 — were still in Sievierodonetsk when it fell to Russian forces on Friday, Mr. Striuk said, citing accounts of people still there. The situation on the ground was dire, he said, with infrastructure razed and clean water and food in short supply.
Mr. Striuk and other officials in Sievierodonetsk were forced to flee elsewhere in Ukraine when the situation deteriorated. Those who remain now that the city has fallen to Russian control will likely be allowed to evacuate only to Russian-held cities, as has been the case in other captured areas.
— Megan Specia and Matthew Mpoke Bigg 
BRUSSELS — NATO intends to significantly increase allied forces on “standby” in case of conflict from 40,000 to 300,000, Jens Stoltenberg, the NATO secretary-general, said on Monday in a news conference previewing the alliance’s annual summit meeting this week in Madrid.
The alliance will also increase the size of its deployments in Poland and the Baltic countries to brigade level, he said, in another response to Russia’s ongoing invasion of Ukraine.
The intention is to increase the level of deterrence against Russia, especially in those countries in closest proximity to it and to Belarus.
In a forthcoming statement of priorities, the first since 2010, the leaders will “make clear that allies consider Russia as the most significant and direct threat to our security,” Mr. Stoltenberg said, while addressing China for the first time “and the challenges that Beijing poses toward our security, interests and values.”
The meeting will also announce a more comprehensive aid package for Ukraine, he said.
NATO also released its latest military spending figures, showing that only nine of the 30 member states reach or exceed the target of spending 2 percent of their economic output on their militaries, although France and North Macedonia are close. Mr. Stoltenberg insisted that 19 allies had clear plans to reach that figure by 2024, which is the alliance’s goal.
However Spain, the host country for this week’s summit, lags far behind, spending only 1.01 percent, second to last of the 30, just behind Belgium and ahead of Luxembourg.
In total, alliance spending on defense has increased every year since 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea and the goals were set at a NATO summit meeting in Wales. But 2 percent “is increasingly considered a floor, not a ceiling,” Mr. Stoltenberg said.
— Steven Erlanger 
China said on Monday that it welcomed the Group of 7 nations’ plans to expand global infrastructure investment in developing countries but rejected criticism that its own extensive efforts were “debt traps” for the nations taking part.
Leaders of the G7 countries said on Sunday that they would seek to raise $600 billion in private and public investment for less wealthy countries to finance spending on infrastructure ranging from telecommunications to health care. The United States said it would mobilize $200 billion of that commitment over the next five years.
While much of the G7 summit has concentrated on the war in Ukraine, China remains a long-term focus, with the infrastructure plan meant to counter the $1 trillion Belt and Road Initiative that Beijing launched in 2013.
Zhao Lijian, a spokesman for China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, rejected criticism of that program on Monday, saying that loose monetary policy and unregulated financial products from the United States create the greatest debt burden for developing nations.
“China always welcomes all initiatives to promote global infrastructure construction,” Mr. Zhao said. “But we oppose words and deeds that use the banner of infrastructure construction to promote geopolitical calculations, and smear and slander the Belt and Road Initiative.”
The latest G7 initiative, called the Partnership for Global Infrastructure, comes one year after President Biden urged the member countries to counter China’s influence through a similar plan known as Build Back Better World.
Western leaders say the Partnership for Global Infrastructure will focus on projects that can be completed quickly and deliver the greatest benefits while meeting environmental and labor standards. But the mix of public and private money means that the total investment sum is not guaranteed. And the repeated attempts to counter China’s program have stirred doubt.
“I think the default reaction has to be skepticism,” said James Crabtree, the executive director for the International Institute for Strategic Studies Asia. “So far the Western Belt and Road competitors tend to promise more than they deliver. So the question is: What is going to be different?”
Still, some observers found the latest iteration to be more concrete than past attempts. The Chinese program has begun to taper off, potentially offering opportunities for rival efforts. And Europe’s attempts to move away from Russian oil and natural gas offer further incentive to pursue projects abroad.
“This shows a big commitment for infrastructure in the developing world,” said Maria Adele Carrai, an assistant professor of global China studies at N.Y.U. Shanghai. Western countries, she said, appeared to have been “pushed further by the war in Ukraine, which shows their vulnerability in the supply chain.”
— Austin Ramzy 
President Biden and Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, pledged on Monday to continue working to reduce Europe’s reliance on Russian energy, including liquefied natural gas — an effort that is part of a campaign to pressure President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia over his invasion of Ukraine.
European nations have pledged to eliminate most imports of Russian oil this year. The United States has banned the relatively small amount of Russian oil it had been importing. And the Group of 7 leaders are working toward capping the price of Russian oil to deprive Mr. Putin of some revenue even after the European bans go into effect.
On Monday, Mr. Biden and Ms. von der Leyen said in a joint statement that the United States and its allies in Europe must continue to find ways to eliminate their reliance on other forms of Russian energy as well.
“We are also working together to find ways to further reduce Russia’s energy-derived revenues in the coming months to further curtail Russia’s ability to fund its unprovoked war in Ukraine,” they said.
Mr. Biden and Ms. von der Leyen noted that the countries they represent were taking steps to increase the use of fuel pumps and smart thermostats — measures that can help reduce demand for natural gas and oil from Russia. They said the goal was to deploy 1.5 million new smart thermostats to their populations in 2022.
The United States has also sought to increase the supply of liquefied natural gas to Europe from places other than Russia, to help the countries there decrease their reliance on Mr. Putin’s regime. The statement on Monday said that global exports of natural gas to Europe had increased 75 percent over last year, and that the United States had tripled its exports of natural gas.
But those deliveries of natural gas — a fossil fuel whose burning contributes to climate change — have put increasing pressure on the United States and its European allies not to abandon their longtime environmental goals as they pursue energy independence from Russia.
Climate change activists have expressed concern recently about the likelihood that the countries will miss the climate change goals they announced only last year. In the statement, Mr. Biden and Ms. von der Leyen acknowledged the need to remain committed to environmental promises.
“Mindful of the environmental impact of L.N.G. production and consumption, the United States and the European Commission will step up their cooperation to reduce methane emissions,” the two leaders said. “We will also continue our cooperation on reduction of methane emissions globally.”
— Michael D. Shear 
A Russian court said the trial for the U.S. basketball star Brittney Griner will begin on Friday and she will remain in custody until it ends, her lawyer, Aleksandr Boikov, said on Monday.
Ms. Griner appeared in the Khimki city court near Moscow for a preliminary hearing. She did not speak following her court appearance, according to a video from outside the courtroom that was posted by the official state news agency TASS.
The W.N.B.A. star, who had played for a Russian team during the off-season, was detained in a Moscow airport on Feb. 17, ensnaring a U.S. citizen’s fate in the confrontation between Russia and the West over Ukraine.
Russian officials said they had found vape cartridges bearing traces of hash oil in Ms. Griner’s luggage when she passed through a security checkpoint. The drug charges levied against her carry a sentence of up to 10 years in a penal colony.
Mr. Boikov said that he expected the trial to take up to two months, depending on the court’s workload. He also said Ms. Griner was well and has no complaints about her treatment in the pretrial detention center.
“It is hot in Moscow, so she feels that too, especially while being transported to the court,” Mr. Boikov said in a phone interview.
Ms. Griner, a seven-time W.N.B.A. All-Star center for the Phoenix Mercury and a key figure in two champion Olympic teams, was detained a week before the invasion of Ukraine, but Russian officials did not reveal her arrest until after the war begun.
Word of her arrest came when Russia-U.S. relations were hitting one low point after another, and her detention raised fears that she could become a bargaining chip, perhaps to be exchanged for high-profile Russians in U.S. custody. In recent years, U.S. officials have accused Russia of detaining and sentencing American citizens on trumped-up charges.
Last week, dozens of organizations representing people of color, women and L.G.B.T.Q. voters called on President Biden to strike a deal for her release.
Dmitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesman, said in an interview with MSNBC this month that Ms. Griner was not being held hostage and was being held accountable for violating Russian law.
— Ivan Nechepurenko 
Russia missed a deadline for making bond payments on Sunday, a move signaling its first default on international debt in more than a century, after Western sanctions thwarted the government’s efforts to pay foreign investors. The lapse adds to efforts to seal Moscow off from global capital markets for years.
About $100 million in dollar- and euro-denominated interest payments failed to reach investors within a 30-day grace period after a missed May 27 deadline. The grace period expired Sunday night.
A formal declaration of default would need to come from bondholders because ratings agencies, which normally declare when borrowers have defaulted, have been barred by sanctions from reporting on Russia. The Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee, a panel of investors that rules on whether to pay out securities linked to defaults, hasn’t been asked to make a decision on these bond payments yet.
But it appeared that the payments had not reached bondholders’ accounts as of Sunday night, as required by the bonds’ contracts. On Monday, Russia’s finance ministry said that it had made the payments in May and that they had been transferred to Euroclear, a Brussels-based clearinghouse, but subsequently blocked from reaching bondholders. 
Russia is rejecting the default declaration, on the grounds that it has made efforts to pay. Dmitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesman, told reporters on Monday that the statements about default were “absolutely illegal.”
“The fact that Euroclear withheld this money, did not transfer it to the recipients, it is not our problem,” Mr. Peskov said. “In other words, there are no grounds to call this situation a default.”
The finance ministry added that the actions of foreign financial institutions were beyond its control and that “it seems advisable for investors to contact the relevant financial institutions directly” over the payments.
Euroclear declined to comment.
“We can expect Russia to stick to its alternative narrative: The default isn’t a default, we tried and it isn’t our fault,” said Tim Samples, a legal studies professor at the University of Georgia’s Terry College of Business and an expert on sovereign debt, adding that Russia also hasn’t submitted to jurisdiction in foreign courts. Still, “that has to be a bit humiliating, even for a country that can survive and maintain a war on its hydrocarbon revenues,” he said.
The risk of default emerged in late February after Russia invaded Ukraine and sanctions were imposed to sever the country from international financial markets. In late May, Russia tried to navigate tightening sanctions that cut off its access to American banks and bondholders by sending the payments to a Moscow-based institution. But ultimately, the funds didn’t make it all the way to bondholders’ accounts because of far-reaching American and European sanctions.
News of Monday’s apparent default showed “just how strong” international sanctions against Russia have been, a senior U.S. administration official said in a background briefing for reporters at the Group of 7 summit in Germany, highlighting the “dramatic” effect on Russia’s economy.
This default is unusual because it’s a result of economic sanctions blocking transactions, not because the Russian government has run out of money. Moscow’s finances remain resilient after months of war, with nearly $600 billion in foreign currency and gold reserves, though about half of that is frozen overseas. And Russia continues to receive a steady influx of cash from sales of oil and gas. Still, a default would be a stain on the country’s reputation that will linger in investors’ memories and probably push up its borrowing costs if it is able to tap international capital markets.
Unlike other major defaults in recent history, such as in Greece and Argentina, this default is expected to have a relatively small impact on international markets and Russia’s budget. For one thing, Russia has already lost access to international investors, traditionally the worst consequence of default.
“The only clear negative outcome of the default is that the external market will be effectively closed for the ministry of finance,” said Sofya Donets, an economist at Renaissance Capital in Moscow. “But it’s already closed.”
The head of Russia’s central bank, Elvira Nabiullina, said this month that there wouldn’t be any immediate consequences of a default because there had already been an outflow of investors and a drop in the value of Russia’s assets. The central bank is more concerned about inflation, most recently at about 17 percent, and supporting the economy through a “large-scale structural transformation” after an exodus of foreign companies and imports.
The Western sanctions alone are expected to block Russia from large parts of international capital markets for a long time. Regardless, Russia has been reluctant to give up its reputation as a reliable borrower, which was hard won after its economic collapse in 1998, when the government defaulted on ruble-denominated bonds amid a currency crisis.
Last month, Russia insisted that it had fulfilled its debt obligations by sending funds to its payment agent in Moscow, the National Settlement Depository. Since then, the depository has fallen under European sanctions, further restricting Russia’s ability to pay bondholders. The finance minister, Anton Siluanov, has accused the West of artificially manufacturing a default and has threatened legal action against U.S. authorities.
This is Russia’s first major default on foreign debt since 1918, soon after the Bolshevik Revolution.
On Wednesday, President Vladimir V. Putin signed a decree saying that future payments to holders of debt denominated in dollars or euros would be made through Russian financial institutions and that the obligations would be considered met if paid in rubles and converted. Most of the bond contracts don’t allow for payment in rubles.
Over the following two days, nearly $400 million in dollar-denominated debt payments were due from bonds that had 30-day and 15-day grace periods. The finance ministry said it had sent the payments, in rubles, using the new procedure laid out by the presidential decree. But it remains unclear how foreign investors will gain access to the funds.
Overseas investors held about half of Russia’s $40 billion in outstanding foreign-currency debt at the end of last year. As the risk of default grew this year, PIMCO, the investment management firm, saw the value of its Russian bond holdings decline by more than $1 billion, and pension funds and mutual funds with exposure to emerging market debt have also experienced declines.
But exposure to Russian assets is limited in the United States and Europe because sanctions imposed since Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 have discouraged investors who didn’t want the geopolitical risk.
By international standards, Russia doesn’t have that much debt. Its public debt was only about 17 percent of gross domestic product last year, according to the International Monetary Fund, one of just a handful of countries with debt ratios under 25 percent. The United States, whose assets are in demand among global investors and deemed low risk, has a debt ratio of 125 percent of G.D.P.
Russia’s low debt levels are partly a result of “this new geopolitical era” since the annexation of Crimea, Ms. Donets said. “But it’s also a product of the default of 1998,” she added, when “the ministry of finance was burned badly.” Since then, the ministry has not been that active in issuing new foreign-currency debt, she said.
Russia hasn’t relied on borrowing from international investors for its budget. The finance ministry hasn’t issued dollar-denominated debt since 2019, when U.S. sanctions barred American banks from buying the debt directly. It last issued euro-denominated debt in May 2021.
Instead, Russia has depended on its oil and gas exports, and those dollar revenues that went into reserves and grew the national wealth fund.
“Why would you borrow and pay additional rates when you are a country that is accumulating oil funds, accumulating in hard currency, a country which has $600 billion in reserves?” Ms. Donets said. 
The war hasn’t changed that calculation. Russia’s current account surplus, a broad measure of trade and investment, has soared as revenues from energy exports jumped, capital controls stopped investments fleeing and sanctions slashed imports. It has helped push the ruble to its highest level in seven years.
If Russia does issue more debt, it will lean on local banks and residents in the short term to buy ruble-denominated bonds.
Russia “will have no access to the capital markets until the war stops and the sanctions are lifted,” said Richard Portes, an economics professor at the London School of Business.
The long-term consequences of a default are unclear because of the unusual nature of the financial breach. But it’s possible to envision a future where Russia is able to sell debt on international markets again, analysts say, if the war ends and Russia’s geopolitical ambitions change. Without Mr. Putin and with hundreds of billions of dollars in international reserves unfrozen, it could return to markets.
“Capital market access can be restored very quickly,” Mr. Portes said. “Once Russia is back in good political graces and sanctions are lifted.”
“If it’s not a political pariah, it won’t be an economic pariah,” he added.
Reporting was contributed by Ivan Nechepurenko, Andrés R. Martínez, Jim Tankersley and Alan Rappeport.
— Eshe Nelson 
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine on Monday endorsed a proposal by leaders of the Group of 7 nations to increase pressure on Moscow by trying to limit the price of the country’s oil exports. He also called on the U.S. State Department to recognize Russia as a state sponsor of terrorism.
In a video address to the G7 leaders’ summit in Germany, Mr. Zelensky also welcomed a decision made last week by the European Union to allow Ukraine’s candidacy for membership. He said the move reflected the country’s “progress in European integration” and its “contribution to the protection of European values.”
He also suggested “creating an effective global mechanism for confiscating frozen or seized Russian assets,” according to the Ukrainian presidency’s readout of the speech.
The G7 summit, a gathering of the world’s wealthiest democracies, offered another venue for Mr. Zelensky to demand more advanced weapons from allies as Ukrainian forces come under withering assault in the country’s east.
Mr. Zelensky, a former comedic actor, has become a global symbol of his country’s resistance to Russia. And while his international prominence has grown since the early days of the invasion, his repeated request to Ukraine’s allies has essentially remained unchanged: more military and financial support.
On Monday, he followed the formula he has used in almost all of his speeches to high-profile audiences since Russia invaded Ukraine in February, delivering remarks by video in his now-ubiquitous military-issue shirt.
In past speeches to foreign audiences, he has appealed to the leaders and their nations’ histories. Mr. Zelensky echoed Winston Churchill’s historic “We shall fight on the beaches” remarks against Nazism when he addressed the British Parliament in March. Ukraine would fight until the end, “in the forests, in the fields, on the shores, in the streets,” he said. 
About a week later, he cast the war as a battle for democracy itself and invoked the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to describe his country’s fight to U.S. lawmakers, saying, “I have a dream.”
— Eduardo Medina 
As Ukraine’s allies seek to broaden the coalition of nations against Russia, the United States and Europe are working to persuade India to abandon its neutral stance in the war in Ukraine.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday will join the Group of 7 summit in Germany, where Ukraine has been the focus. So far, U.S. overtures to persuade Mr. Modi to stop buying Russian oil have failed. Its purchases of Russian crude have doubled since the conflict’s start.
Four other nations with close relations to Russia — Argentina, Indonesia, Senegal and South Africa — were also invited to the summit.
Mr. Modi has maintained a neutral stance on the war, calling for a resolution through diplomacy and dialogue. But India’s increasing trade with Russia has undercut U.S.-led efforts to starve the Kremlin of oil revenue.
Political observers say that the Biden administration probably views India as too essential a partner in its plans to contain China for it to seriously consider sanctioning India for increasing its trade with Russia.
Mr. Modi is scheduled to participate in sessions on climate, energy, health, food security and gender equality. During the summit, President Biden announced plans for an infrastructure fund, with G7 countries putting up billions of dollars for development projects in India and elsewhere as a counterweight to China’s expansive Belt and Road Initiative.
The meeting at Schloss Elmau, a retreat in the Bavarian Alps, comes amid a worsening situation in Ukraine that has not only set off a geopolitical crisis, but also challenged energy and food security, particularly in developing countries.
While the U.S. and Europe are working to reduce their dependence on Russian energy, India and China have drastically increased their purchases, taking advantage of crude discounts of $30 per barrel.
When he was re-elected in 2019, Mr. Modi promised to double the size of India’s economy by 2024. His government said India’s growth depends upon reliable and affordable fuel supplies, and that sanctions on Iranian oil have left India with few other options.
As India increases its purchases of Russian oil, Europe has continued to buy the majority of Russian natural gas exported in recent months. Indian officials have criticized what they characterize as the hypocrisy of the West.
“Punishing India for getting a good deal, and doing it legally, is not on their immediate agenda,” said Samir N. Kapadia of the Vogel Group consultancy in Washington.
“However,” he added, “I don’t believe these record import levels will go unnoticed.”
— Suhasini Raj and Emily Schmall 
COLOMBO, Sri Lanka — The government of Sri Lanka is sending two ministers to Russia to buy oil from Moscow to help overcome an energy crisis in the island nation, a government official said Monday.
“The ministers are going to Russia to try to source oil directly from the government,” Keheliya Rambukwella, the minister of health, told The New York Times. “We are trying everything to meet the demands” of residents, he said.
Protesters have taken to the streets almost daily as Sri Lanka has careened from a debt crisis to an economic collapse that has led to rising food prices and now a shortage of fuel and other essentials. President Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s response to the crisis, which included ordering government employees to work from home to reduce the pressure on public transportation, has been criticized as piecemeal.
Sri Lanka’s energy minister, Kanchana Wijesekera, said on Sunday that officials demanded direct negotiations with the government of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia after the last purchase of Russian crude — 90,000 metric tons earlier this month — had to be brokered by a Dubai-based company.
Any agreement between Sri Lanka and Russia would likely hurt efforts by the United States and Europe to isolate Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. But the need for cheap oil is dire in Sri Lanka, where desperate people have been camping outside gas stations in long lines, which only grew after rumors started spreading that public transit might come to a standstill because of the fuel shortages.
The coronavirus pandemic forced Sri Lanka to close its borders to tourists for nearly a year and a half, depriving the nation of much-needed revenue from travelers. Its currency has also cratered, exacerbated by government missteps. In April, the government suspended payments on its international debt, effectively putting the nation in default.
A delegation from the United States, comprising officials from the Treasury and State departments, arrived in Colombo on Sunday and is working with the government to explore effective ways to support the country, which is also in talks with the International Monetary Fund to restructure its debt.
— Skandha Gunasekara and Sameer Yasir 
Indonesia’s president will meet this week with his counterparts in Russia and Ukraine to urge a halt to the war, part of a rare foray into global politics for Joko Widodo, who is also hosting a major summit later this year.
Mr. Joko will head to Kyiv and Moscow later this week after attending the Group of 7 summit in Germany, where the U.S. and European nations are attempting to put pressure on countries like Indonesia and India — who were invited to the gathering — to join the coalition of nations isolating Russia.
“In those two countries, I will carry out a mission: to invite the two leaders to open dialogue and stop the war,” Mr. Joko said on Twitter.
Indonesia, the world’s fourth most populous country, has long punched below its weight in world affairs. But this year, it is taking on a more prominent role as it hosts the annual summit of the Group of 20, made up of leaders from most of the world’s largest economies.
In March, President Biden called on Indonesia to exclude President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia from the G20 meeting, which is to be held in November on the island of Bali. Instead, Mr. Joko invited President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to attend along with Mr. Putin. Ukraine is not a G20 member.
Mr. Joko, known as Jokowi, is an unlikely peace broker.
Last year, after Myanmar’s military seized power and staged a bloody crackdown, Mr. Joko helped lead efforts by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to end the conflict. He invited the coup’s mastermind, Senior Gen. Min Aung Hlaing, to meet with ASEAN leaders in Jakarta, where they adopted a five-point plan calling for constructive dialogue and the immediate cessation of violence. But nothing has come of it and Myanmar’s military remains firmly in control.
And in Indonesia, Mr. Joko has presided over a military buildup on the island of Papua where clashes between separatists seeking self-rule and Indonesian forces have been escalating and tens of thousands of people have been displaced.
“How likely are Putin and Zelensky to listen to Jokowi when he can’t peacefully resolve the long-running and deadly Papua conflict?” asked Veronica Koman, an Indonesian human rights attorney at Amnesty International Australia. “Jokowi lacks moral authority because he has been ignoring calls for a peaceful resolution in Papua.”
Mr. Joko landed Sunday in Germany. Before arriving, he said he would encourage the group to seek peace in Ukraine and find solutions to the global food and energy crises that are “engulfing the world.”
When he meets later with Mr. Zelensky, he said, he would invite him to “create room for dialogue in the context of peace” and point out that “the food supply chain must be reactivated.”
Mr. Joko said he would appeal to Mr. Putin to declare a cease-fire and stop the war “as soon as possible.”
Aaron Connelly, a research fellow at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in Singapore, said Mr. Joko’s diplomatic approach reflects Indonesia’s longstanding nonalignment and the president’s focus on issues closely tied to ordinary Indonesians’ well-being.
“Historically there are few more important issues in Indonesian politics than cost of living issues,” he said, “and Jokowi wants to be seen to be working to reduce food and fuel prices.”
— Richard C. Paddock and Muktita Suhartono 
Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany, who is hosting the Group of 7 summit in the Bavarian Alps, on Monday did not rule out the possibility that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia would participate in a Group of 20 meeting, a wider gathering of leaders of the world’s largest economies later this year.
But both he and Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, said it would be important not to let the Russian leader’s presence derail the gathering, scheduled to take place in Indonesia in November.
“In my opinion, the G20 is too important, also for developing and emerging countries, that we allow it to be destroyed by Putin,” Ms. von der Leyen said on Sunday.
Asked on Monday whether he would attend the G20 summit if Mr. Putin were present, Mr. Scholz said how to handle the larger forum would be discussed with Indonesia’s president, Joko Widodo, who has been invited to join the G7 leaders later on Monday, and a decision whether or not to attend would ultimately be made shortly before the actual event.
“The G20 play an important role, and we want to work together with them closely,” Mr. Scholz told ZDF television in Germany. “All countries here are clear on that, which is why we share the conviction that Ms. von der Leyen expressed, that we do not want to torpedo the G20.”
Mr. Widodo plans to travel first to Kyiv to meet President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, and then on to Russia to hold talks with Mr. Putin.
— Melissa Eddy 
