The port city, emblematic of the war’s savagery, is suffering under Russian occupation, as another city, in eastern Ukraine, joins the ranks of the fallen. 
Occupied Mariupol is suffering deeply, its mayor says.
Ukraine says it is withdrawing from the city of Sievierodonetsk.
Countries aligned against Russia face growing economic pain, even as Putin proves resilient to sanctions.
A Ukrainian soldier in Lysychansk says an order to retreat ‘could come at any moment.’
Analysis: What the battle for Sievierodonetsk shows about the war.
Ukrainian insurgents kill a Kremlin-backed politician in occupied Kherson, part of a wave of attacks.
E.U. leaders plan for a painful scenario: Russia turning off the gas.
Mariupol, a Ukrainian port city that became emblematic of the savagery of Russia’s military campaign, is now suffering deeply under Russian rule, according to the city’s mayor.
The city of 120,000 captive residents has no working sewage system or drinking water, the mayor, Vadym Boychenko, said in a Telegram post this week that described mountains of uncollected trash and a flood of garbage overrunning the streets. He expressed concern that Mariupol could be on the brink of a new disaster of disease, citing the spread of cholera and dysentery and noting frequent burials throughout the city.
Russia shelled the city ruthlessly almost from the first minute of its invasion, killing thousands of civilians and Ukrainian fighters. Then, in mid-May, Russian forces crushed the city’s last military resistance in the underground bunkers at a vast steel complex. This week, a Turkish cargo ship became the first to set sail from the Russian-occupied port.
The mayor’s report bodes ill for Sievierodonetsk, an industrial city in Ukraine’s eastern Donetsk region, where weeks of battles and months of bombardment have forced the Ukrainian military to withdraw. As in Mariupol, buildings and infrastructure have been devastated. About 8,000 civilians remain in what is left of the city.
Petro Andriushchenko, an aide to Mayor Boychenko, and the Mariupol City Council update their Telegram feeds several times a day with news that often comes with photos and a message from the mayor. On Friday, along with the mayor’s bleak warning, there was celebratory news about the former residents of Mariupol starting new lives and finding new homes in Dnipro, and information about a support center in Khmelnytsky for displaced residents of Mariupol.
But most updates are of the grimmer variety. One recent Telegram post said that Mariupol State University had been destroyed by the Russians. Another post said the Russians were building fortifications disguised as residential buildings and suggested that they were preparing to use civilians as human shields in case of any future offensive from Ukraine’s Army.
— Maham Javaid 
After weeks of bloody street-by-street fighting and months of withering Russian bombardment, Ukrainian forces fighting in the eastern city of Sievierodonetsk will retreat from the city, the local governor said on Friday.
Serhiy Haidai, the head of the Luhansk region’s military administration, said that it “does not make sense” to hold on to what he described as broken positions in the city any longer.
“The number of people killed will increase every day,” he said. “It was decided that our defenders would retreat to new positions, fortified areas, and from there conduct hostilities and inflict damage on the enemy.”
The fall of the ruined industrial city on the east bank of the Siversky Donets River meant that Russia could fully concentrate its forces on taking its twin city on the west bank of the river, Lysychansk, the last pocket of land in Luhansk Province under the control of the Ukrainian government.
The Kremlin has devoted a large portion of its combat forces to the capture of the city and the 30-mile-wide pocket of land surrounding it as it seeks to advance westward in the Donbas region — the mineral rich, industrial heartland of Ukraine.
Russia’s Defense Ministry said on Friday that its troops had captured 10 Ukrainian villages in the Luhansk region over the past five days and claimed to have cornered up to 2,000 Ukrainian soldiers in the area. The ministry’s claims, which have proved overstated or false in the past, could not be independently verified. A spokesman for Ukraine’s defense ministry said the Russian report was categorically false.
Yet with their advance stalled on the outskirts of Lysychansk, the Russians have begun focusing more on the supply routes into the city. Though some damaged roads and bridges remain largely traversable, vehicles will have to slow down to pass craters and debris, leaving more time for Russian artillery to target them.
BELARUS
RUSSIA
Siversky
Donets R.
Kyiv
Lviv
UKRAINE
Sievierodonetsk
Lysychansk
DONBAS
MOLDOVA
ROMANIA
Sea of
Azov
CRIMEA
100 mileS
By The New York Times
To take Sievierodonetsk, Russia had to devastate it with artillery strikes. The Ukrainian government has said that about 90 percent of the buildings are destroyed. There are an estimated 8,000 civilians in the city, and Ukrainian officials have said they cannot safely be evacuated to Ukrainian controlled territory.
Just as the siege and destruction of Mariupol became emblematic of the savagery of the war in its early months, the fight for Sievierodonetsk offered a window into the brutal nature of the Russian offensive in the east. Russia has relied on its vast arsenal of artillery, rockets and air power to smash towns and villages into ruins as it grinds its way to capturing territory.
But holding territory is different from smashing it. The street-by-street fighting that raged in Sievierodonetsk for weeks demonstrated the challenges that lie ahead for Russian forces as they try to move on heavily fortified Ukrainian positions farther west.
The fight for the twin cities has been among the bloodiest of the war, with both sides suffering heavy casualties. Over the course of the battle, the Ukrainians made desperate pleas to the west to speed up the delivery of heavy weapons as they were vastly outgunned by Russian forces. As the battle intensified, Ukrainian officials said that as many as 200 soldiers a day were dying in the fields and villages of eastern Ukraine.
The Russians have also suffered staggering losses, according to military analysts. But they have continued to pour men, armor and artillery into the fight for this one pocket of land about the size of Detroit.
It could not be determined how many soldiers are pulling out of the Sievierodonetsk, and with all of the bridges across the Siversky Donets River destroyed, it was unclear how they would get out en masse.
Ukrainian soldiers have been shuttling people across the river in small boats. Some soldiers have had to to swim.
The situation across the river in Lysychansk is growing more perilous, and the city is in grave danger of being encircled by Russian forces. 
— Marc Santora, Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Ivan Nechepurenko 
WASHINGTON — Four months into the war in Ukraine, the countries aligned against Russia face growing economic pain even as sanctions and energy embargoes are showing little impact on Russian President Vladimir V. Putin’s military campaign or his political standing at home.
U.S. officials vowed that Russia’s financial system would be battered if it attacked Ukraine, and President Biden boasted in March that sanctions were “crushing the Russian economy” and that “the ruble is reduced to rubble.” But Russian oil revenues have set records as crude prices surge. And after plunging in February, the ruble hit a seven-year high against the dollar this week.
Biden officials say Russia’s economy is nevertheless incurring damage that will compound over time, especially as restrictions on technology exports to Russia gradually stunt the growth of its industries from aerospace to computing. And on Thursday, a White House spokesman said that leaders of the Group of 7 industrial nations, set to begin meetings in Madrid on Sunday, will discuss new plans to further “tighten the screws” on Russia’s economy.
But it is unclear which side has more time to spare. The Ukrainian government says as many as 200 of its soldiers are being killed daily, and thousands of civilians have died as Russia seizes territory in eastern Ukraine. Mr. Putin continues to enjoy near-dictatorial power, and he is unlikely to enter serious peace talks with Ukraine while his military makes gains.
“Russia’s financial system is back to business as usual after a few weeks of severe bank runs,” Elina Ribakova, deputy chief economist at the Institute of International Finance, wrote on Twitter last week, adding that those who thought “that cutting Russia from financing for a few weeks at the beginning of the war would stop the war have proven naïve.”
Few if any Biden officials expected sanctions to halt the war immediately. But the administration and its European counterparts also did not expect the economic pressure they now are experiencing. Despite initial assurances that sanctions would not touch Russian energy exports, America has since banned imported Russian oil, and the European Union has announced plans to reduce its imports by 90 percent this year. Partly as a result of those actions, energy prices have surged in the U.S. and Europe, with regular gasoline averaging well above $5 per gallon in some states.
Now Mr. Biden is bracing for midterm elections this fall in which Republicans are likely to capitalize on the rising cost of living. Summer’s end will also bring cooler temperatures to Europe amid rising alarms that Moscow is choking off natural gas supplies.
And in a stinging twist, the sanctions and related embargoes are allowing America’s top strategic competitor, China, to buy massive amounts of oil at heavily discounted prices, as Russia seeks willing customers to replace lost revenue.
— Michael Crowley and Edward Wong 
DRUZHKIVKA, Ukraine — Sergiy, a Ukrainian army medic stationed in Lysychansk, insisted late this week that his country’s forces’ withdrawal from neighboring Sievierodonetsk was a “tactical withdrawal” and was dependent on the difficulty of evacuating the wounded from the city across the heavily shelled Siversky Donets River.
The wounded “sometimes die because the evacuation is stretching for one and a half hours to two hours,” said Sergiy, who noted that often casualties had to be ferried across in small boats.
“Human resources are worth more than the buildings that are left there,” he said.
Another soldier in Lysychansk named Sergiy said that for now they were holding their city on the high ground, but that an order to retreat “could come at any moment.”
Lysychansk, which sits on high ground on the western banks of the Siversky Donets River, is slowly being flanked by Russian forces attacking from multiple directions. Having failed to make progress in a head-on assault, Russia’s forces have been pressing for weeks to break through Ukrainian defensive positions to the southeast of Lysychansk.
This weekend, they were able to break through that part of the line, leaning on heavy artillery barrages and tank advances. Ukrainian soldiers in the city described fierce fighting near its outskirts and medics there were hard at work on the steady steam of casualties coming in.
On Thursday, shelling near the supply lines that run toward Lysychansk was incessant. Ukrainian rocket launchers, their tubes loaded, waited to move into position or sped toward the front. What appeared to be two cruise missiles also hit Bakhmut, about 30 miles to the southwest, a supply hub for Ukrainians, sending mushroom-shaped clouds of smoke into the air.
Serhiy Haidai, the head of the Luhansk region’s military administration, said on Friday morning that the Russians had gained more ground around the city overnight. But unlike with Sievierodonetsk, which is essentially on flat ground, the complex terrain of hills and ridges in and around Lysychansk has offered the Ukrainians multiple defensive positions.
“The enemy presses very hard, since they have significantly superior forces than ours,” he said, adding that Russian forces were also trying to infiltrate the city with smaller “subversive reconnaissance groups.”
“We repulsed attempts to go deep into the city,” he said.
However, he said wave after wave of Russian assault had created a “very difficult” situation.
— Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Marc Santora 
Wars are not won by retreats. But it is also possible to win the battle and lose the war.
The two military axioms — the first from Winston Churchill after the retreat from Dunkirk, and the second from more than 2,000 years ago when the Greek king Pyrrhus strode into the Roman Empire, triumphant but unable to secure the territory he wanted because of heavy losses suffered in the campaign to get there — both resonate as Russia grinds its way to battlefield advances in eastern Ukraine.
Depending on the prism it is viewed through, the fall of Sievierodonetsk and the Ukrainians’ desperate bid to hold on to Lysychansk reveal different aspects of the four-month-old war.
First, in the brutal war of attrition in the east, the Russians have shown that with their vastly superior firepower and willingness to scorch the earth to claim land, they can grind out territorial and tactical gains. And they can inflict heavy losses on Ukrainian forces. The Ukrainian government has said that over the past month, thousands of its soldiers have been killed.
The battle also underscored the importance of Western support for the Ukrainian military and why that assistance will most likely need to be sustained for a long time if Kyiv hopes to not only defend its land, but also set about reclaiming it.
At the same time, however, by holding out for as long as they did in Sievierodonetsk, Ukraine’s soldiers were able to severely degrade Russia’s combat abilities, according to Western and Ukrainian military analysts.
As in the Ukrainians’ defense of Mariupol — which lasted three months before the last garrison of the country’s soldiers surrendered at the Azovstal steel plant in mid-May — the fight in eastern Ukraine has allowed time for Western weapons to flow in and for Ukrainian forces to begin staging counterattacks in other parts of the country.
“The Kremlin’s ideological fixation on the capture of Sievierodonetsk, much like the earlier siege of Azovstal, will likely be to the ultimate detriment of Russian capabilities in future advances in Ukraine,” the Institute for the Study of War, a Washington-based research institute, said on Thursday.
“The loss of Sievierodonetsk is a loss for Ukraine in the sense that any terrain captured by Russian forces is a loss,” it said, “but the battle of Sievierodonetsk will not be a decisive Russian victory.”
— Marc Santora 
Ukrainian guerrilla fighters claimed on Friday to have killed a Kremlin-backed politician in the Russian-controlled southern region of Kherson, the latest in a series of attacks aimed at destabilizing the occupation authorities.
Dmitry Savluchenko, the head of the Department of Youth and Sports for the region, was blown up in his car, according to both Ukrainian and Russian officials, in what appeared to be part of a growing insurgent movement fueled by public anger over worsening economic, security and humanitarian conditions as Moscow pushes to Russify the region.
Kirill Stremousov, the deputy head of the Russia-appointed administration, called the attack “a vile terrorist act.”
“The threats that come my way won’t break me and my comrades,” he said in a video address, sitting under a portrait of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. “No matter what happens, even after us, Russia will be here, and our children will speak Russian.”
The Kremlin has portrayed the territory it has taken as stable and the people there as welcoming Moscow’s rule, lining up for Russian passports and condemning the previous Ukrainian authorities falsely as a gang of neo-Nazis. But Ukrainian officials say that residents are being coerced into taking passports and that prices have skyrocketed and many people are out of work.
Ukrainians celebrated the assassination and said their resistance was growing.
“Our partisans have another victory,” Serhii Khlan, an adviser to the head of the Kherson region’s military administration, said in a Facebook post on Friday. “A pro-Russian activist and traitor was blown up in a car in one of Kherson’s yards in the morning.”
This week, the head of the Ukrainian intelligence agency, Kyrylo Budanov, said that Ukrainian insurgents had injured another Russia-backed official, Oleksiy Kovalyov, in the Kherson region. At least two more attacks on people working with the Russians in the regions of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia were also reported this week.
The Russians did not acknowledge all of the attacks. They control access to seized territory, and reports of what is happening there often come from witness accounts relayed to Ukrainian officials. Many specific incidents cannot be independently confirmed, but they fit into a broader pattern described by witnesses who have spoken to The New York Times and other independent news media outlets.
The Ukrainians point to the documented atrocities committed by Russian forces in areas they briefly held in northern Ukraine as evidence of what Russian rule looks like. They are also eager to encourage attacks on Russian forces and their proxies.
Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol who is an unofficial spokesman of Ukrainian resistance in his city, said at a news conference on Friday that rewards were being offered of up to $10,000 for the killing of the top proxy leader for Moscow in Melitopol.
“Our partisans start the hunting season,” Mr. Fedorov said.
Russia continues to fortify its defensive positions across the south while also taking steps to further integrate the territory with Russia. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei V. Lavrov, said on Thursday that any future peace talks with Kyiv would be based on the “situation on the ground” at the time when such negotiations would resume.
“There are liberated areas there,” Mr. Lavrov said in an interview with Belarusian state television. “The majority of the population cannot so much as think of returning under the control of the neo-Nazi authorities.”
The Ukrainian military’s Center for National Resistance said that with efforts to introduce Russian passports to the general public failing to draw a large number of takers, officials were forcing them on inmates at the Kherson Northern Correctional Colony.
Mr. Fedorov said that people in his home city had been told that they could not receive pensions or start a business unless they take a passport.
As much as 80 percent of the public in Melitopol is out of work, Mr. Federov said. And basic food staples are three times as expensive as in Ukrainian-controlled territories.
Anastasia Kuznietsova contributed reporting.
— Marc Santora and Ivan Nechepurenko 
BRUSSELS — European leaders meeting in Brussels this week were eager to focus on granting Ukraine E.U. candidate status, but have also had to address a pressing problem linked to the war: Russia has slowly been turning off the gas tap.
The tapering of gas to Germany in recent days has forced the country, Europe’s economic engine, to escalate its energy emergency protocol and urge Germans to save power. The next step is rationing.
E.U. leaders on Friday asked the European Commission, the bloc’s executive branch, to come up with policy proposals to collectively handle the possibility that Russia, using Europe’s enduring dependence on its gas supplies to inflict pain on Ukraine’s supporters, could further reduce the gas flow or even cut off countries completely.
“We have seen the pattern not only of that last weeks and months, but looking back in hindsight, also the pattern of last year, when you look at Gazprom filling the storage — or I should say not filling the storage, because last year they were at a 10 years low,” the commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, said on Friday.
“Now it’s 12 member states that have either been totally cut off or partially,” she added.
Ms. von der Leyen said she would ask her experts to propose an emergency plan to tackle possible shortages going into the winter. The commission has already promoted joint purchasing and storing of gas by E.U. members as a safety measure, should one nation get disconnected. After gas supplies were cut off to Bulgaria, for example, Greece stepped up to help supply its neighbor and fellow E.U. member.
But if Russia decides to hurt Europe for its support of Ukraine by further slashing supplies from its energy giant, Gazprom, it is far from clear that such ad hoc solidarity would work in the winter, when the bloc’s energy demands are much higher.
The E.U. has imposed sanctions on Russian fossil fuels, including a broad ban on Russian oil imports that will come into effect at the end of the year. But it has not been able to do the same with Russian gas, on which it is hugely reliant, because it has not yet lined up sufficient alternatives. Gas prices, meanwhile, have surged, costing European buyers dearly and softening the effect of the sanctions on Russia.
And whatever solutions European leaders devise for the growing problem would take effect in months. For now, member states have to tackle possible shortages largely on their own.
Ms. von der Leyen said that she had been asked to present her proposals at the next E.U. leaders’ summit in October, and that she expected her staff to finish drafting them in September.
In the meantime, she urged people to use less power.
“We should not only replace the gas, but also always take the opportunity of the energy savings. I cannot emphasize that enough,” she said, adding that Europeans could save greatly if they turned down their air-conditioners in the summer and their heaters as the temperature drops.
Gas is not the only urgent question facing world leaders. Diplomats also gathered in Berlin on Friday, ahead of a G-7 summit in Germany on Sunday, to discuss the growing global food crisis set off by the inability of Ukraine to export its grain. Earlier this week, the United Nations said that the war had pushed tens of millions of people into food insecurity.
Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, welcomed Secretary of State Antony Blinken; Italy’s foreign minister, Luigi di Maio; and other officials to discuss possible solutions. 
Before the war, Ukraine exported millions of metric tons of grain monthly, mostly via seaports that are now blockaded. Officials weighed the possibility of moving the grain by land, a far slower and more complicated endeavor.
Speaking to reporters after the meeting, Mr. Blinken said that while the food crisis would continue for some time, it was important to not let Russia get away with violating fundamental human rights of the Ukrainian people. 
— Matina Stevis-Gridneff and Maham Javaid 
KYIV, Ukraine — As the European Union summit began in Brussels on Thursday evening, an aide to Ukraine’s foreign minister tuned into the proceedings on a laptop.
The minister, Dmytro Kuleba, whose left leg was in a tight red cast after a basketball injury, was upbeat as he watched the European Council grant his war-battered country something it had been seeking without success for years: the coveted status as a candidate to join the bloc.
It was one of the best pieces of news for Ukraine, which is in its fourth month of war, since a successful counteroffensive pushed Russian soldiers away from the capital. Mr. Kuleba said the council’s move was “the most important step in overcoming the last psychological barrier in the relations between Ukraine and the European Union.”
Still, he acknowledged that his country would have to wait a long time before it could join the 27-member bloc. The action by the European Council, composed of the leaders of the member states, was just the first step in a yearslong process, and Ukraine would have to make progress on combating corruption and enforcing the rule of law to finally pass muster.
“Sure, there will be talks, reforms here and in the European Union,” he said. “I don’t care. As long as the decision that Ukraine is Europe is taken, I’m fine. History has been made.”
Mr. Kuleba said that for decades, as Ukrainians fought for democracy in protest movements in 2004 and 2014, Brussels and other European capitals still “were entertaining this idea of a buffer zone of something in the middle, a bridge between Russia and the E.U.”
In the last phase, he said, European leaders were unofficially “winking” at Ukrainian officials. “Like, ‘Guys, everything will be fine, it will take years, but in the end you will be with us,’” he said. “But they were still afraid to say it out loud.”
As Mr. Kuleba was speaking in the interview, air raid sirens wailed in Kyiv. An aide ran into the office to say that there were 10 Russian missiles flying above Ukrainian airspace.
“I’m not surprised that the Russians would fire something at Kyiv today,” Mr. Kuleba said, adding that the symbolism of the day would not be lost on the Kremlin.
Mr. Kuleba, 41, a career diplomat, said he saw the European Union as “the first ever attempt to build a liberal empire” on democratic principles, contrasting it with the Russia’s aggression toward former Soviet states under President Vladimir V. Putin.
“I understand that people do not like the word empire, but this is how history is written,” Mr. Kuleba said. “You have to show that different things of a similar scale can be built on different principles: those of liberalism, democracy, respect for human rights, and not on the principle of imposition of the will of one on the rest.”
Mr. Kuleba said he was grateful to other Western allies, especially the United States, for military and political support. However, he said he hoped for a more explicit articulation of Washington’s war aims.
“We are still waiting for the moment when we hear a clear message from Washington that for Washington, the goal of this war is for Ukraine to win and for international law to be restored,” he said. “And Ukraine’s victory for Washington means restoring Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.”
— Valerie Hopkins 
WARSAW — Every afternoon at a park outside a distinctively Stalinesque skyscraper in central Warsaw, scores of Ukrainian teenagers come together. They are young refugees, trying to cope.
Many have quit school to drift around Warsaw, rootless, lost even, as young as 14 or 15, smoking cigarettes and swigging cheap beer. They gather under the maple trees, playing Ping-Pong or sprawling out on the benches, heads in each other’s laps, wondering what to do.
“I’ve seen some wild stuff here,” said Mark, an 18-year-old Ukrainian who was hanging out the other day in the park. “Knives. Guns. Drunk kids fighting.”
The teen years are hard enough anywhere. Bodies change. Carefree childhood swirls away. Everything gets more serious so fast.
But for the one million or so Ukrainian teen refugees, it’s like the mirror they were peering into, trying to figure out their futures, exploded in their faces.
Just as they were becoming adults, Covid upended the world. And just as the pandemic was finally lifting, their country was invaded and flung into war. Their families were split up. Their towns were bombed. They fled to foreign lands and four months later, with the conflict still raging, they have no idea when, or even if, they will ever go home.
— Jeffrey Gettleman 
As Russia tries to break the stranglehold of sanctions, China and India are emerging as Moscow’s pivotal financiers by purchasing large amounts of Russian crude, putting themselves in the middle of the messy war with Ukraine and a geopolitical standoff with the West.
It’s a complex calculation for China, India — and the global economy.
Buying cheap oil from Russia offers economic and political advantages. China can diversify its oil supplies for national security reasons, while India can make billions exporting refined products like gasoline and diesel.
But undercutting European and American efforts to isolate the Kremlin risks serious diplomatic fallout that neither country wants. China has avoided overtly supporting Russia’s war in public statements and India has portrayed itself as neutral.
The two countries, with the demand from their enormous domestic markets and the supplies from their vast refineries, are also central in determining the direction of oil prices. Their purchases of Russian crude in recent months have helped ease the pressure.
Their ultimate appetite for Russian oil will either shake or support the global economy, another complicating factor in the West’s capacity to stay united through a war of attrition in Ukraine. So far, the West has remained steadfast in its commitment to Ukraine, but a long period of high fuel prices and potential shortages in Europe could become politically unpalatable.
— Clifford Krauss, Alexandra Stevenson and Emily Schmall 
DRUZHKIVKA, Ukraine — Ukraine’s decision to retreat from Sievierodonetsk, a strategic city in the country’s east, hands Russia another victory in its grinding campaign to seize the Donbas region.
But the battle for Lysychansk, the city across the Siversky Donets River, is far from over, as Ukrainian officials signaled their forces would pull back in order to retrench and take advantage of the higher ground on that side of the river.
The fight for the second of the twin cities covers a slice of territory now roughly 15 miles wide and three-quarters surrounded by Russian forces. The battle for the area, which has come to be known as the Sievierodonetsk pocket, has entered a new phase as Russian troops move to encircle Lysychansk.
“Our colleagues are holding on,” said Oleg, a member of a Ukrainian tank crew whose captured Russian T-80 had pulled off the front for repairs, its dark green hull now repainted with the Ukrainian flag. “They are repelling the enemy’s onslaught and holding the defense.”
The fight for Sievierodonetsk was vicious. Street-to-street urban combat, interspersed with intense artillery barrages, meant casualties mounted on both sides. Ukrainian troops, using buildings and alleyways to get in close, tried to slow the Russian advance and negate Russia’s superior firepower out of fear of hitting their own troops.
The destruction of the three bridges connecting Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk in recent weeks left Ukrainian forces in an increasingly perilous position: Sending in reinforcements to Sievierodonetsk was almost impossible, and evacuating casualties was equally difficult.
The wounded “sometimes die because the evacuation is stretching for one and a half hours to two hours,” said Sergiy, a Ukrainian medic stationed in Lysychansk, who noted that casualties often had to be ferried across the Siversky Donets river in small boats. “Human resources are worth more than the buildings that are left there,” he added.
The Ukrainian defenders of Lysychansk will soon face a similar dilemma as those troops who were once in Sievierodonetsk. Russian troops who broke through Ukrainian defenses in the east this week have pushed near Lysychansk’s southeastern outskirts and are positioning to advance farther from the south, cutting off the key highway that runs into the city.
A constellation of villages line the base of the rolling hills in Lysychansk’s southern reaches, where the fate of Ukrainian troops in the city could be decided.
The terrain has aided the city’s defenses by providing ideal firing positions for artillery. But if the Russians break through one of those villages, the Ukrainian defenders would begin to lose the advantage of elevation.
“Everything will depend on the intensity of the enemy’s attack from the direction of Mirna Dolina,” said Oleksandr Voronenko, a soldier defending the city, referring to one of the villages just south of Lysychansk. “They will not advance from the direction of Sievierodonetsk. The landscape is disadvantageous.”
Russian forces have already begun to harass the supply lines running into Lysychansk with greater intensity by targeting vehicles, bridges and key intersections with airstrikes and artillery barrages.
“It increasingly appears that the Sievierodonetsk-Lysychansk pocket could become untenable, but given the limited forces Russia has available, they are likely to run into another line of Ukrainian defenses at Bakhmut,” said Michael Kofman, the director of Russian studies at C.N.A., a research institute in Arlington, Va. “Russia is making incremental gains, but its ability to capture the Donbas remains very much in question.”
If the Sievierodonetsk pocket collapses, Russian forces will be in a better position to advance south and target Bakhmut, a key strategic supply hub where Russian forces have already begun to increase pressure with cruise missile strikes and artillery.
— Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Natalia Yermak 
