As Russia pummeled eastern Ukraine with strikes, losses were climbing for both sides in a grinding war that Western leaders warned could last years.
Follow the latest updates on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Ukraine rushes troops to reinforce its faltering defense of Sievierodonetsk.
Ukraine bans some Russian music and books.
Children of Ukraine’s fallen soldiers spend Father’s Day in new grief.
Western leaders warn that the war in Ukraine could last years.
Germany will fire up coal plants again in an effort to save natural gas.
Russia launches strikes against targets across eastern Ukraine.
LYSYCHANSK, Ukraine — Russian forces mounted an assault on Sunday against a key Ukrainian defensive position near two strategically important eastern cities, Ukrainian military officials said, bringing them a small step closer to encircling thousands of Ukrainian troops.
Ukrainian forces rushed reinforcements to frontline positions around Toshkivka, a small town southeast of the metropolitan area of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk. The Russians “had success” but were eventually held off, a Ukrainian official said, but the fight highlighted Ukraine’s faltering defense of two of the last cities in the Luhansk province of the Donbas region that are not yet under Russian control.
If Moscow’s forces succeed in cutting off Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk, it could strand thousands of Ukrainian fighters defending the cities, deliver a hard-won military victory to Moscow and move its forces closer to President Vladimir V. Putin’s objective of seizing all of Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region.
Ukrainian battle tanks and several Grad multiple launch rocket systems were seen heading in the direction of Toshkivka and other parts of the front line on Sunday afternoon, smoke billowing from their chassis and treads churning up backcountry roads, likely in an effort to push back Russian forces there.
One crew member, when asked if his tank was headed to the Ukrainian defenses in that area, smiled and nodded.
As Russian troops have moved to surround both cities amid weeks of street fighting and artillery duels, Ukrainian forces have fallen back and now hold only a small portion of Sievierodonetsk. That includes a chemical plant where hundreds of civilians are believed to be sheltering and which has come under withering Russian bombardment in recent days, Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Luhansk, said on Sunday.
Fighting continues elsewhere in the region. To the southwest, Ukrainian military officials said Sunday that their troops had successfully repelled an offensive on the eastern outskirts of Berestove. The Ukrainian military’s general staff added that Russia is planning another assault in Sloviansk, about 50 miles directly west of Sievierodonetsk.
Russia’s Defense Ministry did not immediately comment on Toshkivka, but said earlier on Sunday that its forces had seized Metolkine, a town just east of Sievierodonetsk. The Russian state news agency Tass said that many Ukrainian fighters had surrendered there, although it was not possible to independently verify the claims.
Toshkivka has served as an important part of a defensive wall in what has been referred to as the Sievierodonetsk pocket. Situated in the Donbas region — an area of rolling plains, farm fields and coal mining towns, where Moscow has committed the bulk of its military power in recent months — the pocket is about three-quarters encircled by Russian forces. That has left only a slender gap to the west where Ukrainian troops come and go by using village roads that are often targeted by Russian artillery fire.
And Russian troops have been creeping forward to close the gap.
If Ukrainian forces are unable to reinforce the frontline in Toshkivka, it means Russian forces will have tightened the noose from the southern direction, reducing the area for Ukrainian troops to maneuver within the pocket. It would also allow Russian forces to threaten the few remaining Ukrainian supply routes into Lysychansk and Sievierodonetsk.
The president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelensky, said earlier this month that the future of much of eastern Ukraine would be decided in the battle for these two cities.
Ukraine’s decision to hold out in street fighting in Sievierodonetsk was a gamble from the start. Its strategy has been to fight at close range in the city, where Russia cannot bring its vast artillery advantage to bear.
But the soldiers in the city, and those supporting them in the neighboring town of Lysychansk on the western bank of the Siversky Donets River, have been at daily risk of being surrounded.
Russian artillery gun lines have pummeled the roads, bridges and Ukrainian positions with what Ukrainian troops estimate are thousands of shells each day.
However risky, Ukraine’s strategy has successfully tied up Russian forces and inflicted casualties, Andriy Zagorodnyuk, a former Ukrainian minister of defense, said in an interview on Sunday.
“Right now, the main objective is to use the window of opportunity that we have to completely exhaust the Russians in the Donbas,” he said.
Besides, he added, it is better to fight now than to retreat and fight later at another site farther to the west.
“If we would move, they would move,” Mr. Zagorodnyuk said. “We would have to meet them somewhere. It’s not like Putin wanted just Sievierodonetsk. They will keep going until they are stopped.”
— Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Natalia Yermak and Andrew E. Kramer 
Ukraine’s Parliament voted to ban the distribution of Russian books and the playing or performance of Russian music by post-Soviet-era artists, the latest display of Kyiv fiercely distancing itself from Russian culture.
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine must still sign the bills into law. Both bills received broad support from lawmakers across the political spectrum, Reuters reported.
The laws will not ban all Russian media. They only block work by artists who held Russian citizenship after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
One law prohibits the playing of Russian-language music in public, on television and on the radio. That same law also increases national quotas for Ukrainian-language music and speech on television and radio.
The other law bans the printing of books written by Russian citizens, unless the authors choose to give up their Russian passports and become citizens of Ukraine. It also blocks the books printed in Russia, Belarus and occupied Ukrainian territory from entering the country or being distributed.
“Administrative liability for the import and distribution of publishing products from russia and belarus, as well as literature included in the Register of anti-Ukrainian publishing products, has been established,” a tweet from the Ukrainian Parliament, called the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, said Sunday evening.
This is only the latest effort by Ukraine to control language within its borders. In 2019, the government made Ukrainian the mandatory language used in most aspects of public life, including schools. Russia pointed to this law before its invasion to argue that Ukrainian Russian speakers were under attack.
After that law passed, human rights organizations called on Ukraine to protect the rights of minority language speakers. They were again alarmed when, under Mr. Zelensky, the government began requiring in January that print media outlets registered in Ukraine publish in Ukrainian.
An estimated one in every three Ukrainians speaks Russian at home, according to researchers. Ukraine’s large population of Russian speakers is a legacy of centuries of dominance by its more powerful neighbor. Many Russian-speaking Ukrainians — outraged by the violence of Russia’s invasion — are switching to Ukrainian as a show of defiance.
— Carly Olson 
LVIV, Ukraine — In the heat of the late afternoon sun, Oksana Stepanenko’s sweat mingled with the tears streaming down her face as she rearranged the flowers on her husband’s grave.
It was her daughter Mariia’s first Father’s Day without her father. The two had come on Sunday to visit the military cemetery on the outskirts of Lviv in western Ukraine where he had been buried weeks before.
“My mom picked them out,” Mariia, 8, said of the wrapped toffee candies that she had placed next to the wooden cross on the top of her father’s grave.
Mariia was one in a steady stream of grieving children who on Sunday paid tribute to their fathers-turned-soldiers who were killed in recent weeks fighting on the faraway eastern front line in battles against Russian forces.
And as the graves of soldiers continue to grow in number by the day in the now overflowing Lychakiv cemetery, the grim reality is that there will be many more fatherless children joining the ranks of the mourning.
Another young woman, whose 26-year-old boyfriend had been killed weeks earlier, said that she had seen dozens of small children pass through the cemetery on Sunday afternoon.
“It’s just terrible,” she said, her eyes swollen and hands shaking with grief.
As the intense fighting in eastern Ukraine continued to claim more lives, President Volodymyr Zelensky, who has a daughter and a son, praised fathers who had offered their service to the country.
“Being a father is a great responsibility and a great happiness,” Ukraine’s leader said in an Instagram post on Sunday. “It is strength, wisdom, motivation to go forward and not to give up. And no matter how difficult it is — to protect and defend the most precious. Thank you, our heroes.”
But for those dealing with the reality of losing a father, the grief is raw.
Olha Hnatyshyn, 21, said she can’t shake the feeling that her father, who was a long haul trucker before the war, will suddenly come home.
“It’s hard to believe he is gone,” she said. “We still seem to be waiting for him.”
Ms. Hnatyshyn and her boyfriend rode their bikes to her father’s grave to honor him on a day that she would normally have spent by his side. Her younger brother is taking the loss hard, she said, and has only come to visit the grave once.
But for her, the Lychakiv cemetery has become a place of solace. She visits each day to be near her father, she said.
“I take a blanket with me,” she said. “And I sit down and talk to him and tell him how my day was.”
— Megan Specia 
Two senior Western leaders have renewed warnings that the war in Ukraine could last years, and that the country’s allies should prepare to support it in a lengthy fight against Russia.
NATO’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, told a German newspaper that the Western military alliance “must not let up in supporting Ukraine. Even if the costs are high, not only for military support, but also because of rising energy and food prices.”
Those costs were no comparison “to the price that the Ukrainians have to pay every day with many lives,” he told Bild am Sonntag in comments that were posted online late Saturday.
Britain’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, said that Ukraine’s allies must ensure that it “has the strategic endurance to survive and eventually prevail” over Russian forces.
“I am afraid that we need to steel ourselves for a long war, as Putin resorts to a campaign of attrition, trying to grind down Ukraine by sheer brutality,” Mr. Johnson wrote in The Sunday Times of London.
Ukraine faces an increasingly difficult fight in its east, where Russia is using long-range artillery to bombard cities and military positions. Ukrainian officials have complained that advanced weaponry from their allies is arriving too slowly to overturn Russia’s firepower advantages, and that as many as 200 Ukrainian soldiers are being killed daily.
Mr. Stoltenberg said that Ukrainian forces were fighting bravely, and that with the arrival of more modern weaponry, they would be able to push Russian troops out of the eastern Donbas region.
Mr. Johnson said that allies also needed to step up efforts to ensure that Ukrainian forces knew how to operate the advanced equipment, and that Britain hoped to train “up to 10,000 soldiers every 120 days,” although he did not offer details.
NATO defense ministers met last week to discuss more support for Ukraine, and the United States led a separate gathering of countries providing military aid to Ukraine. The United States said it would provide an additional $1 billion in weapons and aid that included an advanced American rocket system, anti-ship missile launchers, more long-range artillery and more ammunition for howitzers.
NATO members will meet in Madrid for two days starting June 29 to address security concerns and the alliance’s strategic direction for the next decade. The document that comes out of that meeting will address not only Russia, but also China for the first time, Mr. Stoltenberg said.
He also said that NATO took seriously the concerns of the Turkish government about the applications of Sweden and Finland to join NATO, but offered no details on a possible resolution. Turkey has said that it believes Sweden and Finland are too sympathetic to Kurdish groups it considers terrorists. That has complicated the applicants’ prospects of joining NATO, which operates by consensus.
— Austin Ramzy 
BERLIN — Germany will restart coal-fired power plants in order to conserve natural gas, the country’s economy minister announced on Sunday, amid concerns about a looming supply shortage after Russia cut gas deliveries to Europe this week.
The move was part of a series of measures, including new incentives for companies to burn less natural gas, announced by Germany as Europe takes steps to deal with reduced energy supplies from Russia.
Since European countries imposed sanctions to punish Moscow following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February, Russia has responded by cutting off gas supplies to several European countries. Last week, the Russian energy giant Gazprom also reduced flows through the Nord Stream pipeline, an important undersea link that carries gas directly to Germany.
Gazprom blamed maintenance issues for the reductions, but European leaders have called the move a political tactic by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
“The situation is serious,” Robert Habeck, the economy minister who is also Germany’s vice chancellor, said in a statement on Sunday, laying out the steps that would be taken to ensure that more gas is available to divert into storage so the country has enough to get through the winter. They include bringing back online coal-fired power plants that had been drawn down to reduce carbon emissions, although the statement did not specify how many plants would be affected.
“That’s bitter, but it’s simply necessary in this situation to lower gas usage,” said Mr. Habeck, a member of the environmentalist Greens party. “The gas storage tanks must be full by winter. That is our top priority.”
Germany has relied heavily on energy imports from Russia for decades. Last year, Russian imports accounted for 55 percent of the country’s natural gas supply. But after Moscow’s Feb. 24 invasion of Ukraine, Berlin began purchasing gas from Norway, the United States and the United Arab Emirates, reducing its purchases from Russia by about 20 percent.
The government has nevertheless insisted that Russian gas will be needed to ensure storage tanks are at least 90 percent full by November — in keeping with a law passed earlier this year to ensure a sufficient supply of natural gas, which is used largely for heating and manufacturing. One-third of Germany’s homes are heated with natural gas, while it is used for only about 15 percent of all electricity generation.
A law allowing a return to the use of coal in power generation is expected to pass next month. By the end of the summer, a model should be in place that would allow companies to auction gas, as part of efforts to encourage Germany’s industrial sector to reduce its reliance on the fuel.
Last week, Germany’s powerful industrial lobby, the Federation of German Industry, said that companies were already switching to coal, as part of efforts to make more natural gas available for storage. Many have also been seeking alternative, more sustainable sources of energy, it said, while emphasizing that such transitions take time.
The German government recently called on citizens to cut back their energy use in light of the strained supply situation.
“It’s obviously Putin’s strategy to make us insecure, to drive up prices and divide us,” Mr. Habeck said. “We will not allow that to happen. We will defend ourselves resolutely, precisely and thoughtfully.”
— Melissa Eddy 
With hostilities focused on a small area of eastern Ukraine, both Russia and Ukraine have tried to portray the lack of a military breakthrough in their own terms — making claims about the other that were impossible to independently verify.
Lt. Gen. Igor Y. Konashenkov, the spokesman for the Russian Defense Ministry, said that Ukrainian soldiers around the eastern city of Lysychansk in the Donbas region were abandoning their positions and artillery because of a lack of ammunition and low morale. Ukrainian officials have said that their military has inflicted “heavy losses” against Russian forces. Serhiy Haidai, the regional governor of the Luhansk Province of the Donbas region, wrote on Telegram that Moscow’s campaign to capture all of Donbas was “not unfolding according to the enemy’s plans.”
Still, Russian forces continued to exact a huge toll on Ukrainian military and infrastructure targets, while pressing their assault along much of the long eastern front line over the weekend.
Russian missiles hit a tank repair plant in the northeastern city of Kharkiv, a Russian military spokesman said on Sunday. The strike in Ukraine’s second largest city destroyed two Urugan rocket launchers, Russia’s Defense Ministry said in a statement.
The claim could not be verified, but it came amid an intensification of Russian attacks against Kharkiv, which many had felt was securely in Ukrainian hands after Russian forces were pushed out from the city several weeks ago.
Vadym Denysenko, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister, said on Sunday that “Russia is trying to make Kharkiv a frontline city,” describing the situation there as difficult.
Ukrainian officials also said that Russian strikes had targeted a gas processing plant near the eastern city of Izium, causing a large fire, and had destroyed an oil depot in the central Dnipropetrovsk region, killing one person and injuriing 11 others.
Ukrainian officials also said that Russian missiles had destroyed businesses and infrastructure over the weekend in the port city of Mykolaiv, which remains in Ukrainian hands. Two people were killed in the village of Halystsynove in the same region in a separate strike on Saturday. The attack caused a fire, regional officials said.
— Neil MacFarquhar and Matthew Mpoke Bigg 
The State Department said on Saturday that it had reviewed photos and videos appearing to show two Americans captured in Ukraine, although it declined to comment on the authenticity of the images or on the men’s conditions.
American officials were in contact with the men’s families, the Ukrainian authorities and the International Committee of the Red Cross, a State Department spokesperson said. 
The Red Cross declined to comment on the case.
The men, Alex Drueke, 39, and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, 27, were reported missing last week by their families, and the State Department described them on Saturday as “reportedly captured by Russia’s military forces in Ukraine.” Both are U.S. military veterans who volunteered to fight in Ukraine.
The Russian government has not commented publicly on the reports.
On Friday, short videos purporting to show the two men were posted on YouTube in which they said in Russian, “I am against war.” It was unclear when the videos were recorded or by whom.
Then the Russian state broadcaster RT said it had interviewed the men, claiming they surrendered to Russian troops and were at a detention center controlled by Russian-backed forces. Videos watermarked RT, circulating on social media, showed the men, separately, speaking to someone off camera about their experiences.
Lois Drueke, the mother of Mr. Drueke, said on Saturday that she and other members of her family celebrated after seeing the first of the videos, although it was only a few seconds long. 
“I have seen the ones from yesterday over and over again,” she said. “It’s wonderful to see him and see that he is alive.”
The family was confident that it was Mr. Drueke in the videos, because of his “body language, facial expressions, gestures and, most importantly, his mellifluous voice,” said Dianna Williams, his aunt. The State Department, however, has not yet told the family whether officials believe the videos are authentic.
Mr. Drueke, a former U.S. Army staff sergeant who served two tours in Iraq, had previously warned his mother that if he were ever taken captive, he could be asked to read from a script, Ms. Williams said. She added said that the family understood that everything he was saying should be taken with a grain of salt.
“After the great relief we felt at seeing the videos, we also feel apprehensive because we now know that he is in a captive situation,” she said.
Darla Black, the mother of Mr. Huynh’s fiancée, Joy Black, said they had also felt relief seeing the videos. 
“It is a comfort to hear his voice,” said the elder Ms. Black. “It’s not a situation we want him to be in, but as long as he is talking, he is breathing.”
She said the inflection and cadence of the man’s voice in the video was familiar, although they could not be sure it was Mr. Huynh. 
Ms. Black said the videos reminded her of recordings of prisoners of war from Vietnam. “Everyone knows that prisoners are not free to speak their minds,” she said.
The State Department declined to comment in detail on the case, citing privacy concerns. But it repeated a warning that President Biden gave on Friday, when he told reporters, “I want to reiterate: Americans should not be going to Ukraine now.”
He said the administration did not know the location of the men.
Last week, a court in Russian-occupied eastern Ukraine sentenced three foreign fighters to death, accusing the men, from Britain and Morocco, of being mercenaries. Western nations condemned the verdict, and legal experts said the trial appeared to be calculated as a warning to foreign volunteers that, if captured, they could be denied the protections granted to prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions.
The conventions, which govern the law of war and which Russia has signed, specify that captured volunteer fighters can also be considered prisoners of war. The primary definition of a mercenary under international law is someone fighting primarily for financial gain who is paid substantially more than local armed forces.
— Maham Javaid 
Reflecting a shockingly barbaric and old-fashioned wartime strategy, Russian forces have pummeled Ukrainian cities and towns with a barrage of rockets and other munitions, most of which can be considered relatively crude relics of the Cold War, and many of which have been banned widely under international treaties, according to a New York Times analysis.
The attacks have made repeated and widespread use of weapons that kill, maim and destroy indiscriminately — a potential violation of international humanitarian law. These strikes have left civilians — including children — dead and injured, and they have left critical infrastructure, like schools and homes, a shambles. 
The Times examined more than 1,000 pictures taken by its own photojournalists and wire-service photographers working on the ground in Ukraine, as well as visual evidence presented by Ukrainian government and military agencies. Times journalists identified and categorized more than 450 instances in which weapons or groups of weapons were found in Ukraine. All told, there were more than 2,000 identifiable munitions, a vast majority of which were unguided.
The magnitude of the evidence collected and cataloged by The Times shows that the use of these kinds of weapons by Russia has not been limited or anomalous. In fact, it has formed the backbone of the country’s strategy for war since the beginning of the invasion.
— Danielle Ivory, John Ismay, Denise Lu, Marco Hernandez, Cierra S. Queen, Jess Ruderman, Kristine White, Lauryn Higgins and Bonnie G. Wong 
Finland and Sweden failed to break the deadlock over Turkey’s objections to their bids to join NATO in a meeting Monday with Turkish officials in Brussels, but all sides vowed to keep negotiating about what would be the alliance’s most ambitious expansion in decades.
Spurred by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the two Nordic countries last month applied to join NATO, but that move would require unanimous agreement by all 30 member nations. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey has threatened to block it, citing Swedish and Finnish support for Kurdish militants whom Turkey sees as terrorists.
NATO’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, invited senior representatives from the three countries to Brussels on Monday in an attempt to overcome the impasse. They met for more than five hours, focused on security concerns raised by Turkey, NATO officials said.
Petri Hakkarainen, the Finnish representative to the talks, said that although there was clear progress on certain matters, “there is still more to be done” in order to “reach mutual understanding.”
But Ibrahim Kalin, the spokesman for Mr. Erdogan, told reporters in Brussels after the meeting that further progress now depended “on the direction and speed at which these countries will take steps” regarding Ankara’s demands.
Mr. Stoltenberg said the meeting was “constructive” and called Ankara’s objections “legitimate security concerns over terrorism that we need to address,” adding that the talks will continue in the coming days. He said over the weekend that the alliance took seriously the concerns of the Turkish government, but he did not offer details on a possible resolution.
Leaders of NATO countries are set to meet for a high-level summit next week in Madrid.
Turkish resistance to Sweden and Finland joining the alliance has slowed a process that other members have been keen to fast-track, as the West seeks to demonstrate unity in the face of President Vladimir V. Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.
But Turkey’s deputy foreign minister, Sedat Onal, told reporters in Brussels, “We do not consider ourselves bound with a deadline.”
The discussions on Monday come as Russia continues to pummel eastern Ukraine with strikes, resulting in mounting losses of life on both sides in a war that Western leaders have warned could last years.
Foreign Minister Ann Linde of Sweden urged patience, telling the Swedish news agency TT, in comments published on Monday: “I hope that the negotiations will go well, but we are also prepared that this is a process that can take a long time.”
In May, President Biden met with President Sauli Niinisto of Finland and Prime Minister Magdalena Andersson of Sweden at the White House and vowed to speed up their membership. He characterized their inclusion in the alliance as almost a formality, noting that both countries had contributed forces to conflicts in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq.
— Monika Pronczuk, Eduardo Medina, Safak Timur, Christina Anderson, Johanna Lemola and Dan Bilefsky 
