In votes that could echo as Democrats rethink their approach to crime, Chesa Boudin was removed as San Francisco’s district attorney and Rick Caruso, a billionaire developer, entered a runoff against Representative Karen Bass in Los Angeles.
Source: A.P.
 Thomas Fuller
SAN FRANCISCO — Voters in San Francisco on Tuesday put an end to one of the country’s most pioneering experiments in criminal justice reform, ousting a district attorney who eliminated cash bail, vowed to hold police accountable and worked to reduce the number of people sent to prison.
Chesa Boudin, the progressive district attorney, was removed after two and a half years in office, according to The Associated Press, in a vote that is set to reverberate through Democratic politics nationwide as the party fine-tunes its messaging on crime before midterm elections that threaten to strip Democratic control over Congress.
Early returns showed 60 percent of voters in the city approving of the recall. 
Ultimately the election was a contest between progressive Democrats who saw Mr. Boudin as a key leader of a national movement to address mass incarceration and a backlash by more politically moderate San Franciscans — a coalition of Democrats, independents and Republicans — who grew agitated by persistent property crimes and open drug use during the pandemic. The backlash won.
Locally, the resounding recall suggested that many in San Francisco’s Democratic hierarchy are out of step with — and further left than — the city’s voters, one of the most liberal electorates in the country.
In February, the Democratic County Central Committee voted 20-2 to oppose the recall of Mr. Boudin, with the two contrary votes coming from candidates who had run against him for the job. In addition, only two members of the 11-member Board of Supervisors, the city’s top legislative body, publicly supported removing Mr. Boudin; one of them was a former spokesman for the police department and the other is rumored to want Mr. Boudin’s job.
In a legal system that cherishes the adversarial tension of prosecutors battling defense lawyers, Mr. Boudin is one of very few district attorneys in the country who crossed the courtroom. A former public defender, Mr. Boudin began his tenure as the city’s top prosecutor in 2020 by aggressively expanding diversion programs as an alternative to prison. He said public safety was his first priority but that along the way he would work to make the system more equitable and reverse the legacy of mass incarceration.
Mr. Boudin’s replacement will be chosen by Mayor London Breed, who has made public safety a cornerstone of her tenure, including her unusual move in December to declare a state of emergency in the city’s Tenderloin neighborhood, the center of the city’s illicit drug trade.
The city has been facing persistent property crimes, especially car break-ins and burglaries, but data from the police department showed that many other types of crime, including homicides, have been stable or declined during the pandemic. Both sides of the recall campaign traded barbs over the accuracy of the statistics, especially when many crimes go unreported.
Mr. Boudin himself acknowledged that he did not report his own car being broken into three years before he took office. A clear analysis of Mr. Boudin’s two-and-a-half-year tenure was also made difficult by the fact that it occurred during the pandemic, when a near total shutdown of the city influenced criminal behavior much more than the policies of a district attorney.
The vote was seen by many as an accumulation of frustration by city residents over squalid street conditions, including the illicit drug sales, homeless encampments and untreated mental illness. During the campaign, Mr. Boudin repeatedly pointed out that he was not responsible for many of the street conditions that San Francisco residents are decrying but he recognized that he had become a vessel for their anger.
Shortly after 9 p.m. on Tuesday, Mr. Boudin stood on a beer keg in an outdoor bar on the edge of the San Francisco Bay, facing down a cold, bracing breeze.
“We have two cities, we have two systems of justice,” he told the crowd that responded by chanting his name. “One for the wealthy and well-connected and one for everybody else. That’s exactly what we are fighting to change.”
He vowed to continue what he called a “movement, not a moment” and thanked his supporters, some of them young activists, he said, some of them “grizzled ancient hippies.”
“We’ve made mistakes, we’ve learned a lot,” Mr. Boudin said.
He led the crowd in a chant: “Justice! Justice! Is on our side! Is on our side!” After he finished speaking, a jazz band in a corner of the bar resumed discreetly. 
Tuesday’s vote had echoes of another tectonic election in the city, the ouster of three school board members in February, a recall that reflected voters’ sour mood during the pandemic and an assertion of political power by the city’s Asian Americans.
Many of the volunteers in both recall elections were from the Chinese community, members of whom were stung by burglaries and shoplifting and who felt particularly vulnerable after a spate of attacks on Asian Americans in the city during the pandemic.
“In San Francisco, you don’t know anybody who hasn’t had their car broken into,” said Mary Jung, the former chair of the Democratic Party in San Francisco and the head of the campaign to recall Mr. Boudin.
In an interview after the recall was declared successful, Ms. Jung described the campaign, pitting Democrats against Democrats, as “very emotional.”
“We feel heard,” she said. “San Francisco needed a change and this is just really a validation of what a lot of us were feeling.”
Supporters of the recall gathered at a bar in the Marina district, packed tightly into an indoor space with thumping hits from the early 2010s. The crowd repeatedly broke into chants of “Recall! Recall!” and a woman crowd-surfed above the heads of supporters. Men outside celebrated with cigars.
Organizers of the recall say they drew much of their support from harried residents. But criticism of Mr. Boudin also came from those who worked with him. Shirin Oloumi, a lawyer who specialized in prosecuting car break-ins before leaving the district attorney’s office last August, described a workplace in turmoil with a stream of departures of experienced lawyers.
David Lee, a political science lecturer at San Francisco State University, said the two recall elections in San Francisco — the Board of Education members in February and Mr. Boudin on Tuesday — were a clarion call by an surly electorate.
“There is anger at the failure of government, the failure of City Hall, to address pressing problems,” Mr. Lee said. On the precipice of a generational changing of the guard in San Francisco — two iconic San Franciscans, Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, and Senator Dianne Feinstein, are in the twilight of their careers — voters are sending a message of frustration and hankering for change, Mr. Lee said. This was especially true of Asian American voters, he believes.
“In San Francisco, a third of the population is Asian and they don’t feel like anyone is listening to them — City Hall or the Democratic establishment,” he said.
At the same time, many political analysts cautioned not to read too much into the result because it reflected the dynamics of a recall election: When Mr. Boudin was elected in 2019 he received only 36 percent of the vote in the first round of voting. In the third round of that election, under the city’s ranked choice system, he ultimately inched ahead of his main rival for the job, Suzy Loftus, by a few thousand votes.
“In a recall election, you are running against yourself,” said Willie Brown, the former mayor of San Francisco. Mr. Brown said he voted to keep Mr. Boudin in office as a protest against the recall process. But he was also critical of Mr. Boudin, whom he described as “a warrior for the downtrodden.”
“That’s what he is,” Mr. Brown said. “He’s certainly not a prosecutor.”
Holly Secon contributed reporting.
 Azi Paybarah
Voters in seven states weighed in on key contests in Tuesday’s primaries. Here is a rundown of some of the most notable wins and losses:
San Francisco recalled its progressive district attorney, Chesa Boudin. Mr. Boudin had enacted sweeping overhauls since being elected two years ago and faced criticism that those changes led to increases in crime.
Rick Caruso, the billionaire developer, and Representative Karen Bass will square off in a runoff contest to be the mayor of Los Angeles.
Gov. Gavin Newsom, who last year easily beat back a Republican-led recall effort, will face State Senator Brian Dahle, a Republican.
Attorney General Rob Bonta, a Democrat, will advance to the November runoff after his first place finish in the open primary for that office. A second candidate has not been determined yet.
Representative Michelle Steel, a freshman Republican, will face Jay Chen, a Democrat and Navy reservist.
Scott Baugh, a former leader of the California Assembly, fended off a crowded Republican field on Tuesday to earn the right to challenge Representative Katie Porter.
Representative Mike Garcia, a Republican, will face Christy Smith, a former Democratic state legislator, for the third time.
Kevin Kiley, a Republican state legislator backed by former President Donald J. Trump, will compete against the Democrat, Kermit Jones, who is a Navy veteran and physician, in the Third Congressional District.
Robert J. Menendez Jr., the son of Senator Bob Menendez, won his House Democratic primary in the Eighth Congressional District.
Tom Kean Jr., a former lawmaker and the son of a two-term New Jersey governor, won the Republican nomination in the state’s Seventh Congressional District. He now faces Representative Tom Malinowski, the Democratic incumbent.
A congressional race in northern New Jersey will feature a rematch between Representative Josh Gottheimer, the Democratic incumbent, and Frank Pallotta, who won the Republican primary.
Senator Charles E. Grassley, 88, easily won his primary race and will run against Mike Franken, a retired Navy admiral who won the Democratic primary for Senate.
State Senator Zach Nunn won the Republican nomination for Iowa’s Third Congressional District. Mr. Nunn will face Representative Cindy Axne, the Democratic incumbent.
Mark Ronchetti, a former Albuquerque television meteorologist, was the Republican’s pick to challenge Gov. Michelle Lujan Grisham, a Democrat.
Gabe Vasquez, a Las Cruces city councilor, won the Democratic nomination for New Mexico’s Second Congressional District. Mr. Vasquez will face Representative Yvette Herrell, the Republican incumbent.
Raúl Torrez, the Bernalillo County district attorney, defeated Brian Colón, the state auditor, in the Democratic primary for attorney general.
Voters defeated an effort to increase the level of support needed to pass most voter-initiated referendums to 60 percent from a majority.
Gov. Kristi Noem won her Republican primary, and so did Senator John Thune.
Representative Steven Palazzo, a Republican facing an ethics investigation, was forced into a June 28 runoff with Mike Ezell, a longtime police officer, according to The Associated Press.
 Jennifer Medina
Representative Mike Garcia, a Republican, will face Christy Smith, a former Democratic state legislator, in November for the third time in a race for California’s 27th Congressional District, after Ms. Smith held back a political newcomer. The race in the northern Los Angeles County district, called by The Associated Press, is likely to become one of the most expensive and closely watched congressional campaigns in the country.
Ms. Smith has already lost two bids against Mr. Garcia, who was first elected in a 2020 special election to replace former Representative Katie Hill, a Democrat. Ms. Hill, who had won the seat during the 2018 blue wave, resigned in 2019 after nude photographs of her were published without her consent and after she faced accusations of inappropriate relationships with staff members.
The district was once a Republican stronghold, with many of its residents working in law enforcement and the aerospace industry, but it has shifted in recent years with the influx of young families from Los Angeles in search of more affordable housing. After this year’s redistricting, Democrats outnumber Republicans there by nearly 12 percentage points.
After losing to Mr. Garcia by 10 percentage points in the special election of May 2020, Ms. Smith lost to him again that fall — by fewer than 350 votes. Mr. Garcia’s objection to certifying the presidential election results in Arizona and Pennsylvania is likely to emerge as a major issue in the campaign, testing the issue’s salience in a year when Democrats are facing difficult headwinds with inflation and the cost of gasoline.
Ms. Smith faced an intraparty battle against John Quaye Quartey, a former Navy intelligence officer who raised more money and received endorsements from the Congressional Black Caucus and Representatives Katie Porter and Barbara Lee. Some Democrats feared that Ms. Smith, bruised from her losses, would be less likely to defeat Mr. Garcia in another rematch. Supporters of Mr. Quartey, the son of a Ghanaian immigrant, argued that his military experience put him in the best position to win against the Republican incumbent.
In California, the top two vote-getters in the primary advance to the fall election regardless of party.
 Shawn Hubler
SACRAMENTO — A spirited race in the redrawn Third Congressional District in rural, red Northern California is headed to a runoff between a Navy veteran and physician endorsed by the Democratic Party and a Republican state legislator endorsed by former President Donald J. Trump.
Kermit Jones, a Roseville, Calif., internist who served in Iraq and was a White House fellow during former President Barack Obama’s administration, will face off against Kevin Kiley, an assemblyman from Rocklin, Calif..for the House seat held for years by Representative Tom McClintock. 
Mr. McClintock, a Republican, ran for re-election this year in a different congressional district after redistricting reconfigured the boundaries. The candidate he endorsed, Scott Jones, the Republican sheriff of Sacramento County, finished third.
The Third District is one of the state’s largest, running along California’s eastern border from the Lassen National Forest to Death Valley. It is about 38 percent Republican and one-third Democratic, but most of its voters live northeast of Sacramento in the conservative suburbs of the Sierra Nevada foothills.
Both Republicans had strong name recognition and support in those precincts. 
Sheriff Jones — who ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 2016 — is locally known for his clashes with Black Lives Matter activists, his opposition to California’s “sanctuary state” restrictions on local immigration enforcement and his resistance to California’s pandemic rules. 
Mr. Kiley, 37, has represented parts of the district since 2016 in the Assembly, and he was among the challengers on the ballot last year in the Republican-led bid to recall Gov. Gavin Newsom. At a recent debate, the Third District candidates were asked if President Biden was the legitimate winner of the 2020 presidential election. Both Republicans refused to answer directly.
But the sheriff lost Mr. Trump’s endorsement to Mr. Kiley, who has raised more than $1.4 million. Early returns indicated the Republican vote had been split between the two candidates.
Dr. Jones, 46, had Democratic opposition as well, but David Peterson, a small-business owner, siphoned far fewer of his supporters. The physician, who has not previously held elective office, raised some $1.3 million with a campaign that emphasized bread-and-butter issues such as prescription drug costs. 
 Jennifer Medina
Speaking to his supporters at the Grove, Rick Caruso sounded a note of optimism. “We are not helpless in the face of our problems,” he said, flanked by his wife and their four children. “We will not allow this city to decline. We will no longer accept excuses. We have the power to change the direction of Los Angeles.”
 Jonathan Weisman
Scott Baugh, the former leader of the California Assembly, fended off a crowded Republican field on Tuesday to earn the right to challenge Representative Katie Porter, a Democratic star, in November.
The newly drawn 47th District of California leans slightly Democratic, but in a difficult year for President Biden’s party, Republicans would relish dimming Ms. Porter’s shine. Since she took her seat in the former Republican stronghold of Orange County in 2018, Ms. Porter has emerged as a powerhouse fund-raiser and a popular figure for the activist left.
Democratic officials widely see her as an heir to the Senate seat now held by Senator Dianne Feinstein, who is not expected to seek re-election in November 2024, when she will be 91. A loss now would complicate Ms. Porter’s path.
Mr. Baugh is the essence of the Orange County Republican establishment, having once headed the party in the county. 
With more than $1 million in his campaign accounts, he heads toward November in a respectable position. But his cash on hand pales in comparison with Ms. Porter’s $18 million in a widely watched race is likely to be expensive.
 Jill Cowan
Karen Bass, flanked by her family crowded onto the stage around her, described her performance as a victory for the community in the face of Caruso’s attempt to outspend them. “It’s hard to defeat a people-powered campaign,” she said. “All of us stood strong against an onslaught.”
 Jill Cowan
Rob Bonta, California’s progressive attorney general, beat out four challengers by a wide margin in Tuesday’s primary election and appears likely to face a Republican in November, as his supporters had hoped.
The Associated Press quickly determined Tuesday night that Mr. Bonta would advance to the general election, but the results for Republicans Eric Early and Nathan Hochman remained too close to call.
Supporters of Mr. Bonta preferred a Republican opponent for the general election instead of Sacramento County’s district attorney, Anne Marie Schubert — enough that they ran radio ads touting Mr. Early’s conservative credentials in an attempt to elevate him. In statewide races, California Democrats have had success tying Republican opponents to former President Donald J. Trump, who is unpopular in the Democratic state.
Ms. Schubert would have been able to highlight her prosecution of high-profile cases such as the Golden State Killer in an effort to portray herself as a moderate alternative to Mr. Bonta who would effectively solve crimes. (She is registered without a party preference.) But she was a distant fourth in Tuesday night’s returns. 
Mr. Bonta, a Democratic former state lawmaker, was appointed to the job in March 2021 as part of a broad reshuffling of California’s leadership after several top state officials were tapped for the Biden administration. Mr. Bonta’s predecessor, Xavier Becerra, is now the U.S. secretary of health and human services.
When he announced his long-anticipated pick for attorney general, Gov. Gavin Newsom played up Mr. Bonta’s status as the first Filipino American in the role and his background as the son of immigrant civil rights activists.
At the time, in the aftermath of the Black Lives Matter protests, advocates for criminal justice reform hailed Mr. Bonta’s ascent as part of a wave of big victories that included the election of progressive prosecutors such as George Gascón, Los Angeles County’s district attorney, and Chesa Boudin, San Francisco’s district attorney. As a lawmaker, Mr. Bonta supported legislation aimed at increasing accountability for police officer misconduct and fought to end cash bail.
But in the past year, as anxiety over crime has risen across the country, those progressive reformers have faced an increasing backlash from residents who have blamed prosecutors for allowing perpetrators to go unpunished.
And Mr. Bonta’s challengers have seen that as an opportunity.
 
Mr. Early, a conservative attorney, and Mr. Hochman, a former federal prosecutor, later joined the race to be the “top cop” in a state where a Republican-led attempt to recall Mr. Newsom was resoundingly defeated just last year.
The governor won in large part by effectively connecting his rivals with Mr. Trump while emphasizing his own support for liberal causes.
It’s a strategy Mr. Bonta has adapted: He has been outspoken about national issues that are important to liberal Californians, like protecting abortion rights. On Friday, his office announced that it had won a court decision blocking fracking off the California coast, and he appeared at the City of West Hollywood’s Pride Parade on Sunday.
The stakes of the race are high: The California attorney general has wide latitude over criminal justice and legal policy, and the office has been a powerful springboard to higher office. Alumni include Vice President Kamala Harris and former Gov. Jerry Brown.
 Jonathan Weisman
Representative Michelle Steel, a freshman Republican in a Southern California district that leans Democratic, will take on Jay Chen, a Democrat and Navy reservist, in one of the most watched races of the general election.
Ms. Steel was part of a crop of Republicans who clawed back California seats in 2020 that were taken in the Democratic wave of 2018. But the state’s nonpartisan redistricting commission has since turned her slightly Republican district into a slightly Democratic one, which will test the power of incumbency against a Democrat with broad party support.
The race also pits two Asian American candidates against each other in an Orange County district where Asian American voters are a powerful force.
Republican leaders looking to expand the party’s ranks of women and nonwhite members would dearly like to protect Ms. Steel, who is Korean American. President Biden would have won the new seat by 6 percentage points, and pickup opportunities for Democrats will be rare in November.
Ms. Steel’s Seal Beach home was redrawn into the district of Representative Katie Porter, a Democrat, so Ms. Steel jumped inland to face off with Mr. Chen, a Naval Reserve intelligence officer and the son of Taiwanese immigrants.
 Nick Corasaniti
Rachel Hamm, one of the first members in a national coalition of candidates who deny the 2020 presidential election results and are running for offices with control over elections, lost her bid to advance in California’s primary on Tuesday.
Secretary of State Shirley Weber, a Democrat, will face Rob Bernosky, a Republican, this fall, according to The Associated Press.
In the state’s top-two system, the two candidates who receive the most votes advance to the general election, regardless of party; there is no Republican or Democratic primary to guarantee a place on the November ballot.
With multiple independent and Republican candidates running for the office in the heavily Democratic state, Ms. Hamm faced a crowded field and an uphill battle to crack the top two.
But she was able to amass a relatively large audience online for a secretary of state candidate, with nearly 18,000 followers on Instagram and more than 50,000 YouTube subscribers, in part by making appeals to Christian networks. Ms. Hamm’s profile was also boosted by her involvement in the America First slate of secretary of state candidates.
Ms. Hamm appeared at a forum in Las Vegas with ties to the QAnon conspiracy theory; has received the backing of Mike Lindell, the founder of MyPillow and a prominent proponent of 2020 election conspiracies; and has appeared on the “War Room” podcast with Stephen K. Bannon.
“It’s very likely that Trump won in California and that there is more fraud in California than all of these other places that we’re focused on like Arizona, Wisconsin, et cetera,” Ms. Hamm said on Mr. Bannon’s podcast. (Mr. Trump lost California by more than 5.1 million votes).
 Jill Cowan
As the crowd waited for Representative Karen Bass to speak, Antonio Villaraigosa, the city’s former mayor, echoed many of Bass’s supporters who spoke this evening, pointing out the flood of money Rick Caruso unleashed on the race: “Los Angeles is not for sale.” 
 Thomas Fuller
Mary Jung, the former chair of the Democratic Party in San Francisco and the head of the campaign to recall District Attorney Chesa Boudin, described the campaign as “very emotional.” “We feel heard,” she told the reporter Holly Secon. “San Francisco needed a change and this is just really a validation of what a lot of us were feeling.”
 Jennifer Medina
LOS ANGELES — Rick Caruso, a billionaire real estate developer, and Representative Karen Bass are heading to a November runoff election to become mayor of Los Angeles, in a race that has focused on voters’ worries about public safety and homelessness in the nation’s second-largest city.
Though neither candidate earned more than 50 percent of the vote, which would have allowed them to win outright on Tuesday, they both comfortably outperformed their opponents. The runoff was declared by The Associated Press.
The liberal city’s surge of support for Mr. Caruso, a longtime Republican who changed his registration to Democratic days before declaring his candidacy, is likely to deepen the Democratic Party’s divisions on issues of crime, policing and racial justice. San Francisco voters also moved on Tuesday to recall Chesa Boudin, the city’s progressive district attorney.
As Mr. Caruso gave a speech to supporters at the Grove, his flagship shopping center in Los Angeles, he portrayed himself as an optimist with grand plans to address the city’s twin problems of crime and homelessness.
“We are not helpless in the face of our problems,” he said, flanked by his wife and their four children. “We will not allow this city to decline. We will no longer accept excuses. We have the power to change the direction of Los Angeles.”
Ms. Bass was widely seen as the front-runner in the crowded primary before Mr. Caruso’s entrance in February, but his lavish spending and tough-on-crime message quickly propelled him, leading several other candidates to drop out of the race to replace Mayor Eric Garcetti, who is term limited.
The developer of several popular luxury shopping centers, Mr. Caruso, 63, tightly tied his campaign to the spotless image he has cultivated in the faux town squares of those properties. His campaign spent nearly $41 million, including $39 million of his own money, much of it on television, digital and radio ads that seemed to blanket the airwaves in recent weeks, portraying him as a successful businessman who could “clean up” Los Angeles.
Mr. Caruso may face a steeper uphill climb during the general election if high-profile Democrats rally behind Ms. Bass.
“Together we can make our city a place where you can afford to live, where you want to live, because you feel safe, because the air you breathe is clean, because people are no longer dying on the streets,” Ms. Bass told supporters at the W Hollywood hotel on Tuesday night. “Not with empty promises from the past but with a bold path forward.”
A victory for Mr. Caruso would be a significant shift in this overwhelmingly liberal city, where Senator Bernie Sanders easily won the Democratic presidential primary two years ago. The city’s longstanding battles over housing, homelessness and crime have reached a new level of urgency during the pandemic.
Mr. Caruso has portrayed the city as one in deep decay, promising to hire 1,500 more police officers and build 30,000 shelter beds in 300 days. The message has resonated among voters who are deeply frustrated with homeless encampments throughout the city, visible on residential sidewalks, nestled in parks and sprawling under freeway overpasses.
Casting himself as an outsider, Mr. Caruso has blamed career politicians, including Ms. Bass, for the city’s ills. After voting in the predominantly Latino neighborhood of Boyle Heights, Mr. Caruso criticized his rival for suggesting that it could take more than four years to solve homelessness in the city, an objection he repeated in his speech on Tuesday night.
But experts and critics say many of Mr. Caruso’s promises may not be possible because of federal court mandates that allow people to camp in public spaces, as well as the city’s byzantine zoning rules. Compared with leaders of other large cities, the mayor of Los Angeles has relatively little power. Much of the sprawling region is controlled by the five members of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, who oversee a $38.5 billion budget.
Ms. Bass, 68, who spent years organizing in South Los Angeles after the 1992 riots before being elected to the State Legislature and then Congress, has described her campaign as a kind of homecoming and pledged to address questions of equity in this profoundly stratified city.
The campaign between the two is also poised to become a test of whether voters this year favor an experienced politician who has spent nearly two decades in government or an outsider running on his business credentials.
Latino voters are expected to play a pivotal role in the November election and will be courted aggressively by both candidates. Polling has also indicated a striking gender gap, with Black and Latino men appearing more likely to choose Mr. Caruso over Ms. Bass.
Mr. Caruso’s critics, including an independent expenditure committee supporting Ms. Bass, frequently compare him to former President Donald J. Trump, an analogy he has rejected. Instead, Mr. Caruso and his supporters liken him to Michael R. Bloomberg, another party-switching billionaire who won three terms as mayor of New York.
Mr. Caruso had been a longtime Republican and donated generously to the party, but switched his registration to independent in 2019 and then became a Democrat this year, just before announcing his bid for mayor.
Mr. Caruso and his supporters contend that most voters in Los Angeles are not worried about his past support of Republican causes and candidates, including donations to candidates who have fought against abortion rights. Mr. Caruso has dismissed criticism from organizations like Planned Parenthood and insists he supports “a woman’s right to choose.”
Mr. Caruso’s campaign has been aided by several high-profile veteran Democratic advisers, including Ace Smith, Sean Clegg and Juan Rodriguez. The three advised Vice President Kamala Harris during her failed presidential campaign as well as Gov. Gavin Newsom, who easily fended off a recall election last year. Mr. Caruso’s team also included several advisers who helped Eric Adams’s successful bid for New York mayor last year.
Ms. Bass, the former chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, was on President Biden’s shortlist as a possible vice president. Her advisers expect her to be able to consolidate support among both local and national Democrats, which they believe will persuade voters in the overwhelmingly left-leaning city.
For the last four months, Mr. Caruso’s ads have been almost inescapable in Los Angeles, and he spent more than 10 times as much as Ms. Bass’s campaign did on television, digital and radio advertisements.
Rosario Guzmán, 82, who was voting on Tuesday at the Avalon Carver Community Center in South Los Angeles, said that she had not felt this unsafe in Los Angeles since she moved from Mexico more than four decades ago — and that she had placed her hopes in Mr. Caruso, whose ads she had seen frequently on television.
“I have faith in him, a lot of faith,” she said, citing his Roman Catholic beliefs as a reason for her conviction. (Speaking in Spanish, Ms. Guzmán repeatedly referred to Mr. Caruso as “Señor Corazón,” or Mr. Heart.)
Jill Cowan contributed reporting.
An earlier version of this article incorrectly described the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. It has five members, not six. 
 Azi Paybarah
Raúl Torrez, the district attorney in Bernalillo County who ran as a tough-on-crime prosecutor, won the Democratic nomination for New Mexico attorney general, defeating Brian Colón, the state auditor and a longtime fixture in state politics, according to The Associated Press. 
Mr. Torrez will face Jeremy Gay, a special assistant United States Attorney and military veteran who ran unopposed in the Republican primary. The current attorney general, Hector Balderas, a Democrat, is term-limited.
The contest between Mr. Torrez and Mr. Colón had focused largely on crime and public safety. While Mr. Torrez highlighted his prosecutorial credentials, Mr. Colón argued for a more holistic law response to crime. 
“Generally New Mexico voters feel like crime is up and we need to take our candidates to task and demand that they do something about it,” said Insha Rahman, the vice president for Vera Action, the PAC that is closely aligned with the Vera Institute of Justice, a nonprofit focused on criminal justice reform.
During the campaign, Mr. Torrez criticized Mr. Colón as having “never prosecuted a single case, not even a parking ticket.”
Mr. Colón hit back at Mr. Torrez’s record. Mr. Torrez’s jurisdiction as district attorney includes Albuquerque — the state’s largest city, which reported its highest number of murders last year. Mr. Torrez has said he inherited an office in disarray, and directed blame at what he called a “broken” criminal justice system that can allow suspects to be released shortly after they’re arrested.
“I am somebody who spent most of my career as a prosecutor,” Mr. Torrez said in a telephone interview this month. “I think that gives me a certain perspective on public safety and criminal justice that’s just more nuanced and more informed” than his opponent’s.
Ms. Rahman said that Mr. Torrez’s campaign rhetoric “wouldn’t sound strange coming out of the mouth of a Republican candidate.” Mr. Torrez rejected that description, noting he has published the names of officers “with identified integrity issues,” and steered more people to diversion programs rather than incarceration.
Mr. Colón had described himself a lawyer with managerial experience who would bring stakeholders together to tackle the root causes of crime. The two candidates also diverged on how they discussed funding public safety, with Mr. Torrez accusing Mr. Colón of expressing support for defunding the police.
The criticism stemmed from Mr. Colón’s remarks on a 2020 podcast, where he spoke of the need to help “the broader public understand what we mean if we say defund the police, which is reallocate resources.”
 Jennifer Medina
The embattled Los Angeles County Sheriff, Alex Villanueva, appears to be heading to a November runoff against Robert Luna, the former Long Beach Police chief. Villanueva is facing charges of mismanagement and corruption in the scandal-plagued department, one of the largest law enforcement agencies in the country.
 Reid Epstein
The Republican candidates running for Montana’s western congressional seat are now separated by 30 votes with about 60 percent of the vote counted. Ryan Zinke, a former Trump administration interior secretary, leads Al Olszewski, a former state senator, in a race that has seen both candidates ahead as votes are counted. At one point minutes ago, Zinke led by just two votes.
 Thomas Fuller
Chesa Boudin concedes defeat. He tells his supporters at an outdoor bar on the edge of the San Francisco Bay: “This was never about one vote count. It was never about one election night party. This is a movement, not a moment in history.” The crowd chants: “Chesa! Chesa!”
 Tracey Tully
Tom Kean Jr., the son of a popular two-term New Jersey governor, beat six Republican opponents Tuesday to win the nomination to compete against Representative Tom Malinowski, an embattled Democrat accused of ethical lapses, in what is shaping up to be the state’s most competitive midterm contest.
Another son of a storied New Jersey political family, Robert Menendez Jr., easily won a Democratic House primary, making it likely that he and his father and namesake, the state’s senior senator, will serve together in the Capitol.
Mr. Malinowski, 56, in a swipe at Mr. Kean’s three unsuccessful campaigns for Congress, said: “I want to do this job. He just wants to have this job.”
Mr. Kean, 53, who narrowly lost to Mr. Malinowski in 2020, said his opponent had “squandered” the opportunity to serve New Jersey during two terms in Washington.
Mr. Kean’s primary opponents had challenged him from the right as they competed for the support of conservative Republican voters aligned with former President Donald J. Trump. Outside a school near Mr. Kean’s home in Westfield, N.J., where he voted on Tuesday with his wife and daughters, a sign parroting one of Mr. Trump’s favorite labels read, “Warning RINO alert.”
But just after midnight, he was more than 22 percentage points ahead of his closest opponent in a race that was seen at least in part as a measure of Mr. Trump’s grip on the Republican Party in a state better known for a moderate brand of Republican politics once epitomized by leaders like Mr. Kean’s father, Gov. Thomas H. Kean.
The largely suburban Seventh Congressional District is filled with the type of affluent, well-educated voters who helped Democrats take control of the House in 2018.
During the last midterm cycle, Democrats in New Jersey flipped four seats — many of which, including Mr. Malinowski’s, are again seen as potential battlegrounds.
As he runs for re-election, Mr. Malinowski is facing allegations that he failed to report stock trades as required. He is also running in a district that gained more Republican-leaning towns when the borders were redrawn to reflect demographic changes in the 2020 census.
But late Tuesday, Mr. Malinowski’s campaign got a potential boost from an unlikely camp: Republicans hoping to make a home for centrist voters with the creation of a new party, the Moderate Party. The new party, which will almost certainly face legal challenges, has filed nominating petitions on behalf of Mr. Malinowski.
Mr. Menendez won in a largely urban district where registered Democrats outnumber Republicans five to one; winning the primary in the Eighth Congressional District, which includes parts of New Jersey’s two largest cities, is often tantamount to victory in the general election.
A lawyer making his first run for office, Mr. Menendez had an array of political and union support early on — as well as crucial backing from his father, also a Democrat and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Just after midnight, when The Associated Press called the race for Mr. Menendez, he was 70 percentage points ahead of his main challenger, David Ocampo Grajales.
If he wins in November, Mr. Menendez, 36, will occupy a seat held for a decade by Representative Albio Sires, a Democrat who announced in December he would not run for re-election.
Mr. Ocampo Grajales, the son of immigrants from Colombia, said last week that he had entered the race to give Democrats a viable alternative to a handpicked candidate.
“It’s not so much who Menendez is himself, but what he represents: more of the same,” said Mr. Ocampo Grajales, 25.
A Republican primary in a central New Jersey swing district represented by Andy Kim, a Democrat running for his third term in Congress, was the state’s most colorful contest.
Bob Healey Jr., a former singer in a punk band who helps run his family’s yacht-manufacturing company, beat two challengers, Nicholas J. Ferrera and Ian A. Smith, with the backing of the Republican Party.
In March, Mr. Smith, the former owner of a gym that repeatedly flouted Covid-19 lockdown rules, was charged with driving under the influence, reviving talk of his past conviction for vehicular homicide. He served time in prison for killing a teenager in 2007 while under the influence of alcohol, and has pleaded not guilty to the new charges.
“I may have sung in my past about killing someone,” Mr. Healey said during a debate in May. “Ian actually did kill someone.”
By midnight, the winner of the Republican primary to face Representative Josh Gottheimer, a Democrat competing for re-election to a fourth term, had not yet been called.
Frank Pallotta, a wealthy former investment banker who lost to Mr. Gottheimer two years ago, was 5 percentage points ahead of Nick De Gregorio, a Marine Corps veteran, with about 85 percent of the vote counted.
Mr. Pallotta won the endorsement of former President Donald J. Trump in 2020, but not this time. He also had raised significantly less money than Mr. De Gregorio, who had emphasized his service in combat roles in Iraq and Afghanistan.
“We did everything we possibly could, and we left no stones unturned,” Mr. De Gregorio said as he watched the returns come in from the Republican Party headquarters in Bergen County. “We went out there and we listened to what the voters had to say.”
Mr. Menendez will be a heavy favorite in November against Marcos Arroyo, a housing inspector from West New York, N.J., who was the lone Republican candidate to enter the race.
Mr. Menendez has said that, if elected, he would focus on expanding access to early childhood education and issues that affect the cost of living in New Jersey, where property owners pay some of the nation’s highest taxes.
“One of the things we’ve focused on — just because we don’t know the climate that we’re going to be walking into, should we win — is trying to think about what Democratic proposals haven’t been passed yet that we can have bipartisan support for,” Mr. Menendez said in an interview on Saturday.
Before being appointed to the Senate in 2006, Senator Menendez held the House seat that his son is now seeking. The borders of the district, formerly the 13th Congressional District, have since been redrawn slightly.
The state debuted a new electronic voting system in November, but this was the first time that New Jersey voters were offered a chance to cast ballots in person, on machines, during a primary election.
Still, with no statewide races on the ballot, turnout was low.
“We were told that we were the fourth and fifth people in our district to be voting today,” Gov. Philip D. Murphy said on Tuesday morning, “and they’ve been open for a while.”
Shlomo Schorr contributed reporting.
 Nick Corasaniti
Audrey Trujillo, a candidate who has espoused falsehoods about the 2020 election, promoted strict new voting policies and has shared racist and antisemitic comments on social media, has clinched the Republican nomination for secretary of state in New Mexico.
She ran unopposed in the primary, which was called by The Associated Press.
Ms. Trujillo, who carried out an unsuccessful campaign for state representative in 2020, is a member of the Trump-inspired “America First” slate of candidates for secretary of state and other offices, a national alliance forged by those still denying or doubting the legitimacy of the 2020 election.
She is the second candidate aligned with the group to win a G.O.P. nomination, after the primary victory last month of Doug Mastriano, the Republican nominee for governor in Pennsylvania, who would appoint the state’s top election official if he wins in November.
Another America First member, Kristina Karamo, was selected by Republican delegates at Michigan Republicans’ convention, nearly assuring her nomination later this year.
While Ms. Trujillo ran unopposed, many other races for secretary of state — a role overseeing elections in each state — have become hotly contested political battles. Across the country, the races are garnering record donations and attention, as Trump loyalists who continue to cast doubt on the 2020 election results seek to gain control over how elections are run.
Ms. Trujillo will face an uphill battle in November against Maggie Toulouse Oliver, the Democratic incumbent, given New Mexico’s tendency to tilt left.
But the national environment favors Republicans, and they have won statewide in the past. Dianna Duran, a Republican, was elected as secretary of state in 2010 and 2014, but she was forced to resign in 2015 after pleading guilty to embezzlement and money laundering charges.
Though she has not held public office before, Ms. Trujillo gained a modest following on her Facebook page, which is largely filled with pledges to rein in voting. In one livestream, Ms. Trujillo called for counties to hand-count every ballot, enact stricter voter identification requirements and limit absentee voting.
“This was a huge, huge — I’d say coup — to really unseat a president that actually had the best interests of Americans,” Ms. Trujillo said. She later added that New Mexico voting laws were so “lax” that “even our dogs can vote.”
She also drew criticism for old social media posts on a previous Twitter account — @AudreyTrueHero — that were discovered by The Albuquerque Journal last month. The account has since been deleted, but the newspaper wrote that one tweet included “an image of pharmaceutical executives with the Star of David — a symbol of Jewish identity — beside each face” with a caption reading “pick your poison.”
Another post appeared to poke fun at people who speak with Spanish accents.
Ms. Trujillo told the newspaper she was not “racist” and said that her account might have been hacked, or that she might have retweeted the posts without looking at them closely.
She did not respond to requests for comment from The New York Times.
 Jennifer Medina
The successful recall of Chesa Boudin, the San Francisco district attorney, is likely to buoy a similar effort in Los Angeles, where signatures are being collected to recall George Gascón, the progressive district attorney in the county.
 Jill Cowan
No sign of Karen Bass yet, but Mike Feuer, the city attorney, who ran for mayor and dropped out before endorsing Bass, spoke with television reporters while Mariachi Arcoiris, an L.G.B.T.Q. mariachi band, played “My Way.”
 Thomas Fuller
With 100,000 votes counted, the San Francisco Board of Elections put votes for the recall of Chesa Boudin, the district attorney, at 61 percent. At the pro-recall watch party, the crowd erupted with elation, shouting, “Sixty-one! Sixty-one!”
 Jonathan Weisman
In California’s 27th District, in Northern Los Angeles County, some Democratic officials had high hopes that a Black military veteran, Quaye Quartey, would provide a fresh face to challenge Representative Mike Garcia in a redrawn district that tilts even more Democratic than in 2020. But in early returns, name recognition seemed to be winning out, as Christy Smith, the Democrat who narrowly lost to Mr. Garcia in 2020, bolted well ahead of Quartey.
 Shawn Hubler
The A.P. has called the first spot in the November runoff for California attorney general for the incumbent, Rob Bonta. It remains unclear whether he will face one of two Republican challengers or the independent Sacramento County district attorney, Anne Marie Schubert.
 Alyce McFadden
Representative Steven Palazzo, a Mississippi Republican facing an ethics investigation, will head to a runoff election later this month after failing to win 50 percent of votes in his party’s primary contest on Tuesday.
In 2021, the Office of Congressional Ethics released a report that said Mr. Palazzo had used campaign funds to pay himself and his wife at the time nearly $200,000. He reportedly used the cash to make improvements on a riverside property that he was hoping to sell. The House Ethics Committee is still investigating the allegations described in the report. Mr. Palazzo’s office has denied the allegations and has suggested the investigation is politically motivated.
Ethical inquiries were not the congressman’s only concern in the primary contest. He skipped out on both debates for primary candidates. In one instance, his campaign reportedly told debate organizers that Mr. Palazzo had to attend national security meetings. Later that evening, Mr. Palazzo posted a picture on social media of himself at dinner with his son.
Mr. Palazzo has represented the state’s Fourth Congressional District, including the Mississippi Gulf Coast, since 2011, after he unseated a 10-term Democrat. He had nearly 32 percent of the primary vote on Wednesday afternoon, with 95 percent of precincts reporting, according to The Associated Press.
Mr. Palazzo’s opponent in the June 28 runoff will be Mike Ezell, a longtime police officer who has served as sheriff in Jackson County since 2014. Mr. Ezell had about 25 percent of the vote on Wednesday afternoon, 3 percentage points ahead of Clay Wagner, a businessman.
 Katie Glueck
Lanhee Chen, a professor who served as the policy director for Mitt Romney’s 2012 presidential bid, is starting out with a lead in the controller’s race, in early returns. He has given Republicans hope for their first statewide victory since 2006.
 Shawn Hubler
SACRAMENTO — Gov. Gavin Newsom of California, who was elected in a 2018 landslide and last year crushed a Republican-led recall, advanced easily to the general election on Tuesday, where he will face Brian Dahle, a Republican state senator.
The Associated Press called the two runoff spots about 45 minutes after polls closed in California. Mr. Dahle had a commanding lead over the other challengers in early returns, though he was trailing Mr. Newsom by a substantial margin.
The governor’s strong performance was a hint at the contest to come. Even if one candidate earns a clear majority in a race for most statewide offices, the Legislature or Congress, California’s “top two” system requires a general election runoff. 
Michael Shellenberger, a Berkeley activist running as an independent, had hopes of getting past Dahle and reaching the November election. He’s known in the Bay Area as the author of “San Fransicko: Why Progressives Ruin Cities,” a critique of liberal policies on homelessness and mental illness. But Mr. Shellenberger had a fraction of the votes that Dahle had in initial returns, a confirmation that party labels still matter in the state’s open primary.
Mr. Dahle, a wheat farmer from rural Lassen County, has held state and local offices in the state’s northernmost region for more than two decades. As senator, he is personally popular within his party, and he represents close to a million Californians.
But nearly 40 million people live in California, and Democrats hold a 2-to-1 advantage over Republicans in the electorate. Although a recent poll by the Public Policy Institute of California found that half of Californians who responded felt the state was headed in the “wrong direction,” half also approved of Mr. Newsom’s performance. Solid majorities agreed with the governor’s stance in favor of abortion rights, and other polls show widespread approval of his handling of the pandemic and the economy.
Buoyed by the earnings of the state’s wealthiest taxpayers, which have boomed despite the coronavirus, California’s state budget has had a record surplus. Mr. Newsom’s fortunes also rose in the aftermath of last year’s pandemic-fueled recall, which effectively gave him an extra year to campaign and to frame himself as the champion of “California values” that were threatened during the Trump administration.
The recall eliminated the few challengers who might have posed a credible threat to the governor in the general election, giving Mr. Newsom an aura of invincibility, elevating his national profile and filling his campaign coffers. He spent election night preparing to greet President Biden and other world leaders this week at a contentious Summit of the Americas in Los Angeles.
As Californians entered the final week of voting, Mr. Dahle’s campaign had raised only about $1.4 million — substantially more than the other challengers on the primary ballot, but only a fraction of the more than $23 million raised by the governor.
 Katie Glueck
Numbers are just beginning to come in in California’s 22nd District, where Representative David Valadao — a Republican who voted to impeach former President Donald Trump — faces Republican challengers. The seat is expected to be highly competitive in the fall.
 Jennifer Medina
An hour before polls closed, turnout in Los Angeles County hovered around 17 percent. The county includes cities other than Los Angeles, but turnout appeared particularly low in the city’s core neighborhoods, where Karen Bass was expected to have her strongest support.
 Jill Cowan
California’s attorney general, Rob Bonta, took an early commanding lead over Republican challengers as well as Sacramento’s district attorney, Anne Marie Schubert, an independent who hoped to be a more moderate alternative to the progressive Bonta. 
 Shawn Hubler
Gov. Gavin Newsom of California advanced easily to the general election, winning one of two slots on the November ballot. The governor, who crushed a Republican-led recall last year, is set to face Brian Dahle, a Republican state senator.
 Thomas Fuller
Chesa Boudin, the San Francisco district attorney, is holding his recall election watch party at a bait-shop-turned-outdoor bar on the edge of the Bay. There are no television screens showing election results, just a jazz band playing discreetly and a cold breeze blasting off a harbor framed by rusting drydocks, symbols of a bygone San Francisco. No sign of Mr. Boudin just yet.
 Soumya Karlamangla
Turnout in California’s last two June primaries was 38 percent and 48 percent. This one is expected to be even lower — around 30 percent.
 Katie Glueck
The primary in California’s 27th District is likely to determine which Democrat will take on Representative Mike Garcia, a Republican whose seat Democrats regard as a pickup opportunity.
 Soumya Karlamangla
With polls now closed in California, we’ll soon get a glimpse of who could be the next mayor of San Jose, America’s 10th largest city.
 Jennifer Medina
Rick Caruso is holding his election night party at the Grove, his flagship luxury mall in Los Angeles. Much of the shopping center is shut down for the party, which prominently features the faux town square that Caruso created.
 Jill Cowan
The mood was jovial while staff members got ready for Karen Bass’s election results watch party on the 12th floor rooftop pool deck of the W Hollywood. Dusk faded into a pastel sunset and a Pride flag flew over the famed Capitol Records building across the street.
 Jennifer Medina
Polls have closed in Los Angeles, where voters are expected to send Rick Caruso, a billionaire real estate developer, into a runoff with Representative Karen Bass. Their mayoral campaign has focused heavily on the city’s struggles with homelessness and crime.
 Azi Paybarah
The polls are now closed in California.
People who returned a vote-by-mail ballot can track their ballots on this page of the California Secretary of State’s website.
On the ballot are a host of contests, including primaries for governor, congressional seats, mayor of Los Angeles and a recall of the San Francisco district attorney. Here’s more about those races and some others we are watching:
Gov. Gavin Newsom is overwhelmingly favored to win re-election after defeating a recall drive last year.
Attorney General Rob Bonta, a liberal Democrat, is expected to win the primary but could face trouble in the general election, as voters have grown more concerned about crime.
Lanhee Chen has given Republicans hope of winning their first statewide race since 2006. Four Democrats are also running.
A fall runoff is expected between Representative Karen Bass and Rick Caruso, a wealthy developer.
Voters will decide whether to remove Chesa Boudin, the district attorney who has enacted sweeping overhauls in his brief time in office and faces criticism that those changes have led to increases in crime.
Kevin Kiley, a Republican state lawmaker, won the endorsement of former President Donald J. Trump over Scott Jones, the Sacramento sheriff.
Democrats have an edge in voter registration, but Republicans see the open seat as a pickup opportunity.
Representative David Valadao is one of the few Republicans who voted to impeach Mr. Trump for inciting the Jan. 6 Capitol riot, but so far he has not faced a major backlash. The primary will determine whether Mr. Valadao makes it to November, where he is expected to face Assemblyman Rudy Salas, the only Democrat running in the district, in a competitive fall contest.
Representative Young Kim, a Republican, flipped the seat in 2020 but is now facing challengers on both sides.
Representative Michelle Steel, a Republican in a Democratic-leaning district, is facing challengers on both sides.
Representative Katie Porter, a Democrat, is facing four G.O.P. challengers in this swing district.
Reporting was contributed by Shawn Hubler, Soumya Karlamangla, Jennifer Medina, Jill Cowan and Jonathan Weisman.
 Jonathan Weisman
After a scandal-plagued stint as President Donald J. Trump’s interior secretary, Ryan Zinke was widely anticipated to have little problem reclaiming a House seat representing Montana, but early returns from the newly drawn First District show him in a tight race with Al Olszewski, an orthopedic surgeon and former Montana state senator.
 Reid J. Epstein
South Dakota voters resoundingly defeated a referendum that would have required a 60 percent majority to pass most future ballot measures, a decision that buttresses voters’ ability to enact an expansion of Medicaid in November.
As votes were counted late Tuesday, roughly two-thirds of voters had rejected the referendum, which was called by The Associated Press.
The vote stymies Republicans’ latest effort to limit ballot initiatives in South Dakota, where American direct democracy was born in the late 19th century. The referendum was the brainchild of a Republican state legislator who said last year that his aim was to block a referendum on Medicaid expansion that will be on the ballot this November.
Republicans scheduled the referendum, known as Amendment C, for the primary, when more Republican voters were expected to turn out. G.O.P. primaries largely determine the winners of elections in South Dakota, a deep-red state.
South Dakota is one of 12 states that have not expanded Medicaid since the Affordable Care Act was passed in 2010.
Americans for Prosperity, a conservative political organization affiliated with the Koch brothers, provided 88 percent of the $566,000 spent to support the referendum.
Opponents of the referendum, who spent $1.5 million, included South Dakota hospitals, the political arm of the American Cancer Society and the National Education Association — all organizations that back Medicaid expansion in the state.
Amendment C would have required a 60 percent threshold for any ballot initiative that would cost taxpayers $10 million over five years. The cost would have been determined by state legislators.
South Dakota was one of dozens of states where Republican legislators sought last year to restrict citizens’ ability to enact legislation or constitutional amendments via ballot initiatives.
In South Dakota, where a Catholic priest introduced the ballot initiative process in 1898, Republicans passed a law last year mandating a minimum font size of 14 points on initiative petitions. In previous years, Republicans in the state had mandated that all initiatives and their signatures must fit on a single piece of paper, forcing signature gatherers to carry pieces of paper as large as beach towels.
Lawmakers have also limited the signature-collection period to South Dakota’s cold winter months and required all canvassers to register with the state and wear state-issued identification cards while gathering signatures.
