Advertisement
Election results in San Francisco and Los Angeles were the latest signs of a restless Democratic electorate that remains deeply unsatisfied and concerned about public safety.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
This article is part of our Midterms 2022 Daily Briefing
By Shane Goldmacher
LOS ANGELES — Progressive Democrats were knocked on the defensive in their own party over crime and homelessness on Wednesday after voters in two high-profile California races delivered a stark warning about the potency of law and order as a political message in 2022.
The landslide recall of a progressive prosecutor in San Francisco, Chesa Boudin, and the strength of a Republican-turned-Democratic mayoral candidate in deep-blue Los Angeles, Rick Caruso, who ran relentlessly as a crime-fighter eager to clean up the streets, showed the extent to which voter anxieties about public safety have taken hold — even in some of the most progressive corners of the nation.
The results offered fresh evidence of the depths of voter frustration in major American cities about quality-of-life issues. They were also the latest signs of a restless Democratic electorate that was promised a return to normalcy under President Biden and yet remains unsatisfied with the nation’s state of affairs.
On Wednesday, the day after the California elections, Mr. Boudin’s ouster and Mr. Caruso’s strong showing — he is currently the top vote-getter — were being parsed and picked apart by the Democratic Party’s moderate and liberal factions, as the party tries to hold together its fractious coalition in an increasingly brutal 2022 political environment.
“What’s clear is that Californians want the streets to look differently than they look today,” said Anne Irwin, founder and director of Smart Justice California, a criminal justice advocacy group. But she disputed the notion that the results were a rebuke for progressive policies. “We will lose battles here and there. That doesn’t mean we’re losing the war.”
For Democrats, the issue of crime and disorder exposes the party’s racial and ideological divisions, threatening to drive a wedge between some of the party’s core constituencies: Some voters are foremost demanding action on systemic disparities while others are focused on their own sense of safety in their homes and neighborhoods.
“People walking the streets, in many cases, feel themselves in danger, and that’s got to be dealt with,” said Willie Brown, a Democrat who is the former mayor of San Francisco.
But Mr. Brown said too many Democrats did not want to talk about “what cops do” for fear of crossing the party’s activist class and offending “A.O.S. or A.O.C. or whatever that woman’s name is,” he said dismissively of Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, the influential progressive.
In 2019, Mr. Boudin’s victory was hailed as a watershed moment for the progressive prosecutor movement. A former public defender who had switched sides of the courtroom, he became a symbol of success as he vowed to shrink racial disparities, curb mass incarceration and more aggressively hold police accountable. He promised then that “the tough-on-crime policies and rhetoric of the 1990s and early 2000s are on their way out.” Instead, he is.
In Los Angeles, Mr. Caruso, a luxury real estate developer, spent $41 million to advance to a runoff against Representative Karen Bass, a Democrat and former chair of the Congressional Black Caucus.
Two elections in two cities, of course, do not fully capture the dynamics of an issue as complex as crime politics. And even on Tuesday, the left did not only suffer losses in prosecutor contests but scored a few victories. But the sheer fact that fears for public safety were central drivers in such heavily Democratic bastions is an ominous sign for the party in November, strategists in both parties said.
“If the Democratic primary electorate is showing a shift toward the middle on police and crime issues, then it is an even larger concern when thinking about the November general elections,” said Jefrey Pollock, a pollster for Mr. Caruso who also works for at-risk Democratic congressional candidates in other states.
Progressives blamed the media, outside money, Republican politicians and Mr. Caruso’s wealth — he outspent Ms. Bass 10 to 1 — for the setbacks.
But there was also introspection about the backlash.
Representative Pramila Jayapal, Democrat of Washington and the leader of the House Progressive Caucus, said multiple factors led to the urban anguish: soaring housing costs that have exacerbated homelessness, shuttered storefronts in downtowns that have not recovered from pandemic lockdowns, lawlessness to a degree and the perception of rampant criminality stoked by Republican politicians.
She also suggested that the “defund the police” phrase had oversimplified the Democratic message.
“I don’t in any way want to dismiss the concerns that people have around public safety,” she said, adding, “We should not be putting all of this at the feet of law enforcement. We should be supporting efforts to address public safety that go to the root causes — and we should be holding law enforcement accountable.”
Another test could be looming: George Gascón, the progressive district attorney of Los Angeles who moved to eliminate cash bail and impose greater leniency for low-level offenses on his first day, is also facing a potential recall. Signature gathering to qualify for a vote is well underway.
Centrists and former law enforcement leaders hailed the successful San Francisco recall as a crushing blow to progressives, while more liberal activists and members of Congress dismissed it as an only-in-San Francisco phenomenon that said more about Mr. Boudin’s missteps, money or the peculiarities of the recall.
“It’s clear that the toxic Defund the Police movement is dead and is being replaced by a movement of ‘Defund the Progressive District Attorney,’” Bill Bratton, the former New York police commissioner and former Los Angeles police chief who had endorsed Mr. Caruso and appeared in ads for him, wrote on Twitter.
Whitney Tymas, president of the Justice and Public Safety PAC, which spends heavily in district attorney races on behalf of progressive prosecutors, strongly disagreed.
“Rumors of the demise of the movement to support forward-thinking prosecutors are greatly exaggerated,” she said, citing the success in another Bay Area race on Tuesday. In that race, the Contra Costa County district attorney, Diana Becton, who is currently the state’s only Black prosecutor, was far ahead of a tough-on-crime challenger, Mary Knox, a deputy prosecutor who is white.
In another Los Angeles contest, the county’s tough-on-crime sheriff, Alex Villanueva, was forced into a runoff after winning little more than one-third of the vote.
The criminal justice landscape has been fast changing.
In the two years since George Floyd’s murder by a Minneapolis police officer, the initial “defund the police” rally cry has since become so politically toxic that it is now more often used by Republicans as an epithet than earnestly by Democrats. The once-crusading energy for police reform has waned, too, as political strategists say that voters — especially in major cities— feel less safe, an emotional reality far more powerful than any crime statistic.
“People are not in a good mood, and they have reason not to be in a good mood,” said Garry South, a Democratic strategist in Los Angeles. “It’s not just the crime issue. It’s the homelessness. It’s the high price of gasoline.”
In a sign of how crime can divide the party in unusual ways, public and internal polling showed how the crime-and-homelessness campaign of Mr. Caruso, who is white, helped him make inroads with a large swath of Black men, even as he ran against Ms. Bass, who is Black. In one internal survey from May, Mr. Caruso was performing more than 30 percentage points better among Black men than women.
Mr. Caruso found traction in the heavily Democratic city despite being a longtime Republican who then became an independent and only joined the Democratic Party just before running for office. He ran a campaign promising to “clean up” the city and hailed Tuesday’s results as “a great awakening.”
Steve Soboroff, a Los Angeles police commissioner who himself ran for mayor in 2001 and endorsed Ms. Bass this year, was unimpressed, given the vast spending. “Caruso hit a glass ceiling made of Waterford crystal,” he said.
The results in California are not exactly a wake-up call in Washington. Top Democrats have been scrambling for months to address potential vulnerability on crime.
House Democrats raised local and state law enforcement funding by more than $500 million in this year’s appropriations package, delivering Democratic lawmakers a talking point to rebuff “defund” attacks from Republicans.
And at the White House, Mr. Biden has made a point of outright rejecting the most severe rhetoric embraced by the activist left.
“The answer is not to defund the police,” Mr. Biden said in February when he visited New York City, where Mayor Eric Adams, who won in 2021 primarily on a crime-fighting message, has been held up as an example of how to approach the issue.
Republicans say the issue represents a deep vulnerability for Democrats — on par with inflation and the economy.
Why are these midterm races so important? This year’s races could tip the balance of power in Congress to Republicans, hobbling President Biden’s agenda for the second half of his term. They will also test former President Donald J. Trump’s role as a G.O.P. kingmaker. Here’s what to know:
What are the midterm elections? Midterms take place two years after a presidential election, at the midpoint of a presidential term — hence the name. This year, a lot of seats are up for grabs, including all 435 House seats, 35 of the 100 Senate seats and 36 of 50 governorships.
What do the midterms mean for Biden? With slim majorities in Congress, Democrats have struggled to pass Mr. Biden’s agenda. Republican control of the House or Senate would make the president’s legislative goals a near-impossibility.
What are the races to watch? Only a handful of seats will determine if Democrats maintain control of the House over Republicans, and a single state could shift power in the 50-50 Senate. Here are 10 races to watch in the House and Senate, as well as several key governor’s contests.
When are the key races taking place? The primary gauntlet is already underway. Closely watched races in Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Georgia were held in May, with more taking place through the summer. Primaries run until September before the general election on Nov. 8.
Go deeper. What is redistricting and how does it affect the midterm elections? How does polling work? How do you register to vote? We’ve got more answers to your pressing midterm questions here.
“There are voters in the suburbs and exurbs all across this country — they’re seeing what’s happening in cities,” said Dan Conston, who heads the leading super PAC for House Republicans, which has already reserved $125 million in television ads this fall. “They’re both aghast and concerned for their communities.”
For months, the party’s tensions between the progressive left and law enforcement have been particularly acute in San Francisco.
The city’s mayor, London Breed, who sparred with Mr. Boudin, announced plans last month to boycott this month’s Pride parade after organizers had banned law enforcement uniforms. The ban on uniforms was eventually reversed, and so was the boycott.
Across San Francisco, anecdotes abound of break-ins, encampments, street fires. During the pandemic, drug overdoses have been deadlier in the city than Covid-19.
Shortly before Mr. Boudin held a news conference south of Market Street on Sunday with the Rev. Jesse Jackson, a passer-by carrying bags on a bicycle crashed. A small hand ax he was holding clanged on the ground. He quickly gathered his belongings, jumped back on the bike and pedaled away.
In an interview that day, Mr. Boudin did not deny the woes facing the city. But he said his opponents had tried “to scapegoat me for problems that exist in every single city in this country — and that have existed in San Francisco for decades.”
Mr. Jackson, the longtime civil rights activist and former presidential candidate, said the recall campaign was part of a Republican campaign to stop progressive change. “There is no case against him,” Mr. Jackson said in a brief interview. “It’s ideology.”
Representative Ro Khanna, a San Francisco Bay Area Democrat, conceded that Democrats needed to rethink the way they talk about crime and urban violence as part of a broader messaging recalibration to avoid sounding elitist to voters whose three favorite television programs are “Sunday Night Football, Monday Night Football and Thursday Night Football.”
“We need to be nonjudgmental and show we love the things that the people love,” Mr. Khanna said.
Representative Sean Patrick Maloney of New York, who oversees the political arm of House Democrats, said it was imperative for the party to figure out how to navigate the tricky politics of crime.
“We need to not fall victim to a false choice between public safety and criminal justice,” Mr. Maloney said. “We better do both.”
Jonathan Weisman, Jennifer Medina and Jill Cowan contributed reporting.
Advertisement
