Abortion clinics in Utah and Louisiana have been granted temporary reprieves from “trigger” laws. California lawmakers have placed a constitutional amendment on the ballot that would protect reproductive rights in the state.
 Shawn Hubler and Mitch Smith
SACRAMENTO — The battle over abortion shifted to the states on Monday as a weekend of furious protest and prayerful thanksgiving in the wake of the Supreme Court’s Roe v. Wade reversal gave way to a coast-to-coast wave of lawsuits, legislation and pitched political fights. 
With conservatives in roughly half of the states moving swiftly to end or dramatically restrict reproductive rights, and liberals in about 20 more scrambling to preserve them, the national debate suddenly fragmented into a contentious patchwork, with lawyers and lawmakers dissecting state constitutions and statutes after Friday’s ruling in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. 
“It’s all about the states from here on out,” said Jessie Hill, a law professor at Case Western Reserve University who has worked on abortion rights cases. “We can fantasize about federal solutions to this issue or nationwide settlements of the abortion question, but I think that after Dobbs, I don’t see a lot of possibilities at the federal level.” 
Abortion rights advocates in Kentucky, Idaho, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas sued on Monday to halt or delay bans on abortion after a similar court challenge was filed in Arizona over the weekend. Planned Parenthood South Atlantic moved to withdraw a federal court challenge to a ban in South Carolina, but apparently only so the organization could file a fresh challenge in state courts.
To understand why, one need only to look at Louisiana and Utah, where judges on Monday temporarily blocked enforcement of laws that would have banned abortion. Abortion rights advocates are coalescing around a strategy of asking courts for temporary injunctions that at the very least can allow abortions to proceed in the short term. One of Louisiana’s three clinics already said on Monday that it would reopen.
While the actions with the most immediate potential impacts occurred in states with bans or restrictions, states that support abortion rights moved on Monday to shore up their protections. In California, a supermajority of state lawmakers placed a constitutional amendment on the November ballot to explicitly protect abortion rights for the state’s 40 million people. In Washington, Gov. Jay Inslee said he would pursue a change in that state’s Constitution to make abortion rights permanent.
In states trying to ban abortions, the legal battles are accelerating. 
Professor Hill is part of a team of lawyers challenging in federal court an Ohio law that bans abortions after about six weeks of pregnancy. A judge allowed that law to take effect after the Supreme Court ruling. But Professor Hill said she believed that protections for individual rights in Ohio’s Constitution could make for a compelling argument that abortion is protected in the state. 
In Florida, providers on Monday deployed similar arguments in a court hearing, contending that privacy rights in the state’s Constitution pre-empted a new state ban on the procedure after 15 weeks of pregnancy.
The Louisiana district court temporarily blocked so-called trigger laws that would have criminalized nearly all abortions after health providers argued that the bans were unenforceable and vague and violated the state’s Constitution. In Utah, the judge said he would temporarily block enforcement of an abortion ban in that state. 
“There is irreparable harm that has been shown,” Judge Andrew Stone said while issuing a temporary restraining order that will be in effect for two weeks. Lawyers for a clinic that sought the order said they had 28 women awaiting an abortion appointment on Monday. 
But even as lawsuits were filed, abortion opponents moved to introduce restrictions. In Mississippi, the state attorney general officially recognized the Supreme Court’s ruling, starting a 10-day clock after which almost all abortions will be prohibited. In South Carolina, a measure banning abortion at about six weeks of pregnancy appeared likely to take effect after an abortion provider asked a federal judge to withdraw a lawsuit that had blocked the law from taking effect. And in Indiana, the attorney general asked courts to allow the state to enforce several laws, including one banning abortions sought because of race, sex or disability.
“I believe in building a culture of life in Indiana,” Attorney General Todd Rokita said in a statement. “That means protecting the lives of unborn babies and safeguarding the physical, mental and emotional well-being of their mothers.”
As states absorbed the end of a half-century-old set of reproductive rights that had been guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution, the most striking impact was the pace with which it intensified already widening political fissures.
On Monday, attorneys general in 21 states and the District of Columbia issued a joint statement reassuring out-of-state patients that they would protect their access to abortion. The represented states included New Mexico, North Carolina and Minnesota, which could see more patients from nearby states with abortion bans. 
That comes after attorneys general in 19 other states last week jointly asked the U.S. Justice Department to protect anti-abortion organizations from violence. Among the states represented were Florida, Ohio and Texas.
In some places, state bans initiated by conservative lawmakers were challenged by more liberal cities. In Ohio, where courts permitted a 2019 law banning abortion at about six weeks to take effect after the Supreme Court ruling, Cincinnati’s mayor said on Monday that he was taking steps to change the city’s health plan to reimburse city employees for abortion-related travel and for reproductive services to the extent they are allowed under state law.
“It is not my job to make it easier for the state legislature and governor to drag women back to the 50’s and strip their rights,” Mayor Aftab Pureval tweeted. “It’s my job to make that harder.”
In North Dakota, a fund-raising campaign raised more than a half-million dollars in three days to help move the state’s sole abortion clinic a few miles to a new location on the other side of the Minnesota state line.
Several court challenges to abortion bans focused on state constitutions, particularly those in which a right to privacy is embedded. Alaska, Arizona, California, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Louisiana, Montana, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Washington all have specific provisions relating to a right to privacy.
Joanna Grisinger, an associate professor of instruction at Northwestern’s Center for Legal Studies, said she also expected abortion rights advocates to challenge the enforceability of trigger laws, which more than a dozen states enacted to quickly ban or restrict abortion after the Supreme Court decision.
“There’s all sorts of ways that a motivated state could probably try to continue, if they have the votes, to limit or ban most abortion access,” she said. “But there are certainly some strategies in the coming months we’re going to see pushing back against some of these.”
Dr. Grisinger predicted that there could be another round of court review if doctors were charged with crimes for performing abortions, believing that the mother’s health is at risk. Some abortion bans that provide exceptions for the life or health of the mother use relatively vague language that could put prosecutors and doctors at odds.
“I would at least anticipate challenges from doctors and medical associations as they really strive to figure out what they can do,” she said. But, she added, “a lot of this is going to wait until someone is prosecuted.”
Brigitte Amiri, a deputy director of the Reproductive Freedom Project at the American Civil Liberties Union, warned that court challenges, while important, were not a panacea for abortion rights supporters. Even in places where they find relief in trial courts, they face a difficult long-term legal and political landscape. 
The state supreme courts in many places with restrictive abortion laws are dominated by justices who are Republicans or were appointed by Republicans. And even if certain abortion restrictions are deemed unenforceable, legislatures can try to pass new laws, and voters can seek to amend their state constitutions.
“Like we’ve often said, the courts are not going to be able to save us,” Ms. Amiri said. “That was true even when Roe was the law of the land — that you needed all the tools in the toolbox then. But I think even more so now. We have to diversify what we’re doing in terms of trying to ensure abortion access.”
Reporting was contributed by Richard Fausset, Alexandra Glorioso, Jesus Jiménez and Campbell Robertson.
 Emma Goldberg and Julie Creswell
As people bought up Plan B and other emergency contraceptive pills after the Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade on Friday, at least two major pharmacies put limits on purchases or deliveries of the pills, which typically cost $10 to $50.
CVS said it would temporarily cap purchases of emergency contraceptives at three packs “to ensure equitable access and consistent supply on store shelves.”
On its website, Walgreens said the product was available for pickup in stores on Monday, and a spokeswoman said purchases were not being limited at this time. But the pharmacy said it would temporarily stop delivering the contraceptives to customers’ homes.
“Walgreens is still able to meet demand in-store,” the spokeswoman said in an email, adding that “we are working to restock online inventory for ship-to-home.”
Kroger’s website said its Plan B stock in its supermarkets was low. The company did not respond to a request for comment. Amazon’s website had various emergency contraceptives available, but most of them not for delivery before mid-July. The company did not immediately respond to an email asking if the fulfillment times were unusual.
Birth control is currently legal in the United States, but some legal experts have warned that legislators will use abortion bans to limit access to contraceptives.
Morning-after pills can temporarily interfere with ovulation and prevent pregnancy if taken within 72 hours of sexual activity. Some companies that sell emergency contraception said sales spiked significantly after a draft ruling that was leaked last month revealed the Supreme Court was likely to overturn Roe v. Wade, ending federal abortion rights
Abortion pills, which are different from emergency contraception and were used in more than half of recent abortions in the United States, have also become more sought-after since Friday.
 Shawn Hubler
SACRAMENTO — California state lawmakers on Monday put a state constitutional amendment on the ballot that would explicitly protect reproductive rights, moving swiftly on the first business day after the Supreme Court reversed Roe v. Wade.
The amendment, which will go to California voters in November for approval, comes as abortion rights groups across the country react to the sweeping decision ending longstanding abortion protections. It comes after Vermont leaders earlier this year agreed to put a constitutional guarantee before voters in that state.
At least 15 states and the District of Columbia affirmed or expanded abortion rights before Friday’s court shift, while roughly two dozen other states signaled that they would end or dramatically restrict access to the procedure.
On Friday, Gov. Gavin Newsom of California signed a bill to shield California abortion providers from liability or prosecution related to out-of-state bans on abortions. He also announced an agreement with Gov. Kate Brown of Oregon and Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington to establish a West Coast abortion firewall that would protect providers and patients from the legal reach of other states.
California’s Constitution already includes a right to privacy that has long underpinned abortion statutes. But after the Supreme Court leak in May, the state’s legislative leaders moved to make certain that abortion and contraception are explicitly protected.
The amendment “would make it undeniably clear that in California, abortion and contraception are health care and are a private matter between a patient and their medical provider,” explained Toni G. Atkins, the president pro tempore of the State Senate, who directed a women’s health clinic in San Diego before entering public service.
The Senate previously passed the amendment with supermajority approval, and it needed to receive at least two-thirds support in the Assembly by this week to go before voters in November. The amendment did not require Mr. Newsom’s signature to qualify, but he supports it.
“Abortion bans do not end abortion,” Anthony Rendon, the Assembly Speaker, said shortly before the chamber, which is dominated by Democrats, overwhelmingly approved the measure. “They only outlaw safe abortions.”
The 58-16 vote came largely along party lines, with several Democratic legislators sharing personal experiences in which abortion rights shaped their lives and expanded their — or their mothers’ — options, and Republican legislators stressing moral and religious considerations and medical advances that have shifted the point at which a fetus can live outside the womb.
“My twin boys are alive and they are people,” said James Gallagher, a Republican Assembly member and father of four from rural Yuba City, Calif. “And they were alive and they were people at 18 weeks when doctors at U.C.S.F. were preparing to perform surgery on their hearts in utero.”
Opponents also include the California Catholic Conference, which has criticized the proposal’s wording as “extreme” and so loose that it could be interpreted as allowing late-term abortions.
“The sad reality is that California already has some of the most accommodating abortion laws and services in the nation,” the conference said in a statement, vowing to muster “the state’s 12 million Catholics” in its fight against the amendment.
 Neil Vigdor
Soon after a video appeared to capture a Republican State Senate candidate and off-duty police officer punching his Democratic opponent, a woman, at an abortion protest in Rhode Island, he was arrested and charged — and he withdrew from the race.
Jeann Lugo, 35, was charged on Saturday with simple assault and disorderly conduct after the Friday night skirmish outside the State House in Providence, according to the Providence Police Department. He was also suspended from the force.
Jennifer Rourke, 40, a progressive Democrat who is running for the State Senate for the third time after losing primaries in 2018 and 2020, identified herself as the victim.
The confrontation on Friday — viewed nearly 5 million times on Twitter in a video taken by a journalist — came as a crowd of demonstrators had assembled at the state capitol to decry the Supreme Court’s ruling earlier that day striking down Roe v. Wade.
In the video, a man is seen repeatedly striking a demonstrator in the head with a closed fist, an assault that Providence’s mayor called “immensely disturbing.”
Moment @JenRourke29 struck by who appears to be her Senate opponent @JeannCLugo pic.twitter.com/kJd64rRO1B
Mr. Lugo, a three-year police veteran with the Providence Police Department, did not respond to requests for comment on Monday, but he did not dispute throwing punches when reached by The Providence Journal.
“I’m not going to deny,” he told the newspaper. “It was very chaotic, so I can’t really tell you right now. Everything happened very fast.”
It was not immediately clear whether Mr. Lugo had a lawyer. The Providence Fraternal Order of Police also did not respond to an inquiry on Monday.
Ms. Rourke, who is Black, Puerto Rican and white, said in an interview on Monday that she was trying to escort a protester away from the crowd when the otherwise peaceful protest became heated.
“It was out of nowhere,” Ms. Rourke said. “He punched me at least two times.”
Ms. Rourke, a co-founder of Rhode Island Political Cooperative, a progressive group that supports candidates of color and those with L.G.B.T.Q. backgrounds, said she had never met Mr. Lugo before the encounter. The next morning, she said, she went to an emergency room, after experiencing hearing loss in her left ear and head pain. She also filed a police report, which was obtained by The New York Times.
“This is what it is to be a Black woman running for office,” Ms. Rourke on Saturday said on Twitter. “I won’t give up.”
On Monday, Ms. Rourke’s rival in the Democratic primary, Michael J. McCaffrey, made a surprise announcement that he would retire — clearing a major obstacle in the 29th Senate District.
It was not clear whether the recent events had played a role in the decision of Mr. McCaffrey, the majority leader in the chamber who had defeated Ms. Rourke in two previous Democratic primaries. He did not respond to a message on Monday. The deadline is Wednesday for candidates to file for the Sept. 13 primary.
On Saturday, Mr. Lugo tweeted, “I will not be running for any office this fall,” before deactivating his Twitter account.
A spokeswoman for the Rhode Island Democrats declined to comment on Monday. A message left for the Rhode Island Republican Party was not returned.
The Providence Police Department is continuing to investigate the matter.
 Alexandra Glorioso
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. — A Florida judge will decide on Thursday whether to block enforcement of the state’s new 15-week abortion ban, which is set to take effect on Friday.
The law, similar to the Mississippi statute at the heart of the Supreme Court case that overturned Roe v. Wade last week, was signed this spring by Gov. Ron DeSantis. It includes no exceptions for cases of rape or incest.
Regardless of the Supreme Court ruling, health care providers argue that the Florida law violates the state constitution’s protection of individual privacy rights. In previous state rulings, that has been interpreted to include the right to abortion.
Until now, Florida has had fewer restrictions on abortion than other Southern states, making it a refuge for women across the region who are seeking abortions.
Judge John C. Cooper of the state’s Second Judicial Circuit Court heard a full day of testimony on Monday, much of which focused on the safety of abortion, when life begins and when a fetus might feel pain. At one point a lawyer for the state argued that medical science has made “huge leaps forward since Roe versus Wade was decided” — prompting the judge to caution him: “This is not about Roe versus Wade. This is about Florida’s right to privacy.”
The two sides presented competing medical experts who described the practice and effects of abortion in starkly different terms.
Dr. Ingrid Skop, a senior fellow and director of medical affairs for the Charlotte Lozier Institute, an anti-abortion research organization, testified on behalf of the state. She described abortion as “substantially more difficult and dangerous after the 15th week of gestation” and criticized the state of data collection across the country. “We are vastly underestimating complications” from abortions, she said.
Dr. Shelly Tien, a gynecologist who works for Planned Parenthood in Jacksonville as well as a clinic in Arizona, testified on behalf of the plaintiffs and rebutted that argument. “Our tracking of pregnancy-related events is very detailed,” she said.
And, Dr. Tien said, serious complications from abortions are rare.
Judge Cooper will hear closing arguments on Thursday and then deliver his ruling. Advocates on both sides expect the case to eventually be appealed to the state Supreme Court.
 Julia Jacobs
Several musicians decried the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, sometimes in highly personal terms, and some pledged to donate some of their ticket sales to organizations that support abortion rights.
The rap-metal band Rage Against the Machine posted on social media that its members were “disgusted” by the decision and that it would donate $475,000 from the sale of charity tickets to reproductive rights organizations in Wisconsin and Illinois. Tom Morello, the band’s guitarist, tweeted about the effects of abortion restrictions on his family, writing that his great-grandmother died from an illegal abortion.
My great grandmother, Mary Maude Fitzgerald, died from an illegal, unsafe abortion. Her widower, Thomas Fitzgerald, an itinerant worker, couldn’t raise their 3 kids alone & sent them off to families that took them as servants. He died alone of TB in a work camp. #WeWillNotGoBack https://t.co/K41PkCmB1I
“Like the many women who have organized sophisticated railroads of resistance to challenge these attacks on our collective reproductive freedom, we must continue to resist,” the band said in its post.
The pop singer Lizzo said she would donate $500,000 from her upcoming tour to Planned Parenthood and other abortion rights organizations, writing on Instagram, “The most important thing is action & loud voices.” She said the concert promoter Live Nation would match her donation.
“Black women & women of color have historically had disproportionately less access to family planning resources — this is a great loss but not a new one,” the singer’s post said.
Onstage at a musical festival in England over the weekend, Olivia Rodrigo and other singers condemned the decision, with Rodrigo dedicating an expletive-laden duet to Supreme Court justices who voted in favor of the ruling. The issue came up repeatedly during Sunday’s BET Awards, where the show’s host, Taraji P. Henson, said, “It’s a sad day in America.”
Actors who denounced the decision included Patricia Arquette, Bette Midler, Mark Ruffalo and Viola Davis, who tweeted, “Now more than ever we have to use our voice and power!”
Among the celebrities who appeared to support the decision were Megyn Kelly, who tweeted that it was “the right decision legally,” and Meghan McCain, who has voiced anti-abortion views, after the ruling was announced, retweeted a line from a psalm saying, “Children are a gift from the Lord.”
 Campbell Robertson
Under a law that goes into effect Friday in Maryland, health care workers who are not physicians — including nurses, midwives and physician assistants — will be legally allowed to provide abortions.
Starting next year, the law requires the governor to allocate $3.5 million annually for training. Democrats reserved that amount this year so that the training could get underway, but the outgoing governor, Larry Hogan, a Republican, is withholding those funds. Mr. Hogan had vetoed the bill after its passage, arguing that it “endangers the health and lives of women,” but his veto was overridden.
Delegate Ariana B. Kelly, the Democratic state lawmaker who sponsored the bill, said that at least 14 other states already allowed non-physicians to provide abortions. She said that the law was motivated in part by a shortage of abortion providers within Maryland, but that it had become more urgent given that abortion will soon be mostly banned in more than a dozen states. “Pro-choice states really need to ramp up training,” she said.
 Richard Fausset
The South Carolina ban on abortions at six weeks is now in effect, according to state Attorney General Alan Wilson. A U.S. District Court judge on Monday stayed the injunction that had blocked the law. “Once Roe v. Wade was overturned by the Supreme Court, the decision on legally protecting the lives of unborn babies was returned to the states, so there was no longer any basis for blocking South Carolina’s heartbeat law,” Mr. Wilson said in a statement.
 Mitch Smith
A Utah judge said he would temporarily block enforcement of an abortion ban in that state. “There is irreparable harm that has been shown,” Judge Andrew Stone said. Lawyers for a clinic that sought the order said they had 28 women waiting on an abortion appointment on Monday. The temporary restraining order will be in effect for two weeks.
 Campbell Robertson
On Monday, Lynn Fitch, the Mississippi attorney general, officially recognized the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe v Wade. Under the state’s 2007 “trigger law,” this recognition starts a 10-day clock, after which abortion will be prohibited in Mississippi “except in the case where necessary for the preservation of the mother’s life or where the pregnancy was caused by rape.”
 Dani Blum
In the wake of the Supreme Court overturning Roe v. Wade, some women are evaluating their options for reproductive health care. Many are stocking up on morning-after pills, which are used to prevent a pregnancy from occurring within days after unprotected sex; while others are wondering how the ruling will affect their access to abortion pills, which can be used to terminate early pregnancies.
Both medications come in pill form and are often confused for each other. Here’s how they differ.
Also called the morning-after pill, Plan B One-Step is a type of emergency contraception that is typically taken within 72 hours of unprotected sex and is meant to prevent a pregnancy from occurring.
It is usually available over the counter at drugstores and pharmacies (though access can vary depending on where you live), and contains levonorgestrel, which mainly works by stopping the release of an egg from the ovaries. It may also prevent sperm from fertilizing an egg; or if fertilization has already occurred, it may prevent the embryo from attaching to the uterus. Other brands of levonorgestrel-based emergency contraceptives include Next Choice One Dose, Aftera and EContra One-Step.
Ella, a different type of emergency contraceptive that contains ulipristal acetate, can prevent pregnancy if taken within five days of unprotected sex. It can be more effective than other types of emergency contraceptives, like Plan B, but it requires a prescription. As with Plan B, it disrupts ovulation in order to prevent pregnancy.
Doctors recommend taking emergency contraceptives as soon as possible after unprotected sex in order for them to be most effective. Because they do not terminate pregnancies, they are not considered abortion methods.
As of now, emergency contraceptives like Plan B are still legal. However, some states are more restrictive than others about who can access them and under what conditions.
Birth control in general is currently still legal everywhere in the United States, but some legal experts and activists have speculated that the Supreme Court could revisit and reconsider its stance on contraceptives. In a concurring opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas specifically said that one of the landmark cases the justices should reconsider is Griswold v. Connecticut, which ruled a ban on contraceptives unconstitutional.
About half of people who get legal abortions in the United States use a method called medication abortion, or the abortion pill. Unlike with emergency contraceptives, which prevent pregnancies from occurring, the abortion pill works to terminate an early pregnancy.
This method of ending a pregnancy usually involves taking two pills: first mifepristone, then misoprostol about 24 to 48 hours later. Together, these drugs stop a pregnancy from growing and then cause the uterus to contract and expel it. Medication abortion is approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use within the first 10 weeks of pregnancy, and people can take the pills at home or in any location.
“They’re very, very safe and very effective,” said Dr. Siripanth Nippita, a clinical associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at N.Y.U. Langone Health.
Abortion is now banned in at least eight states, with trigger bans in additional states set to take effect soon. These restrictions affect all forms of abortion, including medication abortion.
 Jesus Jiménez
Hours before the Supreme Court announced its decision overturning Roe v. Wade on Friday, a doctor in Missouri performed what may have been the state’s last nonemergency abortion.
The doctor, David Eisenberg, an obstetrics and gynecology specialist in St. Louis, said in an interview on Monday that he had an operation scheduled for Friday afternoon for a patient with multiple medical problems, which resulted from a condition she has had since birth. She had become pregnant despite using contraception, he said.
The patient, who lives in rural Missouri, was on a train to St. Louis on Thursday night when Dr. Eisenberg said he heard from various Supreme Court watchers that they believed a decision would be announced on Friday morning. Because Missouri had a “trigger” law in place that would make it a felony to perform an abortion except in the event of a medical emergency, Dr. Eisenberg decided to move up the patient’s appointment to early Friday morning.
He performed the procedure at a hospital, he said, and left the operating room less than an hour before the Supreme Court announced its decision. The trigger law in Missouri went into effect within hours of the ruling.
“If we had taken care of her that afternoon, when it was originally scheduled, we would not have been able to meet the current very tightly defined medical emergency exception in the state law,” Dr. Eisenberg said.
Dr. Eisenberg said his patient was “medically too complex to be cared for in an outpatient setting.” If he had not moved up her appointment, the closest hospital-based abortion service that he could have referred her to is in Chicago.
“Given how challenging it was for her to just get back to us from rural Missouri, if I told her to go to Chicago, I’m not sure if she would have been able to do it,” he said. “It would have been like telling her to go to the moon. It would have been unreasonable.”
With Missouri’s trigger law in effect, Dr. Eisenberg and other medical professionals will only be able to perform abortions in the event of a medical emergency, or risk being prosecuted for a felony and losing their licenses, according to the state. The doctor said he believes the law could result in preventable deaths.
“This is real life and death stuff,” he said. “If we are forced as health care providers to wait until somebody is on death’s doorstep, in a downward spiral, sometimes it will be too late. We never want to be in that situation.”
Dr. Eisenberg said he hopes people who were angered or upset by the Supreme Court’s decision “channel it toward forward progress toward a more just and equitable society.”
“This is not about health care,” he said. “This is, unfortunately, about the process of governance in our country, and we need people to be engaged.”
 Richard Fausset
A South Carolina law banning abortion at about six weeks of pregnancy could take effect as early as Monday or Tuesday after an abortion provider asked a federal judge to withdraw a lawsuit that had blocked the law’s implementation.
The provider, Planned Parenthood South Atlantic, vowed to challenge the law by other means now that Roe v. Wade has been overturned. Although Planned Parenthood was vague about what kind of challenge is in store, it probably means that the group will turn to the South Carolina courts in an effort to keep abortion legal in the state.
Planned Parenthood notified the U.S. District Court in Columbia, S.C., on Monday that it was withdrawing its motion seeking a preliminary injunction against the South Carolina law, in order to seek relief “on other grounds.”
Jenny Black, the group’s president, said in a statement that it was clear after the Supreme Court decision that “the best path to protect abortion access in South Carolina after around six weeks of pregnancy does not run through our existing federal court case. But this fight is far from over.”
The abortion ban was signed in February 2021 by Gov. Henry McMaster, a Republican, after it was passed by the Republican-controlled State Legislature. It bans abortions after the detection of cardiac activity, except for cases involving rape, incest, fetal anomalies or the potential for serious harm to the mother.
The South Carolina Legislature is likely to return to session in the summer to consider passing an outright abortion ban.
 Ed Shanahan
Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is calling for a House investigation into whether two Supreme Court justices who voted to overturn Roe v. Wade should be impeached for lying at their confirmation hearings about their views of the landmark abortion-rights case.
In a Sunday interview on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, a New York Democrat and progressive firebrand, said that she thinks the justices, Neil Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh, were dishonest when discussing Roe at the hearings.
“They lied,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said during the interview, adding at another point that “there must be consequences for such a deeply destabilizing action and hostile takeover of our democratic institutions.”
In raising the specter of impeachment, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez seized on comments by Senators Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, and Joe Manchin, Democrat of West Virginia, both of whom voted to confirm the justices.
The senators appeared to express misgivings about doing so after the court’s ruling on Roe, saying in statements that the justices had indicated during the confirmation process that the case was a settled matter.
Neither justice gave straightforward answers about ruling on Roe. Justice Kavanaugh declined to directly answer whether the decision was “correct law.” He said at one point that the case was “important precedent of the Supreme Court that has been reaffirmed many times.”
Justice Gorsuch followed a similar tack. He refused to say how he would rule on Roe, noting that the decision was “a precedent of the U.S. Supreme Court that had been reaffirmed.”
“For a judge to start tipping his or her hand about whether they like or dislike this or that precedent would send the wrong signal,” he added. “It would send the signal to the American people that the judge’s personal views have something to do with the judge’s job.”
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said in the NBC interview that the remarks by Ms. Collins and Mr. Manchin amounted to a “very explosive allegation” that warranted an inquiry by the House Judiciary Committee as a step toward impeachment.
“I believe that lying under oath is an impeachable offense,” she said.
The House can impeach a federal judge by a simple major­ity vote. Conviction in the Senate requires a two-thirds majority. Only one Supreme Court justice, Samuel Chase, has been impeached in American history. He was acquitted by the Senate.
 Christina Caron
Anti-abortion groups have long argued that abortion is what harms a woman’s mental health. But this is a claim that contradicts the American Psychological Association, which recently reaffirmed its opinion that “restrictions on access to reproductive care will worsen mental health.”
So what does the research say?
While unwanted pregnancy can produce feelings of distress, regardless of whether a woman has an abortion or not, landmark research known as the Turnaway study found that women who were denied an abortion had more psychological problems in the short term than those who received one.
When examining how women are affected by abortion restrictions, the Turnaway study — while not without its limitations — is the most comprehensive available, and analyses of its data have been published in numerous peer-reviewed journals.
The study recruited nearly 1,000 women at 30 abortion clinics around the country between 2008 and 2010. The researchers then compared the outcomes of those who were denied an abortion (because they were just over the gestational limit in their state) with those who were permitted to have the procedure, and followed both sets of women for five years.
The women who were denied abortions were initially more likely to experience higher levels of anxiety, lower life satisfaction and lower self-esteem compared with those who could obtain abortions — distress that “may be a response to being denied an abortion, as well as other social and emotional challenges faced on discovery of unwanted pregnancy and abortion seeking,” the study said.
After about six months, however, those differences disappeared. In fact, the mental health of both groups eventually improved, which indicates that the study participants were emotionally resilient, said Diana Greene Foster, a professor in the department of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences at the University of California, San Francisco, and lead investigator of the Turnaway study.
The physical and financial harms of being denied an abortion, however, lasted for years. Women who were denied an abortion and gave birth reported more chronic headaches or migraines, joint pain and gestational hypertension compared with those who had an abortion. They also reported more life-threatening complications like eclampsia and postpartum hemorrhage, and burdens that included higher exposure to domestic violence and increased poverty.
An analysis of Turnaway data published in 2020, led by M. Antonia Biggs, an associate professor in the department of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences​ at the University of California, San Francisco, found that most people considering abortion perceived some stigma — they felt people in their community or people they were close to would look down on them if they knew they had sought an abortion — and this stigma was associated with psychological distress years later.
Another of Dr. Biggs’s studies, also published in 2020, surveyed 784 people seeking abortion at four facilities in three U.S. states. The women who encountered logistical problems, like spending time trying to seek care, scheduling an appointment or traveling — as well as those who felt forced to wait to have the abortion or to tell other people about their pregnancy — were more likely to have symptoms of stress, anxiety and depression.
Having reproductive autonomy “is extremely important in terms of protecting someone’s mental health and well-being,” Dr. Biggs said.
The more women are denied abortions, experts say, the bigger some of these obstacles might become.
In 2017, Catherine Sullivan was 17 weeks pregnant when she learned that her baby was missing an X chromosome, the result of a rare genetic disorder called Turner Syndrome.
The doctor presented termination as an option. But in Anchorage, where she lived, she could not find a provider who was willing or able to perform the procedure. She began calling clinics in different states and finally located one in Colorado. The cost, $10,000 out of pocket, was out of reach.
“I went through five or six weeks of absolute torture,” Ms. Sullivan recalled. Eventually, at 22 weeks, her daughter died in utero and was delivered at a hospital.
“I am still working through the PTSD of being denied the choice of how to end my pregnancy,” said Ms. Sullivan, 39. “And I still feel shame about having wanted an abortion for this child that I wanted so much.”
Not having the option only caused her “further pain, further anguish, further grief,” she said. “And none of that had to happen.”
Read more about the mental cost of being denied an abortion.
 Mitch Smith
Abortion rights supporters in Texas filed a lawsuit seeking to block enforcement of an abortion ban that predated Roe v. Wade. A separate “trigger” ban on most abortions in Texas is not expected to take effect until later this year.
 Campbell Robertson
Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the last abortion clinic in Mississippi and one of the main parties in the case that led to the overturning of Roe v. Wade last week, filed a lawsuit on Monday challenging Mississippi’s so-called trigger law, which will soon institute a near total ban on abortion in the state. Lawyers representing the clinic cite a 1998 decision of the Mississippi Supreme Court, which found a right to privacy under the state constitution that “includes an implied right to choose whether or not to have an abortion.”
 Mitch Smith
Planned Parenthood filed a lawsuit challenging an Idaho “trigger law" that would ban abortions later this summer if it remains in effect. They claimed the law was vague and violated the State Constitution.
 Alexandra Glorioso
Testimony continues this afternoon in a challenge to Florida’s new 15-week abortion ban, which is set to take effect on Friday. Health care providers are arguing that it violates the state constitution’s right to privacy. But much of the testimony has focused on when life begins and when a fetus might feel pain. At one point a lawyer for the state argued that medical science has made “huge leaps forward since Roe v. Wade was decided” – prompting the judge to caution him: “This is not about Roe v. Wade. This is about Florida’s right to privacy.”
 Alexandra Glorioso
A ruling in the Florida case is expected later this week. Advocates on both sides expect it to land eventually in the state Supreme Court. 
 Mitch Smith
Abortion rights advocates filed a lawsuit challenging Kentucky’s abortion ban and arguing that access to the procedure is protected under the state’s constitution.
 Jesus Jiminez
At least one of Louisiana’s three remaining abortion clinics will resume performing the procedure after a judge temporarily blocked enforcement of the state’s abortion “trigger laws.”
 Glenn Thrush
A coalition of 22 state attorneys general on Monday committed themselves to defending abortion rights after the Supreme Court struck down Roe v. Wade, even as officials in conservative states attempt to enact trigger laws to immediately ban the procedure.
The statement from Attorney General Letitia James of New York and Democratic counterparts in New Jersey, California, Michigan and Maryland declares their intent to protect women who travel from states where abortions are restricted — echoing similar promises from Biden administration officials, including Attorney General Merrick Garland.
“If you seek access to abortion and reproductive health care, we’re committed to using the full force of the law to support you,” the attorneys general wrote, addressing women directly.
“We will continue to use all legal tools at our disposal to fight for your rights and stand up for our laws,” they wrote. “We will support our partners and service providers. We will take on those who seek to control your bodies and leverage our collective resources — thousands of lawyers and dedicated public servants across our states. Together, we will persist.”
The letter, broadly worded and reflective of the messages that Democrats will likely use in Congressional races this fall, was more political than legal: Governments in more liberal states have few options to counter the laws in conservative states, apart from signaling their willingness to fight efforts to impose abortion restrictions across state lines.
Several Republican state officials, for their part, have sought to portray abortion rights proponents as threats to the activists and state officials who oppose them.
Last week, 19 Republican attorneys general, including Ken Paxton of Texas, wrote to Mr. Garland requesting help in protecting judges and anti-abortion groups who have been threatened, following the arrest of an armed man near Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh’s house earlier this year. A Justice Department spokesperson did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
 Fahima Haque
Catherine Starr was 17 when she attended her first demonstration to push for abortion rights outside City Hall in St. Louis. It was May 24, 1973. Just a few months earlier, the Supreme Court had ruled on Roe v. Wade.
Women had gained a constitutional right to abortion, but America would continue arguing about it for another 50 years. The Supreme Court’s decision last week to overturn Roe has once again thrust the country into turbulence that feels all too familiar to those who lived it the first time around. Three women on the front lines of the abortion rights movement before Roe was the law and in the early years after the ruling told their stories to The New York Times.
When Ms. Starr protested that day in St. Louis, she was joined by her mother and grandmother. The three generations of women rallied together to protest Mayor John Poelker’s forbidding of city hospitals to perform abortions.
In the early days after Roe, legal access to abortion was still difficult or unavailable in many states. It was only the year before, in 1972, that unmarried men and women had been granted the right to access birth control.
The Roe decision had come too late for Ms. Starr. A year earlier, at 16, she was pregnant. Without the option of a safe, legal abortion, she said, she gave birth to a baby boy and then gave him up for adoption.
Ms. Starr went to the rally because she “wanted to be able to make sure that the next little girl that gets pregnant has an option,” she said.
“Giving up a child, it’s like losing one to death but in a way it’s worse because you don’t know anything about the child,” Ms. Starr, now 66, said. “I had a little boy, and years would go by and I’d sit back and wonder if he is even still alive, is he happy, is he healthy?” 
About 10 years ago, Ms. Starr’s son found her and they reconnected. The conversation was initially awkward, she said, but ultimately therapeutic. Her son told her that he was grateful for her decision and that he had a pretty good life. He also told her that he is in favor of abortion rights, she said, a pleasant surprise for her.
“Most kids would probably not want to know that their mother thought about aborting them,” she said. “But I did. I was 15 when I was pregnant, and 16 when I had him and I was awfully young.”
“He asked me, ‘You could have gotten an abortion, why didn’t you do it?’ And I said, ‘Well, actually, I couldn’t have, it wasn’t legal at the time,’” she continued. “I said I didn’t want to get an illegal abortion and once I started feeling him in there, I just couldn’t do it.”
Susan Bilyeu was counseling a patient at an abortion clinic when she heard screaming. When she opened the door, she saw flames, and a nursing assistant on the floor, holding her eyes.
An arsonist had attacked the Concerned Women’s Clinic in Cleveland on Feb. 15, 1978, a busy Saturday.
Ms. Bilyeu, who was 25 at the time, was swept up in an escalation of violence around abortion clinics in the late 1970s. Legal challenges to thwart abortion kept failing. People would chain themselves to the doors of clinics and shout at women and staff members as they entered the facilities. “It was really quite nasty,” said Karissa Haugeberg, assistant professor of history at Tulane University.
At Ms. Bilyeu’s clinic, a man posing as a delivery worker had splashed gasoline on the assistant’s face and set the building on fire. Ms. Bilyeu helped carry the injured worker out of the burning building. There was also a 16-year-old in the midst of having an abortion. They called an ambulance and took her to the women’s hospital two blocks away.
“Nobody changed their mind about having an abortion that day,” she said.
Ms. Bilyeu said she felt fundamentally connected to the abortion rights movement because of the stories her mother, born in 1917, told her, including about her aunt nearly dying from an abortion.
“I got involved because I knew people who were struggling,” she said. “I’m not pro-abortion, I’m pro-choice. No one should be forced to have a child, and I certainly don’t want someone to die from it.”
Loretta J. Ross grew up in a conservative household in the 1960s. She got pregnant at 14 after her cousin raped her. Her only choice at that time, she said, was to raise the child herself, or give him up for adoption. She gave birth to her son in 1969, and kept him.
The experience formed Ms. Ross, now a professor at Smith College, as an activist and a Black feminist, she said.
“I went from being a scared teenager to being an active teenage mother,” she said, “so that had a definite impact on my consciousness and it separated me from the rest of the kids in school.”
She enrolled at Howard University in 1970. Washington, D.C., was in turmoil after the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Ms. Ross was tear-gassed when she attended her first demonstration at 16. She also became pregnant again. Her older sister forged their mother’s signature on the permission slip, but because Washington had legalized abortion in 1971, she was able to get one.
Yet for Ms. Ross and her fellow classmates, other issues were priorities, such as apartheid and gentrification. There was not a sense of urgency around abortion rights for Ms. Ross, she said, until the Hyde Amendment passed in 1976, banning federal funding for abortion, which disproportionately affected low-income women.
For Ms. Ross, her activism on abortion rights dovetailed and sometimes complicated her political coming-of-age as a Black woman.
“When I was with the Black Nationalist movement people, I actually felt more feminist than not,” she said. “I would call myself a Black Marxist feminist. But then when I was with white women, I was just like, ‘I’m not a feminist like y’all are, so I don’t want to use the word.’”
Concerns that Black women lacked a presence in the women’s movement is what prompted Representative Eleanor Holmes Norton, the District of Columbia’s nonvoting House delegate, to co-found the National Black Feminist Organization. Despite the group’s forming in 1973, amid the backdrop of Roe, abortion did not loom large in their conversations, she said.
Black women receive about one-third of the abortions in the United States, according to recent data from the Guttmacher Institute, a reproductive health research group that supports abortion rights. But Ms. Ross, who was trying to help the National Organization for Women plan a women’s rights march, said it was tough to get Black women’s organizations involved because few wanted to engage with the abortion debate.
For a second march in April 1989, which drew more than 600,000 people, Ms. Ross made a banner for women of color to gather around to make them visible.
Over the years, she held steadfast to one principle. “I definitely was going to stand up for women’s rights,” she said.
 Emma Goldberg
Relatively few major companies have commented directly on the Supreme Court’s ruling that overturned Roe v. Wade, but far more have come forward to assure their employees that they would reimburse travel expenses related to abortions. 
Those employers, though, cover health care for only a fraction of the millions of people living in states where abortion is or could soon be banned. The country’s largest private employer, Walmart, declined to comment on the court’s decision.
Here are some of the companies that have committed to covering travel expenses:
Wells Fargo told its employees on Monday that the firm would expand its existing travel benefits for medical coverage to include reimbursement for abortion travel “in accordance with applicable law.”
PricewaterhouseCoopers said on Saturday its employees could apply for financial assistance for expenses associated with medical procedures. “I know that some of you will think that I haven’t said enough in this note and that some of you will think that I’ve said too much,” said the firm’s chairman in a message to staff. “What I hope you take away from it is that I care.”
Douglas Elliman said it would expand its health care coverage to reimburse employees who have to travel to get abortions: “Douglas Elliman stands firmly behind women and their reproductive rights,” said company leaders in an email to staff.
Nordstrom said it created a new travel benefit for employees who could not get abortions locally: “While we had reason to believe this ruling was coming, we recognize that this news still weighs heavily on many of us,” company leaders wrote in a message to staff.
Open Sea said it would cover travel for employee abortions. “We are heartbroken, and frustrated, and overwhelmed by the challenge ahead of us,” company leaders said in a message to staff. “We believe that access to safe and legal abortion is absolutely critical to keeping women and those with female assigned reproductive systems healthy and empowered to make their own choices about their future, and to pursue their missions and ambitions.”
 Jesus Jiménez
At least one of Louisiana’s three remaining abortion clinics said it would resume performing the procedure after a judge on Monday temporarily blocked enforcement of the state’s abortion “trigger laws.”
Louisiana is one of 13 states where the legislature had previously enacted laws designed to curtail abortions, in anticipation of Friday’s Supreme Court ruling that overturned Roe v. Wade. The state’s three operating clinics filed a petition seeking emergency relief and received a temporary restraining order. 
One of the clinics, Hope Medical Clinic for Women, planned to continue operating with the order in place, a spokeswoman for one of the law firms representing the clinics said on Monday. The state’s other two clinics are expected to continue as well, although that had not been confirmed. Judge Robin M. Giarrusso of the Orleans Parish Civil District Court, who granted the order, set a hearing in the case for July 8.
Abortion care providers in states with trigger laws, like Louisiana, have said they are uncertain whether they could face immediate consequences for providing care to those seeking an abortion. Some prosecutors have suggested they would not file charges under trigger laws, including Jason Williams, the New Orleans district attorney, who said on Friday that his office would not prosecute patients or physicians.
Abortion providers in Louisiana argued that the state’s trigger laws violate the state’s constitution and “are void for vagueness” because it is unclear if they would take immediate effect after the Supreme Court’s ruling, and they do not provide enough specifics about banned actions — such as what exceptions exist for medical workers trying to save a pregnant woman’s life.
Joanna Wright, one of the lead lawyers on the case, said that abortion clinics have been unable to provide services since the Supreme Court ruling because they cannot risk criminal prosecution, which could include mandatory jail time.
“That puts care providers in this impossible position of having to turn away women who possibly need abortion care to save their life in order to avoid going to jail,” she said in an interview on Monday.
A trigger law in Louisiana has been on the books since 2006, banning anyone from performing an abortion or providing a woman with drugs to interrupt a pregnancy. The law would allow exceptions to prevent serious injury or death to a pregnant woman, but not for rape or incest. Another law was signed by the governor this month in anticipation of the Supreme Court decision.
Benjamin Clapper, executive director of Louisiana Right to Life, said in a statement on Monday that his organization was thankful that the state’s Republican attorney general, Jeff Landry, “will vigorously defend our pro-life laws.”
Mr. Landry said in a statement on Monday that his office was “fully prepared” to defend the state’s trigger laws. “It is unfortunate that there are those who continue to utilize confusion, misinformation, and deceit as scare tactics” after the Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe, he said.
