Advertisement
Supported by
letters
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
To the Editor:
In a functioning democracy Congress would write a law that makes neither side happy but strikes a balance. Making abortions legal for any reason before 15 weeks, and illegal after 15 weeks with exceptions for the health of the mother or substantial fetal deformity, is something that would strike a balance that the majority of Americans would accept.
Roe was always on shaky constitutional ground. For the most ardent supporters of abortion rights and the most ardent pro-lifers, there will never be a middle ground. It will be up to the rest of us to urge legislative compromise. For now it goes back to the states, where people can democratically elect officials who support their views.
Mary Ann LynchCape Elizabeth, Maine
To the Editor:
When a house is on fire, we rescue those we can, even as we wish to rescue all. Before the midterms, when any possibility of change is likely to vanish, Congress should pass what possibly can be passed, namely: Make abortion legal in cases of rape and incest committed on girls under age 18.
Protect some even if you cannot protect all. Then, pro-choicers should campaign on the rest.
Gail S. HumphreysGoleta, Calif.
To the Editor:
OK, calm down. Abortion is not outlawed. Roe is a lousy ruling that rightly was overturned because it made no sense. Stare decisis does not mean that Supreme Court pronouncements are infallible and therefore cannot be overturned. It is meant to ensure some level of continuity. The states will address abortion and most, if not all, will allow for reasonable accommodations over time.
Daniel DziedzicRochester Hills, Mich.
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court, an unelected body with absolute legal authority, is out of step with, and moving our country in directions contrary to, the interests of the majority of the people who constitute today’s diverse society.
The court got this way through the political machinations of a patient and determined right-wing minority. It will take an equally determined political remedy to restore the court’s legitimacy. Adding three or four centrists to the court is the solution.
Jay MarkowitzPound Ridge, N.Y.
To the Editor:
As a nation, it is time we ask ourselves how a deeply unpopular president, elected to office while losing the popular vote by millions, is empowered to appoint three justices to the Supreme Court. These justices, who will serve lifetime appointments, will drive this country to the right through a series of decisions that are clearly out of line with popular sentiment.
If there were ever a more compelling argument for eliminating or reforming the Electoral College, I don’t know what that could be.
Paul GiffordBonita Springs, Fla.
To the Editor:
Questions for the Supreme Court: Can I claim my fetus on my taxes? Do I count my fetus in the census? Can I get child support for my fetus? Can my teenager nurse her infant in school? Are there going to be nurseries and day cares in junior high and high schools? Can my pregnant teen attend church without being shamed? Will a woman who suffers a miscarriage be investigated for murder?
Forced birthing is tyranny.
Janet WoodworthKirkville, N.Y.
To the Editor:
President Biden should consider issuing an executive order allowing offshore abortion clinics in U.S. territorial waters. This would enable women of Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia and South Carolina access to full abortion services. Helicopters, boats or hovercraft could provide transportation to and from these facilities.
Since the federal government issues permits for offshore oil and gas drilling, then it seems feasible it could do the same for floating abortion clinics.
Roger ChapmanWest Palm Beach, Fla.The writer is a professor of history at Palm Beach Atlantic University.
To the Editor:
In the 18th century, most states followed British common law, which prohibited abortion after quickening, when a woman first feels fetal movement at 15 to 20 weeks.
Since the conservative, strict constructionist justices seem determined to follow the laws of our founding fathers, should we just go back to the “quickening” rule? That would effectively restore Roe v. Wade.
David G. ThoeleChicagoThe writer is a pediatric cardiologist.
To the Editor:
After the devastatingly cruel overturning of Roe v. Wade, I asked a woman friend what could be done, knowing that the typical American has a lamentably short attention span.
Her answer was simple and direct. Until women’s reproductive rights are restored, “Every woman and girl should take a knee when the national anthem is played — whenever they hear it, and wherever they are.”
I agree, and I’ll be taking a knee beside my wife and daughters.
John R. ScannellSammamish, Wash.
To the Editor:
Re “Legal Precedents: Will Other Rights ‘Come Crumbling’ Down?” (news article, June 25):
Justice Clarence Thomas, in his concurring opinion in the Dobbs case, stated that the court should review its decisions in Griswold (involving the use of contraceptives), Lawrence (involving same-sex relations) and Obergefell (involving same-sex marriage), because they stem from the same legal reasoning that compelled the court to overrule Roe v. Wade.
I wonder why he did not include the Loving v. Virginia case, which involved interracial marriage.
Herbert RosenbergDobbs Ferry, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Re “For Collins, Decision Is a Betrayal by Kavanaugh” (front page, June 25), about Senator Susan Collins’s feelings that she had been misled by a Supreme Court nominee’s assurances:
Oh, please! No one I know had any illusions about what Brett Kavanaugh was going to do about Roe. It was obvious from his pathetic performance at his confirmation hearings, and anyone who didn’t see it was just fooling themselves. Or, perhaps, acting in what they believed to be their own political self-interest? And, perhaps, that’s what’s going on now too?
The lady doth protest too much.
Donna KentonNew York
To the Editor:
Re “Pence Ponders Possible White House Run, and Fraught Political Moment” (news article, June 21):
Mike Pence is no hero; he deserves no praise. He had a moment — that is all he had. He did what was expected of him as vice president and as president of the Senate: preside over the counting of the electoral votes and announce the new president and vice president.
Just because he upheld his position, which he took an oath to uphold, does not erase the fact that for four years he went along with Donald Trump as his lap dog.
Now Mr. Pence is considering running for the presidency. Why would anyone vote for him, given his history?
Milena CornickNew York
To the Editor:
Re “What Makes a Bathing Suit So Expensive to Produce?” (Sunday Styles, June 19):
After spending several months searching in vain online and in stores for a bathing suit that would fit me and my budget, I concluded that the only solution was to resurrect my sewing machine and make one for myself.
Let the swimwear companies extol their fabrics and their products, but considering the small amount of fabric needed (1 to 1.5 yards) for a one-piece suit, charging $100 to $400 for a swimsuit seems like highway robbery.
Though it is challenging to find the right pattern, once done it is possible to create a suit that is unique and doesn’t break the bank.
My swimsuit was not only fun to make, it also proved that we need not be held hostage by the merchandisers.
Belle von der GoltzNeedham, Mass.
Advertisement
