
Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
The head coach of artistic swimming for Team USA saved the life Wednesday of one of her athletes, who had fainted and started sinking at the World Aquatic Championship in Budapest.
Andrea Fuentes, 39, dove into the pool fully clothed when Anita Alvarez, 25 — an Olympian and New York native — went under and lifeguards at the event failed to react, she said.
The young swimmer was not breathing when Fuentes brought her to the surface — but she soon managed to cough up the water she had taken in.
Teammates, some with tears in their eyes, stood poolside consoling each other as she was taken away on a stretcher for treatment.
“It was a big scare. I had to jump in because the lifeguards weren’t doing it,” Fuentes told Spanish newspaper Marca. “I was scared because I saw she wasn’t breathing, but now she is doing very well.”
“I think she was at least two minutes without breathing because her lungs were full of water,” Fuentes told the newspaper AS.
“But we were able to take her to a good place, she vomited the water, coughed and that was it, but it was a big scare.”
Fuentes, a Spanish swimmer with four Olympic medals to her name, has been head coach for Team USA since 2018. 
The veteran swimmer was critical of the Budapest lifeguards’ slow reaction to Alvarez’s apparent distress.
“When I saw her sinking, I looked at the rescuers, but I saw that they were stunned. They didn’t react,” she told the paper.
“I thought, ‘Will you jump in now?’ My reflexes kicked in quickly. I’m like that, I can’t just stare,” she added. “I didn’t overthink it, I jumped. I think it was the craziest and fastest free dive I’ve ever done in my career.”
In a statement on Thursday, Fuentes said Alvarez was apparently healthy and being monitored by doctors. 
“Anita is okay – the doctors checked all vitals and everything is normal: heart rate, oxygen, sugar levels, blood pressure, etc… all is okay,” Fuentes said in a statement Thursday.
She said the incident was due to the intensity of Alvarez’ routine, and not uncommon in high-intensity sports.
“We sometimes forget that this happens in other high-endurance sports. Marathon, cycling, cross country,” she said. “We all have seen images where some athletes don’t make it to the finish line and others help them to get there.”
“Our sport is no different than others, just in a pool, we push through limits and sometimes we find them,” she added. “Anita feels good now and the doctors also say she is OK.”

			Stay up on the very latest with Evening Update.		



						Please provide a valid email address.					


						By clicking above you agree to the 						Terms of Use
						 and 						Privacy Policy.
					

Thanks for signing up!
 Never miss a story.				
But Wednesday’s harrowing moment is the second such spell for Alvarez, who passed out last year during an Olympic qualifier in Barcelona. 
“I honestly thought I was asleep,” Alvarez told Buffalo’s News 4 at the time. “I started hearing people saying, ‘It’s going to be OK.’ I thought, ‘Stop telling me that! I’m trying to sleep.’ Then I realized that no, I was still in the pool.”
The young swimmer chalked the 2021 incident up to exhaustion, acknowledging, “It’s happened before in training.”
In a statement Thursday, USA Artistic Swimming said Alvarez was under medical observation Thursday.
“Whether or not she will compete in the free team final on Friday, June 24, will be determined by [Alvarez] and expert medical staff,” the sanctioning body said.
Alvarez has previously said she hopes to compete in the 2024 Olympics.

Share Selection
