
Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	




It was no coincidence.
As PGA Tour commissioner Jay Monahan began to speak to reporters shortly after 1 p.m. Wednesday at TPC River Highlands in advance of this week’s Travelers Championship to address the state of the tour, LIV Golf dropped its official release announcing that Brooks Koepka had joined its tour.
News of Koepka’s imminent defection was running rampant on Tuesday, but still there were some who were surprised by his jump for several reasons, the first of which was his previous vocal reactions against it.
“Am I surprised?’’ Rory McIlroy said Wednesday. “Yes, because of what he said previously. That’s why I’m surprised at a lot of these guys because they say one thing and then they do another, and I don’t understand that and I don’t know if that’s for legal reasons or if they can’t … I have no idea.
“But it’s pretty duplicitous on their part to say one thing and then do another thing.’’
Scottie Scheffler, the No. 1 ranked player in the world, also expressed “surprise.’’
“I was at a function with him last week and [LIV] definitely wasn’t what he had in mind,’’ Scheffler said Wednesday. “We were focused on building the PGA Tour and getting the guys that are staying here together and kind of just having talks and figuring out how we can help benefit the Tour. So, to see Brooks leave was definitely a surprise for us.
“With that being said, he’s made his decision. I’m not going to knock him for doing that. He made the decision that’s best for him and I’m not going to be one to judge him on that.’’
Said Monahan: “Listen, every player that’s left, I’m going to say I have great admiration and respect for the contributions that they have made to the PGA Tour. I’m disappointed that Brooks Koepka has left and has joined the LIV Golf series. I haven’t had a chance to talk to him about it, and I look forward to having a conversation with him, but I’m not going to share any more than that at this point in time.’’

Share Selection
