
		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	

							Get the free Action Network app for expert picks, live odds, bet tracking and more.
						
Fifteen MLB games and one NBA Finals contest fill out today’s betting board, but expert bettors have identified a few contests with decent value. 
The Action Network PRO Report designates five factors — sharp money, big money, PRO systems, model edge, and expert picks — to help distinguish certain plays from others available.
Today’s report has identified one MLB side, one MLB total, and a pick for Game Four of the Finals that trigger at least a majority of the above signals. Without further delay, let’s dive into the recommendations.

            
Claim a Risk-Free First Bet up to $1,000        

            New customers only. Must be 21+. AZ, CO, IA, IL, IN, LA, MI, NJ, NY, PA, TN, VA, WV, WY only. Full T&C apply.        

            Up To $1500 Risk Free First Bet        

            New users only, 21 or older. NY, CO, DC, IA, IN, IL, MI, NV, NJ, PA, TN, VA, WV only. Full T&Cs apply.        

            Bet $50 Get $200 in Free Bets
        

            21+. New customers only. NY, AZ, CO, CT, IA, IL, IN, MI, NJ, PA, TN, VA, WV only. T&C apply        

            100% First Deposit Match up to $250 with promo code NYPBONUS
        

            New players only, 21+. NY, NJ, MI, AZ, VA only.  In order to participate in this promotion, the player needs to make a first deposit (of at least $10). Full T&C apply.        

            $1000 No Sweat First Bet        

            21+. New customers only. AZ, CT, IA, IL, LA, MI, NJ, NY, PA, TN, WV, WY only. T&C apply        

            Bet $20, Get $100 in Free Bets        

            21+. New customers only. CO & VA Only. T&Cs apply.         

            Risk Free Bet Up to $1000 + One Free Month of Fubo TV        

            New users only, 21 or older. Available in IA, AZ only. Full T&C apply.        

            Bet $1 Get $200 in Bet Credits with NYP365        

            21+. New customers only. NJ only. Full T&C apply.         

            Bet $20, Get $100 in Free Bets        

            21+; New Customers only. NJ &; PA only. Full T&Cs apply.        

            Get a $250 First Deposit Match        

            21+, New Customers Only. NJ and CT only. Full T&Cs apply.        

            100% Deposit Match Up to $500        

            New users only, 21+. Offer available in CO only. Full T&C apply.        
The Yankees have only dropped two games across its last 10, but expert bettors like the visiting Cubs as heavy underdogs. 
We’ve seen sharp action coming in on Chicago, which opened as a consensus +195 underdog but now sits anywhere between +204 and +220 depending on the book. Additionally, big money bets are hitting the Cubs as well — as of this writing, it has received only 17 percent of all moneyline bets against 38 percent of the total handle. 
Further, one Action Network PRO System — Contrarian Betting Against Good Teams — identifies the Cubs. That system, which looks for moneyline percentages under 35 percent for teams on a minor losing streak, has a 42 percent historical win rate and 11 percent return on investment. 
Finally, one top MLB betting expert from The Action Network is backing the Cubs on the moneyline tonight to give it four of a possible five signals. 
Chicago Cubs Moneyline (+220) — Caesars Sportsbook

The Rays and Twins begin a three-game series tonight in Minneapolis, and bettors are interested in the total. 
We’ve tracked sharp action hitting the under, which opened at 8.5 runs and has remained steady at that number thus far. It is worth noting that – depending on where bettors shop – there are nine-run totals available at -110. 
Big money is also interested in the under. As of this writing, that market has seen 53 percent of all bets against 90 percent of the total handle. 
Furthermore, there’s a model projection edge with this game. According to The Action Network’s MLB power ratings, the total between these two teams should be set at 8.02, providing bettors a half-run of supposed wiggle room. 
Lastly, one top MLB betting expert from The Action Network supports the under tonight. That gives this market four of a possible five signals. 
Total Under 8.5 Runs +102 (FanDuel) or better 
The Celtics bring a 2-1 series lead into tonight’s matchup after Wednesday’s victory and experts like it to double its advantage tonight. 
We’ve tracked both sharp and big money hitting the Celtics spread, which opened at -3.5 and has largely held steady at that number through early betting. Regarding the percentages, 49 percent of all bets have hit Boston’s spread, but 89 percent of the total handle is on that same side. 
Those percentages trigger an Action Network PRO system — Playoffs: More Money on Favorites — in favor of the Celtics. That system, which looks for favorites with a positive percentage delta between its bet and money percentage, has a 62 percent historical win rate and 20 percent return on investment. 
Finally, one top NBA betting expert from The Action Network got in early on the Celtics to trigger a fourth and final signal in its favor. 
Boston Celtics Spread (-3.5) (-115) — BetMGM
Share Selection
