
Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
MINNEAPOLIS — It had been more than two weeks since the Yankees had allowed as many as six runs in a game, and when Nestor Cortes retired the first nine Twins batters he faced on Wednesday, that streak seemed sure to grow.
But in a rare clunker, Cortes and the Yankees faltered, losing 8-1, to end their seven-game winning streak.
The day started with manager Aaron Boone talking about Cortes’ chances of starting the All-Star game, based on the stellar beginning to his season, but the left-hander gave up a season-high four runs in 4 ¹/₃ innings.
Cortes entered with an MLB-best 1.50 ERA, and Wednesday marked the first time he has allowed more than three runs in a start since last season — a stretch of 19 straight outings.
“There’s gonna be ups and downs [in a season],’’ Cortes said. “It’s whether you come back the next time and weather the storm.”
The loss to the Twins was also a rarity, as the Yankees had beaten Minnesota five times in a row, and nine out of their last 10 meetings. Since 2015, the Yankees were 30-10 versus Minnesota — but Boone wasn’t interested in those stats.
“I look at the here and now and say, ‘That’s a good team,’ ’’ Boone said before the game. “We’ve got to play well to beat them. That’s as far as I go.”
With the defeat, the Yankees’ lead in the AL East dropped to seven games over the Rays and Blue Jays.
It all started to go downhill for Cortes and the Yankees when Byron Buxton led off the bottom of the fourth with a single to left. From there, Cortes’ once-promising outing quickly fell apart.
Carlos Correa, in his first back after coming off the injured list, followed with a bloop hit to right. With one out, Gio Urshela hit a fly ball to deep right that Giancarlo Stanton misplayed into a hit, allowing Buxton to score.
Jose Miranda’s infield single made it 2-0, though it could have been worse.
Max Kepler singled to left and Urshela was sent home on the play. Aaron Hicks made a strong throw and easily got Urshela at the plate, getting Cortes out of the inning without further damage though he gave up five hits.
And the Yankees’ offense never got going against Chris Archer, who didn’t give up a hit until Hicks led off the fifth with an infield hit to third.
Archer pitched around a pair of walks in the second inning and was wild again in the fourth. Aaron Judge opened that inning with a walk and reached second on a throwing error by shortstop Nick Gordon that hit off Judge’s left arm on a grounder by Stanton.
With one out, Josh Donaldson walked to load the bases for Gleyber Torres. The Twins brought the infield in and Torres hit a ball to short, which Gordon turned into an unorthodox 6-4-3 double play to end the inning and keep the game scoreless.
Kyle Higashioka doubled to left with Hicks on first on and one out in the fifth. That sent Hicks to third, from where LeMahieu drove him in with a sacrifice fly to deep right that allowed Higashioka to move to third.
But with the Yankees trailing by a run, Judge grounded out.
Ryan Jeffers and Buxton both homered against Cortes in the fifth. The lefty this season had not given up more than one home run in a game, let alone in an inning.
“They’re a good hitting team and made me battle all night,’’ Cortes said.
The Twins scored two more runs in the sixth off Clarke Schmidt, thanks to three doubles.
Manny Banuelos replaced Schmidt in the seventh, and Minnesota scored two runs for a fourth consecutive inning.

Share Selection
