
Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
SAN DIEGO — Khalil Lee was struggling badly enough last month that he was demoted from Triple-A Syracuse to High-A St. Lucie.
On Wednesday the 23-year-old outfielder was recalled by the Mets, giving the team another needed position player with Pete Alonso and Starling Marte sidelined, but not on the injured list.
Lee replaced Brandon Nimmo in center field in the seventh inning and grounded out in the eighth inning of the Mets’ 13-2 blowout loss to the Padres Wednesday.
Lee spent a week in May in Port St. Lucie to work on his swing, and thrived after returning to Syracuse. Over his last 19 games for Syracuse, he had a .311/.414/.623 slash line with four homers and 19 RBIs.
“He found his timing and his rhythm back, he was basically working on some stuff to get his fluidity and rhythm back,” Mets director of hitting development Hugh Quattlebaum said. “His swing is smooth … it looks more like a sudden explosion than a buildup and there is a lot of power there and when he gets too quiet or too simple with it, he was doing a toe tap and losing his timing, he was a little bit later on fastballs than he typically is.
“He went down [to St. Lucie] and put in a leg kick and he said right off the bat it felt way different, he loves it. He’s kind of come back with it and definitely looks different since he’s been back.”
Lee had a cameo with the Mets last season. He appeared in 11 games and went 1-for-18 (.056) at the plate with 13 strikeouts. Manager Buck Showalter got to evaluate Lee in camp this spring.
“He and Dom [Smith] have really been swinging the bat well, playing well,” Showalter said. “That was one of the things in the conversation. We probably caught him in the best part of the year for him so far.”
Adonis Medina was optioned to Syracuse, creating roster space for Lee. The right-hander was among the Mets’ heroes Sunday, when he pitched a scoreless 10th inning against the Dodgers for his first career save.
“At least he leaves with a great taste in his mouth,” Showalter said. “He’ll be back. I am hoping there is not a need, but I am sure there will be.”
Tylor Megill will be activated from the injured list to pitch Friday’s game against the Angels, according to Showalter. Carlos Carrasco and Taijuan Walker are scheduled for the ensuing two games of the series. Megill was placed on the IL on May 12 with right biceps inflammation.
The Mets have maintained a steady lead in the hit-by-pitch category for most of the season. After three players were plunked Tuesday, the Mets had an MLB-leading 40 hit batsmen.
“I have never seen so many people get hit in the feet area with curveballs,” Showalter said.

Share Selection
