
		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
The ban on transgender swimmers competing in major women’s events has been celebrated by trans celebrity Caitlyn Jenner — as well as a three-time Olympic gold medalist who said athletes have been too scared of cancel culture to admit they all supported it.
Jenner, an Olympic gold medal-winning decathlete, celebrated the news by sharing The Post’s coverage of the landmark decision Sunday by the world swimming’s governing body, FINA, which covers the Olympics.
“It worked!” tweeted Jenner, 72, one of the most high-profile transgender personalities to regularly rail against the likes of Lia Thomas dominating women’s events in the pool.
“I took a lot of heat – but what’s fair is fair!” insisted the former “Keeping Up with the Kardashians” star
“If you go through male puberty you should not be able to take medals away from females. Period,” tweeted Jenner.
It worked! I took a lot of heat – but what’s fair is fair! If you go through male puberty you should not be able to take medals away from females. Period.  https://t.co/qqZq7gnt6g
Some of Jenner’s transgender followers were among those joining her celebrations.
“We all understand this Truth,” tweeted Anna von Harlotte, saying she was “speaking as a Trans Woman.”
“Acceptance is vital but not at the cost of defying Logic. Unfortunately the political arm of the Trans movement doesn’t see it that way,” she tweeted.
Meanwhile, Australian swimming legend Emily Seebohm — a three-time Olympic gold medalist and five-time world champion — told Channel 9 early Monday that she was “100%” relieved by the decision.
“We all feel the same — it’s just we were all too scared to be the first one to say anything,” she told the Australian channel’s “Today Show.”
“It’s such a hard topic. No one wants to be the first one to say anything because you’re scared of cancel culture,” she said.
“That’s such a thing now. If you say one wrong thing you’re done.”
She believed the same fear delayed FINA’s decision, which she felt “100%” should have come earlier.
“They were just sitting on the fence. No one wanted to be that first person because they were scared,” she said, insisting it was backed by a vast majority of those in the sport.
Now, however, she expects others to follow.
“This is just gonna be a snowball effect — we’re one of the first sports to make the decision,” she predicted.
Seebohm stressed how FINA was suggesting a new open division that would still allow trans swimmers to compete.
“We’re not saying no to transgender athletes, we’re saying ‘Yes, we’re gonna make a category for you,'” she said.
Share Selection
