This blog is closed. You can catch up on the week in Ukraine here. Live coverage will resume later.
Mariupol’s mayor, Vadym Boychenko, warned cholera and other deadly diseases could kill thousands of people in the Russian-occupied city in southern Ukraine as corpses lie uncollected amid rising temperatures.
Boichenko, who is no longer in the devastated city, said wells had been contaminated by the corpses of people killed during weeks of Russian bombardment and siege, and that the collection of bodies by the city’s Russian occupiers was proceeding slowly, Reuters reports.
Speaking on national television, Boychenko said:
There is an outbreak of dysentery and cholera. This is unfortunately the assessment of our doctors: that the war which took over 20,000 residents ... unfortunately, with these infection outbreaks, will claim thousands more Mariupolites.
Mariupol has been placed into quarantine, he said earlier. “Nobody is let in or out.” He told the BBC that “there are a lot of dead” in the city, adding:
 They have not cleared the bodies of those they killed in the bombings. Many bodies are still under the ruins. The problem is compounded by the absence of garbage collection – the system hasn’t been functioning since February.
The situation was being made worse by it now being summer and hot, with heavy rain ruining makeshift burial places as well as a lack of functioning water and sewage systems, he said.
Boychenko told the BBC:
The resulting mix flows towards rivers and wells, where people draw and use it. This water is already poisoned. It has already propagated throughout the city. The occupation authorities bring water to the city, but not enough. People still go to the wells and take that poisoned water.
Earlier today, Britain’s defence ministry said there was a risk of a major cholera outbreak in Mariupol because medical services were likely near collapse. Russia is struggling to provide basic public services to the population in Russian-occupied territories, it said.
About 100,000 people are in the city that once had a population of about 430,000 before Russian troops invaded the country, according to Ukrainian officials. 
This blog is closed. You can catch up on the week in Ukraine here. A final summary follows. Live coverage will resume later.
The world’s chemical weapons watchdog said Friday it is keeping a close eye on Ukraine since Russia’s invasion to monitor “threats of use of toxic chemicals as weapons”.
Agence France-Presse reports: 
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons chief Fernando Arias met Ukraine’s parliamentary chairman Ruslan Stefanchuk to discuss “the implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention,” the Hague-based organisation said.
“Since the beginning of the current conflict, the OPCW Technical Secretariat has been closely monitoring the situation in Ukraine,” the OPCW said in a statement after the meeting.
Friday’s talks included “the threat of chemical weapons use and assistance and protection support from the OPCW Technical Secretariat as well as from States Parties to the convention,” it said.
The Chemical Weapons Convention is the treaty signed by most countries around the world - including Ukraine and Russia - banning the use of chemical weapons.
Stefanchuk’s visit comes in the wake of Russia’s attack on a chemical plant last week in the eastern Ukrainian city of Severodonetsk in which a nitric acid tank was hit.
The destruction of the tank prompted Ukrainian authorities to call on residents to “stay indoors and prepare protective face masks impregnated with soda solution”.
Arias said the OPCW was ready to provide technical assistance to Ukraine, “especially in the field of chemical safety and security.”
Russia has demolished 1,300 high-rise buildings in the city of Mariupol without removing dead bodies of residents, according to Vadym Boichenko, mayor of Mariupol. 
Mariupol mayor: Russia demolished 1,300 high-rise buildings in city without removing dead bodies of residents
Inna Sovsun, Ukraine’s former first deputy minister of education and science tweeted on Friday photos of Ukrainian high school graduates posing amidst war-torn backdrops. 
Photo of graduates of one of the schools in the city of #Chernihiv in Northern #Ukraine.#Russia severely damaged the city in February-March.This will forever remain in the memory of these high school graduates. And in their yearbooks. pic.twitter.com/3FcyKG5bVR
Russia’s military campaign severely damaged the city of Chernihiv in northern Ukraine between February and March, Sovsun said. 
“This will forever remain in the memory of these high school graduates. And in their yearbooks,” she added. 
Russia has labelled a non-governmental organization that fights for investigations into torture allegations as a “foreign agent.”
On Friday, the Russian justice ministry updated its website list of blacklisted entities to include the Committee Against Torture, a UN-linked human rights treaty body. 
Russia has long used the “foreign agent” label to blacklist opponents, journalists and human rights activists who are accused of carrying out foreign-funded political activities against the state. 
The organization, founded 22 years ago, has urged Russian authorities to investigate torture allegations carried out by its security forces and called for preventative measures. 
In 2015, the organization was designated as a “foreign agent” and again the following year, dissolving itself and then re-forming to try and evade the label.
Since the start of Moscow’s military operation in Ukraine on February 24, dozens of members of the Russian intellectual elite and journalists have left the country, as the authorities step up pressure against the last critical voices and media.
In April, Russia announced that it was shutting down the local offices of over a dozen international organizations including Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International.
Moscow announced it withdrawal on Friday from the United Nations World Tourism Organization after it suspended Russia in April as a result of its military invasion of Ukraine. 
The Russian government said that it “accepted a proposal from the foreign ministry...concerning the withdrawal of Russia” from the organization, according to a decree signed by prime minister Mikhail Mishustin. 
37,000 women are in the Ukrainian army and over 1,000 women have become commanders, Ukrainian first lady Olena Zelenska said on Friday. 
“Most of our doctors are women as well as 50% of our entrepreneurs who work to support the economy at war,” she added. 
37,000 women are in the Ukrainian army & more than 1,000 women have become commanders, Ukrainian first lady said at the conference in Brussels."Most of our doctors are women as well as 50% of our entrepreneurs who work to support the economy at war" https://t.co/N1TaeBtEEh
Ihor Zhovka, diplomatic advisor to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said that Ukraine will not “cede an inch” of territory to Russia. 
Speaking to Bloomberg reporter Maria Tadeo, Zhovka said, “We are not going to give away territory, we won’t cede an inch - especially not in Donbas. Russia has thrown everything at it - I won’t get tired of saying Ukraine needs immediate supply of heavy weapons.” 
Zelenskiy’s diplomatic advisor Ihor Zhovkva tells me «As I’ve told you, we are not going to give away territory, we won’t cede an inch - especially not in Donbas. Russia has thrown everything at it - I won’t get tired of saying Ukraine needs immediate supply of heavy weapons.»
He went on to express concerns over trusting Russia, saying, “We are ready to export using our vessels or third parties. But we don’t trust Russia. We need a ceasefire and guarantors. We are ready. So far, our efforts have not sufficed.” 
Serbian president Aleksandar Vuvic appeared on Friday to reject calls from German chancellor Olaf Scholz for Serbia to join the European Union in imposing sanctions on Russia over its military invasion of Ukraine. 
Speaking at a news conference during his two-day tour of the Western Balkans, Scholz said that Serbia, as an EU candidate, should join the EU bloc and join other EU members in their measures against Moscow. 
However, Vuvic said that he did not believe sanctions are “efficient” and that his country is in a complicated position, given the long-standing special relationship between Serbia and Russia. 
“As far as sanctions are concerned we have different position.... We remember sanctions (against Serbia) and we do not think sanctions are efficient,” Vuvic said.
Vuvic did not mention whether Serbia planned to impose sanctions on Russia. 
During his tour, Scholz promised to help the Western Balkans to streamline their long-stalled campaign for EU membership, a move aimed at easing regional tensions and fending off the influence of rival powers such as Russia.
A video of one of many mass graveyards in Ukraine has emerged online, Ukraine’s Centre for Strategic Communications and Information Security under the Ministry of Culture and Information Policy tweeted on Friday. 
This is one of many graveyards of civilians in #Mariupol. It has over 3,000 fresh graves. This is what Russia did to the once flourishing city of nearly 500 000 inhabitants. #RussianWarCrimes pic.twitter.com/oZQ6qj1aBx
According to Mariupol mayor Vadym Boichenko, there are 50 to 100 killed people under every destroyed house in the city, with the amount of destroyed houses reaching 1,300. 
“Therefore, the real number of people killed in the city may be much higher than previously estimated,” the center said. 
Mariupol mayor Vadym Boichenko says that there are 50 to 100 killed people under every destroyed house in the city (the destroyed houses amounting to 1,300). Therefore, the real number of people killed in the city may be much higher than previously estimated.
Ukraine tried to push back Russian troops in the east and south on Friday as France offered to help ensure access to the port of Odessa and ease a global grain crisis.
Agence France-Presse reports: 
Kyiv said Friday it had launched new air strikes on Russian positions in the captured southern region of Kherson, one of the first areas to be taken by Russia after the February 24 invasion.
Fierce fighting continued in the eastern Donbas region, where President Volodymyr Zelensky said that Ukrainian forces were “holding on” despite Moscow concentrating its firepower there.
The fiercest fighting remains around the eastern industrial city of Severodonetsk, a battle that Zelensky has said is pivotal for the fate of the Donbas region.
Local governor Sergiy Gaiday said on Friday that Russian forces had destroyed a major sports centre, adding: “One of the symbols of Severodonetsk was destroyed. The Ice Palace burned down.”
With the world still facing shockwaves from the war, an adviser to French President Emmanuel Macron said France was ready to assist in an operation to allow safe access to Ukraine’s Black Sea port of Odessa.
The port has been subject to a de facto blockade by Russia, and grain is waiting to be exported amid mounting fears of global food shortages, especially in developing countries.
“We are at the disposal of the parties to put in place an operation which would allow access in complete safety to the port of Odessa, in other words for boats to pass through despite the fact that the sea is mined,” said the advisor, who asked not to be named.
Macron will travel to Ukraine’s neighbours Moldova and Romania next week but no date had been set for a visit by Macron to Kyiv, the advisor said.
France wants “victory for Ukraine”, the advisor added, after Macron sparked controversy by suggesting Russia should not be humiliated. 
It is 8pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand:
That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, today. I’ll be back on Monday. My colleague, Maya Yang, will be here shortly to continue to bring you all the latest developments from Ukraine. 
Any way you count it, the figures are stark: Ukrainian casualties are running at a rate of somewhere between 6oo to 1,000 a day. 
One presidential adviser, Oleksiy Arestovych, told the Guardian this week it was 150 dead and 800 wounded; another, Mykhaylo Podolyak, told the BBC that 100 to 200 Ukrainian troops were being killed a day.
It represents an extraordinary loss of human life and capacity for the defenders, embroiled in a defence of the eastern city of Sievierodonetsk that, this week, turned into a losing battle. Yet the city was also arguably a place that Ukraine could have retreated from to the more defensible Lysychansk across the Siverski Donets River, the sort of defensive situation that Ukraine has fared far better at.
The sheer number – more than 20,000 casualties a month – raises questions about what state Ukraine’s army will be in if the war drags on into the autumn. That is true for Russians too, of course. But it is the invaders who already control large chunks of Ukraine, and they can pause the fighting with the territorial upper hand.
Consider the figures in context. Ukraine’s army was 125,000 strong according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies – and there were a further 102,000 national and border guards in addition. Crude analyst estimates suggest that since the start of the war that figure could have doubled to an impressive 500,000.
Kyiv’s forces are far from a point of collapse. But several months of high casualties will erode its fighting strength significantly, even allowing for some of the wounded to recover. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s forces are already being pushed back in a Donbas artillery bombardment so intense it is likely to have a shell-shock impact on many of those who survive it. Morale is certainly an issue for the Russians, but there are now reports of desertions from the Ukrainian side too.
Read the full piece by Dan Sabbagh: Ukraine’s high casualty rate could bring war to tipping point
The leaders of nine central and eastern European countries have asked Nato to strengthen its eastern flank following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Leaders of Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia met in the Romanian capital, Bucharest, less than three weeks ahead of a Nato summit later this month in Madrid, AFP reports.
Romania’s president, Klaus Iohannis, opened the meeting alongside his co-chair and Polish counterpart, Andrzej Duda, by saying:
In view of the increased security risks in Romania and the Black Sea, consolidating Nato on its eastern flank, in a unified and balanced manner, becomes all the more urgent and crucial.
The summit will draw up “a long-term vision... putting collective defence and Article 5 at the heart of the actions”, Iohannis said, referring to Nato’s article that states that an attack on one member is an attack on all of them.
The heads of state of the nine countries represented in Bucharest will also discuss the impact of the Russian invasion on the security of Nato’s “vulnerable partners”, including Moldova and Georgia.
Mariupol’s mayor, Vadym Boychenko, warned cholera and other deadly diseases could kill thousands of people in the Russian-occupied city in southern Ukraine as corpses lie uncollected amid rising temperatures.
Boichenko, who is no longer in the devastated city, said wells had been contaminated by the corpses of people killed during weeks of Russian bombardment and siege, and that the collection of bodies by the city’s Russian occupiers was proceeding slowly, Reuters reports.
Speaking on national television, Boychenko said:
There is an outbreak of dysentery and cholera. This is unfortunately the assessment of our doctors: that the war which took over 20,000 residents ... unfortunately, with these infection outbreaks, will claim thousands more Mariupolites.
Mariupol has been placed into quarantine, he said earlier. “Nobody is let in or out.” He told the BBC that “there are a lot of dead” in the city, adding:
 They have not cleared the bodies of those they killed in the bombings. Many bodies are still under the ruins. The problem is compounded by the absence of garbage collection – the system hasn’t been functioning since February.
The situation was being made worse by it now being summer and hot, with heavy rain ruining makeshift burial places as well as a lack of functioning water and sewage systems, he said.
Boychenko told the BBC:
The resulting mix flows towards rivers and wells, where people draw and use it. This water is already poisoned. It has already propagated throughout the city. The occupation authorities bring water to the city, but not enough. People still go to the wells and take that poisoned water.
Earlier today, Britain’s defence ministry said there was a risk of a major cholera outbreak in Mariupol because medical services were likely near collapse. Russia is struggling to provide basic public services to the population in Russian-occupied territories, it said.
About 100,000 people are in the city that once had a population of about 430,000 before Russian troops invaded the country, according to Ukrainian officials. 
Ukraine’s military intelligence directorate said it believes Russia has the economic resources to continue the war at its current pace “for another year”.
In an update on Telegram, it said:
The Kremlin leadership probably will try to freeze the war for a while in order to convince the West to lift sanctions, but then continue the aggression. 
Russia’s economic resources will allow the occupying country to continue the war at its current pace for another year.
Russia’s goal “is all of Ukraine and not only Ukraine”, it added. 
