
https://www.wsj.com/articles/revamped-doj-compliance-unit-takes-on-greater-role-in-corporate-settlements-11655940214
A revamped unit in the Justice Department’s fraud section is bulking up with new staff as it takes on an expanded role in corporate settlements, an official said on Wednesday.
Now known as the corporate enforcement, compliance and policy unit, the division previously focused on internal strategy and policy, including providing specialized training to the prosecutors who handle some of the Justice Department’s biggest investigations into corporations and their executives.
Over time, however, it has evolved to provide more support to the prosecutors who negotiate settlements with companies, according to









      
      Lauren Kootman,



      an assistant chief in the unit.
“It has taken on over the last several years more responsibilities for overseeing corporate resolutions, ensuring consistency, and also specifically looking at compliance and how compliance factors into our resolutions,” Ms. Kootman said.
 Our Morning Risk Report features insights and news on governance, risk and compliance. 
The unit will soon be adding more lawyers with compliance expertise, including from law firms or companies, to help assess corporate compliance programs, she said.
Ms. Kootman was hired last year from the law firm Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP as a compliance specialist in the division, then called the strategy, policy and training unit. Her appointment, among others, builds on the position once held by









      
      Hui Chen,



      who was hired in 2015 to serve as the Justice Department’s first compliance consultant. Ms. Chen, who had held compliance roles in the corporate world, left the Justice Department in 2017.
Last year, the Justice Department renamed the unit to better fit its shifting role in the fraud section. Housed in the Justice Department’s Washington headquarters, the section is responsible for investigating corporate fraud, market manipulation and foreign bribery.
Federal prosecutors in recent years have urged companies to invest in building and maintaining compliance programs to help prevent legal violations or detect them once they occur. Companies that do are eligible for more lenient treatment in the event they are investigated by the Justice Department, officials have said.
The Justice Department also has recruited lawyers with compliance experience for more senior positions. Last year, the Biden administration chose









      
      Kenneth Polite,



      a former U.S. Attorney for New Orleans and a former chief compliance officer for the power company










            Entergy Corp.


      , to serve as assistant attorney general of the department’s criminal division, which houses the fraud section.
Earlier this month, Mr. Polite announced that









      
      Glenn Leon,



      a former federal prosecutor and the chief compliance officer of










            Hewlett Packard Enterprise Co.


      , would serve as head of the fraud section.
—Richard Vanderford contributed to this article.
Write to Dylan Tokar at dylan.tokar@wsj.com


Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

