Banks and gas stations are increasing the hold they place on consumers’ credit and debit cards to $175. WSJ reporter Ayse Kelce joins host J.R. Whalen to discuss why it’s being done and how consumers can avoid the risks.

An often overlooked option to stem retirement savings losses is to convert traditional IRA money into a Roth IRA. WSJ tax reporter Laura Saunders joins host J.R. Whalen to explain the benefits and potential tax liabilities of making that move. 

Some companies are helping employees deal with sky-high gas prices as a way to retain them and encourage a return to the office.  WSJ workplace reporter Kathryn Dill joins host J.R. Whalen with more.
Even though the labor market remains hot, some companies are rescinding job offers after candidates have signed on the dotted line. Host J.R. Whalen is joined by reporter Angela Yang, who spoke with several people whose job offers were pulled back.

The stock market declines in 2022 have taken their toll on stock portfolios and 401(k)s. WSJ “Intelligent Investor” columnist Jason Zweig joins host J.R. Whalen to explain why bear markets affect investors in different generations in different ways.

Many retirees mismanage their 401(k) savings once they leave the workforce, resulting in a shortfall of funds. WSJ retirement reporter Anne Tergesen joins host J.R. Whalen to discuss how more 401(k) providers are including features similar to pension funds to ensure retirement savings last as long as possible.

Although stocks have suffered a series of broad selloffs as inflation continues to climb, history shows certain sectors tend to buck the trend and move higher in times of high inflation. George Mason University finance professor Derek Horstmeyer joins host J.R. Whalen to discuss  his recent research pinpointing sectors that tend to outperform during periods of rapidly rising prices.

The Federal Reserve announced plans to raise interest rates by 0.75 percentage point, and is likely to raise them rapidly for the rest of the year. The moves are meant to counter high inflation but could lead to some hard financial decisions for many people. WSJ personal-finance reporter Julia Carpenter joins host J.R. Whalen with steps you can take to protect your holdings, and financial decisions to put off amid rising rates.
U.S. households are likely to pay a lot more for electricity this summer due to inflation. WSJ personal-finance reporter J.J. McCorvey joins host J.R. Whalen with tips for reinin g in your air conditioner’s electricity usage and lowering your monthly energy bill.

Prospective homebuyers who don’t have funds on hand to make an all-cash offer are finding creative ways to solve the issue. WSJ reporter Orla McCaffrey joins host J.R. Whalen to discuss. 

J.R. Whalen is host and producer of The Wall Street Journal’s Your Money Briefing and Minute Briefing podcasts. He joined WSJ Podcasts in 2017 after nearly a decade of producing news and business programming for the WSJ’s video department. Before joining the WSJ, J.R. held positions at CBS News, CBS Sports, HBO, the Associated Press and Who Wants to Be a Millionaire, where he was responsible for assigning dollar values to the questions. He began his career at WVIP-AM/FM in Mount Kisco, N.Y., as news and sports director. He is a graduate of Syracuse University, and owns about 100 pairs of cufflinks.
