“The world needs Ukrainian grain,” Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said at The Journal’s Global Food Forum. The war is threatening food supplies from one of the world’s most-productive farming regions to some of its poorest countries.
Patrick Thomas
June 28, 2022
FDA has proposed several rules that would mark the biggest effort to curb smoking since the 1998 landmark deal with tobacco industry
Jennifer Maloney
June 24, 2022
Campbell’s, General Mills and Mars have grown through acquisitions, but some of their legacy brands have stalled.
Annie Gasparro
June 23, 2022
Buffalo is redeveloping, but the East Side, particularly the Fruit Belt area, has largely been left behind.
Omar Abdel-Baqui and Joseph De Avila | Photographs by Lauren Petracca for The Wall Street Journal 
June 23, 2022
Russia’s invasion has hit some of Ukraine’s most productive agricultural land, disrupting supplies and pushing up food prices. As harvest season begins, farmers are feeling the heat of relentless fighting. 
Thomas Grove| Photographs by Guillaume Binet / MYOP for The Wall Street Journal 
June 23, 2022
The policy follows over a decade of research suggesting a sharp reduction in cigarettes’ nicotine content would help smokers quit. 
Jennifer Maloney
June 21, 2022
The Supreme Court’s decision not to hear a bid by the company to end thousands of lawsuits alleging weedkiller Roundup causes cancer leaves German conglomerate exposed to billions of dollars in potential settlement costs.
Jan Wolfe
June 21, 2022
Silos and warehouses are holding millions of tons of older grains and seeds, with export routes blocked.
Alistair MacDonald and Thomas Grove | Photographs by Guillaume Binet/MYOP for The Wall Street Journal 
June 19, 2022
Record temperatures have wreaked havoc on crops, threatening the livelihoods of farmers and elevating food prices for the country’s nearly 1.4 billion people.
Shan Li and Vibhuti Agarwal | Photographs by Sahiba Chawdhary for The Wall Street Journal 
June 18, 2022
Alleged theft is heaping more misery upon Ukraine’s beleaguered farming industry and threatening to crimp harvests when the world needs Ukrainian crops.
Alistair MacDonald and Thomas Grove | Photographs by Guillaume Binet for The Wall Street Journal  
June 17, 2022
The Cincinnati-based grocery chain says its margin fell, as the company aimed to offer more deals to inflation-battered shoppers and navigated higher supply-chain costs.
Jaewon Kang and Dean Seal
June 16, 2022
Grocery store stocks have held their value a lot better than the market this year as investors seek safety from an uncertain economic outlook. Keeping that streak going won’t be easy. 
Jinjoo Lee
June 16, 2022
Major U.S. food suppliers and restaurants, including Kraft, Tyson and some McDonald’s franchisees, said they would continue to raise prices as they face starkly higher costs. 
Jaewon Kang and Annie Gasparro
June 11, 2022
The move would require tobacco companies to reduce the nicotine in all cigarettes sold in the U.S. to minimally or nonaddictive levels, according to people familiar with the matter.
Jennifer Maloney
June 11, 2022
Airline fares and household furnishings saw a slight cooling of price pressures amid a month of surging costs in other categories. 
David Harrison
June 10, 2022
The German agricultural and pharmaceutical giant notched a third consecutive court victory in the U.S. over its Roundup weedkiller.
Georgi Kantchev
June 10, 2022
Wheat output in the European Union is expected to fall this year, according to a closely followed survey, threatening to crimp supply from one of the world’s biggest growers at a time when the war in Ukraine has bottled up exports from that country and from Russia.
Yusuf Khan
June 9, 2022
Brazil has been testing ways to boost farm productivity and reduce the need for imported fertilizers for years, trying solutions that are now subjects of widespread interest because of the Ukraine war’s effect on global supplies.
Vinod Sreeharsha and Samantha Pearson | Photographs by Dado Galdieri for The Wall Street Journal 
June 8, 2022
The German conglomerate’s stock is up 41% this year as food shortages stoked by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine drive demand for seeds and pesticides to boost global crop production.
Ben Dummett
June 7, 2022
Across Ukraine, farmers are navigating mines, traversing bombed bridges and risking dangerous maneuvers at overworked ports to circumvent a Russian blockade and get their grains to a world desperate for them.
Alistair MacDonald, Will Horner and Patrick Thomas | Photographs by Petrut Calinescu for The Wall Street Journal 
May 30, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
