Beijing’s top official reportedly vowed five more years of strict pandemic controls in a speech, prompting a social media outburst—and a speedy retraction of the pledge. 
Joyu Wang
June 27, 2022
The theme park remains closed as it and other businesses deal with the possibility of abrupt and disruptive lockdowns because of China’s zero-Covid policy.
Stella Yifan Xie and Liza Lin
June 27, 2022
As the region’s top networking center, Hong Kong’s reputation continues to suffer as Covid controls keep international bankers and investors away. 
Elaine Yu
June 26, 2022
Diaries of residents who lived through the city’s long battle against Covid-19 reveal their journey from complacency to shock to a growing sense of disillusionment with the government. 
Natasha Khan, Cao Li, Shen Lu and Stella Yifan Xie | Photographs by Qilai Shen for The Wall Street Journal 
June 25, 2022
Chinese President Xi Jinping will visit Hong Kong next week to mark the 25th anniversary of the city’s handover from the U.K. and inaugurate a new government, as the city continues a two-year crackdown on dissent. 
Cao Li
June 25, 2022
The second investigation of China National Knowledge Infrastructure comes as Beijing restricts the flow of information about what is happening inside the country.
Raffaele Huang
June 24, 2022
In a redirection of flows because of the Ukraine war, America is selling more to Europe, while Russia is becoming more dependent on sales to China.
Brian Spegele and Sha Hua
June 23, 2022
In the central city of Zhengzhou, two officials in charge of pandemic control switched the health codes of more than a thousand bank customers to color red to thwart protests over alleged bank fraud. 
Wenxin Fan
June 23, 2022
Companies say they fear the law that came into effect Tuesday aiming to prevent shipping of goods using forced labor is difficult and costly to comply with.
Liza Lin and Yoko Kubota
June 21, 2022
The meeting is moved to Montreal, costing Beijing a chance to project its diplomatic and cultural clout on the world stage.
Sha Hua
June 21, 2022
Sinopec Shanghai said the fire had effectively come under control. The cause of the explosion is under investigation.
Joyu Wang
June 18, 2022
The Fujian, named for the Chinese province closest to Taiwan, is China’s first indigenously designed and built aircraft carrier.
Chun Han Wong
June 17, 2022
Plans to protest in Zhengzhou against banks for freezing deposits were thwarted when would-be protesters’ health codes turned red—prompting accusations authorities were using the Covid tool for social control.
Wenxin Fan
June 17, 2022
Joblessness among youth rose to 18.4% last month, the highest rate since before the pandemic and far above that of the U.S. or Europe. 
Stella Yifan Xie
June 16, 2022
Government support measures for the industry have yet to take hold after a yearlong regulatory campaign aimed at reining in developers’ debt levels.
Jonathan Chengand Cao Li
June 16, 2022
Official data showed an uptick in factory production and a smaller decline in retail sales in the world’s second-largest economy last month.
Stella Yifan Xie
June 15, 2022
China said it released Bloomberg Beijing bureau local staff member Haze Fan on bail in January, more than a year after she was detained for alleged national-security offenses.
Chun Han Wong
June 14, 2022
Millions of people are tested in the capital and entertainment venues are shut, just a week after many businesses had reopened.
Yoko Kubota
June 14, 2022
Michelle Bachelet has been criticized over her visit to assess claims of rampant abuses of Muslim minorities in the Xinjiang region, but cited personal reasons for her departure. 
Chun Han Wong
June 13, 2022
Social media erupts in anger over footage of men beating several women. “It could be me.”
Liyan Qi
June 11, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
