Authorities were investigating the deaths of 22 young people, some as young as 14, whose bodies were found in a township tavern near the coastal city of East London. 
Aaisha Dadi Patel
June 26, 2022
China’s offer to mediate disputes across the troubled Horn of Africa is the latest sign Beijing is expanding decades of economic diplomacy into matters of war and peace.
Nicholas Bariyo and Chun Han Wong
June 21, 2022
Across the continent, surging energy costs are straining economies already burdened by spiraling food prices and the disruptions caused by the continuing pandemic.
Nicholas Bariyo
June 8, 2022
Dubai police arrested two brothers at the center of a sprawling government graft scandal in South Africa, offering some relief to that country’s embattled president, Cyril Ramaphosa, and his sputtering anticorruption drive. 
Gabriele Steinhauser in Johannesburg and Rory Jonesin Dubai 
June 7, 2022
Masked attackers walked into a Pentecost service in Ondo state spraying bullets and detonating explosives. 
Joe Parkinson and Gbenga Akingbule
June 5, 2022
The country has become a model for living with Covid-19 in the long term. Life continues as normal for most South Africans, while behind the scenes, dozens of scientists closely track the virus’s every move.
Denise Roland and Aaisha Dadi Patel
May 17, 2022
Somalia’s lawmakers voted to bring back a former leader, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, and oust President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, whose attempts to delay elections and remain in office beyond his term alienated the U.S. and other Western countries.
Nicholas Bariyo
May 15, 2022
More than 300 people have been killed in floods in South Africa, with officials warning that disruptions at the regional transport hub of Durban will likely continue for some time, with outbound shipping still suspended. 
Aaisha Dadi Patel
April 14, 2022
Insurrections are disrupting American security strategy in the region and giving Russia an opening to gain sway.
Michael M. Phillips
April 9, 2022
Chinese firms have spent billions of dollars buying out U.S. and European miners of cobalt, a critical commodity in the transition to cleaner energy. Now a court has ordered one of the largest to cede control of one of its mines.
Nicholas Bariyo
March 12, 2022
The American military is asking the president to station several hundred commandos in Somalia to help blunt the spread of al Qaeda’s aggressive local affiliate, al-Shabaab, according to  U.S. officials.
Michael M. Phillips
March 10, 2022
As the African nation, under military control after coup last year, seeks fresh investment, officials suggest they could give Moscow a 25-year lease in Port Sudan.
Michael M. Phillips in Djibouti and Nicholas Bariyo in Kampala, Uganda 
March 2, 2022
The Islamist militants who have rampaged through the heart of West Africa in recent years are now spreading toward the Gulf of Guinea coast, including some of the continent’s most stable and prosperous countries, according to African and U.S. officials.  
Michael M. Phillips | Photographs by Michael M. Phillips/The Wall Street Journal 
March 2, 2022
Countries in some parts of the world have offered a variety of incentives or threats to convince people to get inoculated, but some African nations are taking a more aggressive stance.
Nicholas Bariyo
February 28, 2022
The move threatens to leave a security vacuum in Africa’s Sahel region where French-led troops have spent nearly a decade battling Islamist terrorist groups and tamping down ethnic conflict.
Matthew Dalton
February 17, 2022
France and its European allies are preparing to withdraw their military forces from Mali, a move that would leave a security vacuum in Africa’s Sahel region where French-led troops have spent nearly a decade battling Islamist terror groups and tamping down ethnic conflict.
Matthew Dalton and Michael M. Phillips
February 16, 2022
Parts of Africa are contending with a wave of inflation that is, by some measures, even worse than the supply shocks cascading around the rest of the world. 
Nicholas Bariyo
February 15, 2022
The International Court of Justice ruled in 2005 that Kampala was liable in a conflict that left more than five million dead
Talal Ansari
February 9, 2022
Rescuers reached the five-year-old child, identified as Rayan Aourram, on Saturday night after excavating and tunneling into the well, but he did not survive. 
David S. Cloud
February 6, 2022
A spate of coups has spread across West Africa over the past 18 months.
Nicholas Bariyo
February 2, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
