Queen Elizabeth II stood on the balcony at Buckingham Palace with members of the royal family as crowds gathered across London. The U.K. marks the monarch’s record 70 years on the throne with four days of platinum jubilee celebrations. Photo: Daniel Leal/AFP/Getty Images
President Biden called the availability of Covid-19 vaccines for young children a “monumental step,” speaking a few days after the CDC recommended that children as young as 6 months receive the newly authorized shots. Photo: Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images
Every day, millions of sailors, truck drivers, longshoremen, warehouse workers and delivery drivers keep mountains of goods moving into stores and homes to meet consumers’ increasing expectations of convenience. But this complex movement of goods underpinning the global economy is far more vulnerable than many imagined. Photo illustration: Adele Morgan
WSJ’s Daniela Hernandez explores new technologies aimed at helping fully and partially paralyzed patients regain their sense of touch, which also helps them with moving normally again. Illustration: David Fang
Political Cuts: The gas tax holiday is another way of diverting attention from one of the contributors to inflation: a rushed transition to green energy. Images: AFP/Getty Images Composite: Mark Kelly
Electric-vehicle startups like Rivian, Lucid, Fisker, Canoo and Lordstown are having to adjust to the realities of making vehicles in a harsh economy. WSJ’s George Downs explains some of the challenges they’re facing and why some even risk going out of business. Photo composite: George Downs
Elon Musk said Tesla’s factories in Germany and Texas are losing billions of dollars as supply-chain snags and battery-cell manufacturing hurdles limit production. Output at the company’s Shanghai plant also took a hit during the city’s Covid-19 lockdown. Photo: Patrick Fallon/Reuters
Electric-scooter rental companies are hitting speed bumps in the U.S. over safety and other concerns. But in Tel Aviv, one in 10 residents has rented a Bird e-scooter, and the city appears to be embracing them. WSJ’s Jason Bellini takes a look at the challenges and potential lessons of the e-scooter craze.

Luxury home tours on YouTube are exploding, and transforming the way high-end real estate is discovered and sometimes sold. YouTube personality Enes Yilmazer walks us through the making of a video for his channel, which gets an average of 15 million views a month. Photo: Michal Czerwonka for The Wall Street Journal
Zoom CFO Kelly Steckelberg shares the company's latest investments in technologies such as conversation AI with the acquisition of Solvvy, and how that can improve the experience for their customer base in a hybrid workplace.
