The largest Russian missile barrage in weeks hit the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv early Sunday, hours before a Group of Seven meeting convened in Germany to discuss new economic measures to stop Moscow’s invasion.
Alan Cullison and Yuliya Chernova
June 26, 2022
The overnight attack left 21 people wounded and prompted organizers of the city’s Pride march to cancel the celebration hours before it was scheduled to begin.
Drew Hinshaw
June 25, 2022
The German government moved closer to rationing natural gas after Russia cut deliveries to the country last week in an escalation of the economic war triggered by Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. 
Bojan Pancevski and Georgi Kantchev
June 23, 2022
President Emmanuel Macron said he was open to building an alliance with other parties, in his first televised address since the election. 
Noemie Bisserbe
June 22, 2022
Divisions over military aid for Ukraine have triggered a split in Italy’s biggest parliamentary party, reflecting ambivalence in the Southern European country about how deeply to get involved in Kyiv’s resistance to Russia. 
Marcus Walker
June 22, 2022
A top French court ruled against allowing head-to-foot swimsuits at public pools in Grenoble, the latest move amid a debate over how to balance France’s values of liberalism and secularism.
Noemie Bisserbe
June 22, 2022
President Emmanuel Macron’s pro-business agenda appeared in jeopardy after France’s conservative party Les Républicains rejected the idea of an alliance with the French leader to form a majority in Parliament.
Noemie Bisserbe
June 21, 2022
Election defeat is early sign of higher stakes for European leaders as fighting in Ukraine becomes war of attrition.
Stacy Meichtry
June 20, 2022
The president’s party and its allies will remain the largest coalition in the National Assembly but without enough seats to form a majority, in a setback to his pro-business agenda.
Noemie Bisserbe and Stacy Meichtry
June 20, 2022
Ukrainian attacks in Donbas came as Moscow unleashed new salvoes of long-range missiles—some of them shot down by air defenses—on cities across the country.
Yaroslav Trofimov
June 19, 2022
The battle for control of the Donbas area is escalating, with Ukrainian forces fighting to prevent Russian troops from seizing Severodonetsk, the regional governor said, while Moscow continues to target other cities with missile strikes.
Thomas Grove and Mauro Orru
June 18, 2022
Why the country’s request to join the 27-country bloc is a long shot.
Laurence Norman
June 17, 2022
The European Commission recommended that member states make Ukraine a candidate for EU membership, the first step of what could be a decadeslong process to join the bloc.
Laurence Norman
June 17, 2022
Moscow’s move to slash natural-gas exports to Europe has pitched the continent’s energy crisis into a dangerous new phase.
Joe Wallace in London and Georgi Kantchev in Berlin 
June 16, 2022
The U.S. is sending $1 billion in new military assistance to help Ukraine repulse Russia’s invasion, in response to urgent pleas from Kyiv for better weapons and amid growing strains among Western capitals.
Daniel Michaels in Brussels and Nancy A. Youssef in Washington 
June 15, 2022
The European Union’s move signaled that the bloc has no immediate plans to suspend the Brexit agreements but also set up a protracted period of uncertainty over the deal’s future and a possible trade war in Europe.
Laurence Norman in Brussels and Max Colchester in London  
June 15, 2022
European Parliamentary committees voted against including some natural-gas and nuclear-energy investments on a list of sustainable activities, ahead of a parliament-wide vote next month.
Kim Mackrael
June 14, 2022
The move came as the Russian gas giant said it would nearly halve flows of gas to Germany because of pipeline maintenance issues. 
Bojan Pancevski in Berlin and Joe Wallace in London 
June 14, 2022
Russia is advancing in the Donbas region as the U.S. and its allies prepare to discuss new heavy-weapons supplies for Kyiv.
Yaroslav Trofimov and Stephen Fidler
June 13, 2022
Industrial energy costs are soaring in the wake of Russia’s war on Ukraine, hobbling European manufacturers’ ability to compete in the global marketplace. 
Matthew Dalton
June 13, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
