The prevalence of the Omicron variant rather than earlier strains, strict lockdowns and resilient immune systems may have helped the country avoid a worse outcome, say defectors and health experts.
Dasl Yoon and Timothy W. Martin
June 27, 2022
The Taliban government is racing to get recovery efforts under way in the country’s disaster-stricken east, where entire families were wiped out by a quake that left over 1,000 people dead.
Esmatullah Kohsar | Photographs by Julian Busch for The Wall Street Journal 
June 24, 2022
China’s ambassador to Australia said he believes strained relations between the two countries can improve, though the protests that interrupted his speech suggest there will be political challenges.
Mike Cherney
June 24, 2022
Ranil Wickremesinghe laid the groundwork for potential austerity measures as his government negotiates with the International Monetary Fund, after months of rolling blackouts and double-digit inflation.
Philip Wen
June 22, 2022
Tuesday’s launch of the Nuri rocket and successful placement of a large dummy satellite into orbit shows South Korea has harnessed technology that could build a homegrown space surveillance system.
Dasl Yoon
June 21, 2022
While China and the U.S. exchanged testy salvos at a recent gathering of military officials, the rhetorical fireworks helped provide cover for a revived effort to cool tensions, diplomats and defense officials said.
Keith Zhai and Alastair Gale
June 16, 2022
Critics from other countries say Piyush Goyal has hindered deal-making, but Indian minister says he speaks for the marginalized. 
Yuka Hayashi
June 15, 2022
The protest over rising fuel prices and wages had delayed cargo shipments and thwarted deliveries in one of Asia’s export powerhouses.
Jiyoung Sohn
June 15, 2022
Gen. Wei Fenghe said the country’s nuclear weapons buildup is an appropriate response to a more threatening international environment, a rare official acknowledgment of Beijing’s expanding nuclear arsenal.
Keith Zhai and Alastair Gale
June 13, 2022
Canberra agrees to pay the equivalent of roughly $584 million to Naval Group after ending a contract in favor of U.S. technology. 
David Winning
June 11, 2022
Lloyd Austin says Chinese aircraft and ships are engaging in provocative behavior in the Indo-Pacific region.
Niharika Mandhana
June 11, 2022
A night of partying and 26 Covid-19 infections linked to the Heaven Supermarket Bar have thrown a wrench into attempts to ease restrictions in Beijing.
Liza Lin
June 10, 2022
Washington and Seoul are responding to North Korea’s missile tests with a greater show of force of their own, in an effort to increase pressure on Pyongyang and reset the tone for stalled nuclear negotiations.
Dasl Yoon
June 10, 2022
Over two years, firms and technical experts from China’s military will build and renovate a number of structures at the facility, with the revamp funded by a Chinese grant.
Niharika Mandhana in Singapore, Sun Narin in Phnom Penh, Cambodia and Chun Han Wong in Hong Kong 
June 8, 2022
The cause of a blaze that set off a series of explosions at a container depot where chemicals are stored isn’t yet known, but the death toll is expected to grow.
Shan Li and Vibhuti Agarwal
June 6, 2022
Fijians warn the U.S. is at risk of losing influence as Beijing seeks closer ties in the region. “We see China everywhere.”
Mike Cherney
June 5, 2022
North Korea fired eight short-range ballistic missiles, South Korea’s military said, a day after a special U.S. envoy departed from Seoul.
Dasl Yoon
June 5, 2022
A Taiwanese air force pilot died after his jet went down during a training flight. It comes as China’s military has ramped up aircraft sorties near Taiwan.
Chun Han Wong
May 31, 2022
Both countries are working to finalize what would be the first face-to-face meeting between their current top defense officials on the sidelines of a conference in Singapore.
Keith Zhai in Singapore and Alastair Gale in Tokyo 
May 30, 2022
The U.S. and South Korea, which rely on all kinds of clues to guess at what’s going on in highly secretive North Korea, are now being more open about that intelligence.
Alastair Gale and Dasl Yoon
May 27, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
