Veteran executive David Taylor is assuming a role as a senior operating adviser after more than 40 years at the consumer-products company.
Miriam Gottfried
June 21, 2022
The company traps waste gas and uses bacteria to turn it into sustainable chemicals and products for customers including Unilever and Coty. 
Amrith Ramkumar
March 8, 2022
Trian Partners has taken a stake in the maker of Ben & Jerry’s ice cream. The British company may prove a tougher nut to crack than Procter & Gamble.
Carol Ryan
January 24, 2022
Its quarterly sales rose 6%, led by health and cleaning products, with price increases accounting for half of the jump. 
Sharon Terlep
January 20, 2022
Unilever said it approached GlaxoSmithKline and Pfizer about a potential acquisition of their consumer-healthcare joint venture, a deal that would reshape the company’s portfolio as it is under pressure to accelerate growth.
Denise Roland and Ben Dummett
January 15, 2022
From wine to sneakers, more consumer products are sporting labels touting their carbon-neutral credentials. How the labels will pay off with consumers remains to be seen. 
Dieter Holger
December 22, 2021
A blank-check company backed by British billionaire Richard Branson’s Virgin Group is merging with natural-consumer-products seller Grove Collaborative to take it public in a deal the companies value at $1.5 billion.
Kimberly Chin
December 8, 2021
The maker of Nescafé coffee and Purina petfood said it would sell 22.26 million L’Oréal shares back to the French company, allowing the world’s biggest packaged-food maker to capitalize on a rally in the beauty giant’s share price.
Saabira Chaudhuri
December 8, 2021
Companies’ cash hoards stir hopes for greater spending on business growth and returning money to shareholders.
Hardika Singh
August 17, 2021
He will be succeeded on Nov. 1 by his top deputy, Jon Moeller, who has been P&G’s finance chief and was promoted to chief operating officer. 
Sharon Terlep
July 29, 2021
Huggies maker Kimberly-Clark plans to raise prices, joining General Mills, Hormel Foods and other consumer-goods companies in passing along added costs.
Dave Sebastian and Annie Gasparro
March 31, 2021
Gojo Industries, the family-owned maker of Purell hand sanitizer, has added a factory and warehouse and restructured its supply chain, expecting consumers’ new hygiene habits are here to stay.  
Sharon Terlep
January 22, 2021
U.S. labor and trade figures point to uneven recovery from the pandemic, as unemployment claims remained elevated while consumer demand for imported goods rose to a record.
Eric Morath and Harriet Torry
January 7, 2021
What’s News: Business & Finance
December 28, 2020
Redemptions of digital coupons in the U.S. have surpassed redemptions of paper coupons for the first time as more people shop online.
Annie Gasparro
September 1, 2020
General Electric is getting out of the business of making lightbulbs, selling a unit that defined the company for nearly a century and was its last direct link to consumers.
Thomas Gryta and Cara Lombardo
May 27, 2020
Tupperware Brands is looking to ease its debt burden, entering a new phase in its effort to turn around a business struggling with coronavirus lockdowns and shifts in shopping habits. 
Matt Wirz and Micah Maidenberg
May 26, 2020
Trucking companies that deliver goods to manufacturers are cutting pay, reducing hours for workers and pulling back spending as an initial bump in demand for consumer products gives way to a deepening economic downturn.
Jennifer Smith
April 7, 2020
The physicist Freeman Dyson, who died in late February, believed that scientific ingenuity would find a way to save the planet.
Frank Wilczek
March 19, 2020
The consumer-products seller is seeking more time to file its annual report after it disclosed an internal accounting investigation and warned of pressures on its sales and profit.
Micah Maidenberg
February 25, 2020
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
