P.M. Edition for June 27. The Supreme Court’s ruling to end protections for abortion access has left it to the states to decide whether to allow or restrict the procedure. On today’s episode, Congressional reporter Natalie Andrews, Supreme Court correspondent Jess Bravin, and legal affairs reporter Laura Kusisto join host Annmarie Fertoli to answer some of your questions about the historic decision.
A.M. Edition for June 27. The leaders of the Group of Seven leading industrialized nations  meeting in Germany are expected to agree on further sanctions against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. WSJ Germany correspondent Bojan Pancevski says Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky addressed the G-7 summit asking for more weapons to be delivered to his country. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for June 24. The Supreme Court has overturned the landmark Roe v. Wade decision, that for nearly 50 years ensured the constitutional right to an abortion. The historic ruling now leaves the question of whether abortion should be legal to individual states. Supreme Court correspondent Jess Bravin joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss the court’s ruling.Join us for a live Q&A on Roe v. Wade on Monday, June 27th at 11am ET. We’ll break down what we know now - and what may come next.
A.M. Edition for June 24. European Union leaders agreed Thursday to make Ukraine an official candidate to join the bloc, opening the door to possible membership in the years to come. WSJ reporter Laurence Norman explains the symbolic importance of the move and what the path to membership looks like for Kyiv. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for June 23. The Supreme Court could overturn Roe v. Wade, the landmark decision that established the constitutional right to its abortion, in the next few days. If that happens, more than a dozen states are set to immediately outlaw abortion in most cases. Meanwhile, abortion providers in neighboring states bracing for an influx of out-of-state patients. Health reporter Julie Wernau joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss how providers in Illinois are preparing.
A.M. Edition for June 23. Sri Lanka’s prime minister warned this week that the county’s indebted economy faced a complete collapse following months of high inflation, power blackouts and acute food and medicine shortages. WSJ South Asia correspondent Philip Wen explains the origins of Sri Lanka’s crisis and what options exist for navigating out of it. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for June 22. Gas prices have come down slightly from recent highs, but are still hovering just below $5 a gallon. To help ease the pressure, President Biden is calling for a three-month suspension of the federal gas tax. But that would require Congressional approval - and economists and lawmakers are split on how effective it would be for consumers. White House reporter Tarini Parti joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss.
A.M. Edition for June 22. A number of major U.S. companies are reviewing their hedging strategies as a strong dollar dents the value of their overseas earnings. WSJ CFO Journal bureau chief Nina Trentmann explains the steps some executives are taking as they seek additional protection. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for June 21. Typically, when stocks rise, bonds fall. But recently there’s been turbulence in both markets - as investors balance fears of inflation with fears of slowing growth. Markets reporter Sam Goldfarb joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss how this is playing out in yields, and what investors can expect going forward.
A.M. Edition for June 21. In Virginia Beach, Va.—like many communities across the U.S.—high gasoline prices are causing sticker shock at the pump and constraining family budgets. WSJ audio reporter Daniella Cheslow visited the political battleground to learn how the issue could also sway opinions ahead of this year’s closely watched midterm election. Luke Vargas hosts.
Annmarie Fertoli hosts the PM edition of the What's News podcast. She joined The Wall Street Journal in 2017 after more than a decade in public radio: first with WFUV at her alma mater, Fordham University, then at WNYC, where she worked as a news host, reporter and producer for All Things Considered. Annmarie has also worked as a reporter and arts and entertainment editor for weekly newspapers on Long Island and in Queens. Her first print story for the WSJ focused on how the popular video game “Animal Crossing” became a form of therapy during the coronavirus pandemic—for her and many others.
Luke Vargas is the AM host of the What’s News podcast. He joined the WSJ in 2021 from the Skimm, where he was the senior producer of Skimm This. He previously spent seven years as a U.N.-based correspondent, hosting The World in 2:00 radio newscast and reporting from more than 35 countries for a consortium of local and regional AM/FM radio stations. Luke is a published poet and an avid permaculture landscaper, and designs detailed video game maps in his spare time.

