
https://www.wsj.com/articles/cross-river-bank-hires-crypto-compliance-chief-from-robinhood-11655422085
Cross River Bank, a small New Jersey-based community bank that caters to fintech companies, has hired cryptocurrency executive Benjamin Melnicki as the compliance chief for its crypto team.
Mr. Melnicki joined Cross River Bank last month to oversee cryptocurrency compliance. He left trading platform










            Robinhood


      Markets Inc.’s cryptocurrency unit in December after joining the company in September.
A spokeswoman for Cross River Bank confirmed his appointment and declined to comment further. A spokeswoman for Robinhood declined to comment.
 Our Morning Risk Report features insights and news on governance, risk and compliance. 
The appointment comes as Cross River Bank, which is backed by some of










            Silicon Valley’s


      top venture-capital firms, looks to make cryptocurrency a bigger part of its business.
The community bank, which is based in Fort Lee, N.J., and has two branches, one in nearby Teaneck and another in Brooklyn, N.Y., uses its position as a chartered and Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.-member bank to help fintech firms do things that are tougher for nonbank firms under U.S. rules. That includes originating loans in any state and moving funds over the banking system’s rails on behalf of its partners or customers. 
Cross River Bank, which also offers commercial and personal banking services, has been growing rapidly. The bank said it hired more than 225 people in 2021 and its workforce has grown eightfold since 2017.
Before joining Robinhood, Mr. Melnicki was the chief compliance officer of digital-currency asset-management firm Grayscale Investments LLC for about nine months, according to his LinkedIn profile. Before Grayscale, he worked as regulatory counsel at cryptocurrency startup Ripple Labs Inc. and Blockchain.com, a provider of cryptocurrency services to retail and institutional clients, with each position lasting about a year. Earlier, he was director of swap-dealer compliance at










            Bank of America Corp.

Mr. Melnicki’s move comes as the cryptocurrency industry faces turmoil. Prices of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies have been plummeting as interest rates rise and investors have continued to unload assets viewed as risky, including cryptocurrencies. Crypto exchange company










            Coinbase Global Inc.


      said it would cut almost a fifth of its staff. Crypto lender Celsius Network LLC hired restructuring attorneys to help handle its mounting financial problems after freezing user accounts.

Robinhood, meanwhile, said in April that it was laying off 9% of its full-time workers and cutting back on duplicate roles it added when the investment platform was growing rapidly beginning in 2020. 
Write to Mengqi Sun at mengqi.sun@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
Related coverage, selected by the editors
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

