The move aims to counter sharp rise in prices that accompanied prior sanction rounds targeting Moscow’s energy exports. 
Bojan Pancevski, Marcus Walker and Tarini Parti
June 26, 2022
In a role reversal, Ukraine could be the one helping Europe after an exodus of residents left the war-torn country with surplus electricity to sell.
Joe Wallace
June 26, 2022
The Biden administration is asking Exxon, Shell and others to shore up fuel supplies as gasoline hovers near $5 a gallon.
Timothy Puko in Washington and Collin Eaton in Houston  
June 23, 2022
The odds of Russia cutting off Europe’s gas have changed dramatically. Europe’s energy options haven’t.
Rochelle Toplensky
June 23, 2022
Berkshire Hathaway just made another $529 million bet on big energy. The company bought 9.6 million more shares of Occidental Petroleum in June, according to a regulatory filing.
Akane Otani
June 23, 2022
In a redirection of flows because of the Ukraine war, America is selling more to Europe, while Russia is becoming more dependent on sales to China.
Brian Spegele and Sha Hua
June 23, 2022
Ukraine is expected to take a step closer to European Union membership as leaders of the world’s liberal democracies kick off a week of summitry.
Daniel Michaels in Brussels and Drew Hinshaw in Warsaw 
June 23, 2022
Global financial institutions handle transactions for Iran’s sanctioned companies, enabling Tehran to resist U.S. pressure, documents show. 
Ian Talley
June 22, 2022
The guilty plea by Glencore Energy (UK) Ltd., a subsidiary of commodities giant Glencore PLC, in the U.K. is part of a series of deals struck with authorities in that country, the U.S. and Brazil. 
Dylan Tokar
June 21, 2022
Digital ads require a lot of computing power, but the exact amount of electricity they consume is hard to pin down.
Megan Graham
June 21, 2022
A group of American renewable-energy developers is making a $6 billion offer to solar manufacturers: Build panels in the U.S. and we will buy them. 
Phred Dvorak
June 21, 2022
Russia’s throttling of natural gas to Europe is endangering the continent’s race to sock away enough fuel to ride out next winter.
Jenny Strasburg and Joe Wallace
June 20, 2022
Rio Tinto, BHP and other big miners are giving priority to investor payouts instead of funding for new projects.
Amrith Ramkumar
June 19, 2022
French President Emmanuel Macron will be the first of the leaders to face voters, with his majority under threat in parliamentary elections this weekend from rivals who are hammering him over inflation.
Eric Sylvers in Milan and Noemie Bisserbe in Paris 
June 18, 2022
Elected on a green platform, the president’s record so far: higher emissions, slowing renewable energy development and rising consumption of oil and coal. 
Timothy Puko and Phred Dvorak
June 17, 2022
Both candidates on Sunday’s presidential ballot oppose fracking, while state company Ecopetrol is looking to try the practice to bolster dwindling reserves.
Kejal Vyas
June 16, 2022
Russia’s successful efforts to stabilize its economy and its ability to keep oil and gas flowing overseas have cushioned the blow of sanctions for Moscow. 
Georgi Kantchev and Paul Hannon
June 16, 2022
Supply problems are feeding expectations that commodity prices will go higher, but rising interest rates are an important counterweight. 
Rochelle Toplensky
June 16, 2022
A United Nations agreement to accelerate greenhouse gas cuts this year has stalled, according to some negotiators, as most of the world’s biggest emitters have done little to follow through on the deal since it was struck seven months ago at the climate summit in Glasgow, Scotland.
Matthew Dalton
June 16, 2022
Much of the growth in oil demand next year will be driven by China, the International Energy Agency said, while developed economies are expected to contend with a worsening economic outlook and rampant inflation.
Will Horner
June 15, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
