Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 6:33 PM The $2.2 trillion global Islamic finance industry will expand about 10 per cent in 2022-2023 after a similar growth trend in total assets in 2021, albeit it is still held back by structural constraints, according to a new report. “This year, we think higher commodities prices will underpin a stronger recovery in many core Islamic finance markets. Moreover, most of these countries are relatively resilient to macroeconomic shocks resulting from the Russia-Ukraine conflict. This will support the industry’s prospects for 2022-2023 but global headwinds could change the picture,” said S&P Global Ratings head of Islamic finance Mohamed Damak. According to Invesco experts, who expect to see the continued growth of opportunities for investors looking for Shariah-compliant investment vehicles in 2022, a remarkable rise in the range of Islamic exchange-traded funds (ETFs) would drive global Islamic finance assets to grow t $4.94 trillion in 2025. The surge in ETFs has been attributed to fund managers in the UAE, Saudi Arabia, the United States, and Europe. ETFs overall had a record year in 2021 with more than 900 new launches worldwide and over $1 trillion in global net inflows, taking assets under management to $9.9 trillion at the end of November, according to Invesco experts, who expect to see the continued growth of opportunities for investors looking for Shariah-compliant investment vehicles in 2022. S&P Global Ratings noted that the Islamic finance industry is still held back by structural weaknesses, namely the complexity inherent to transactions and the correlation of performance with oil prices given concentration in commodities-exporting countries. What’s more, the clear preference of some Shariah scholars for a higher proportion of profit and loss sharing in sukuk is posing certain legal challenges. “However, we see opportunities in the alignment of certain Islamic financial products and environmental, social, and governance factors and recent strides in digitalization. We expect to see a higher volume of green and sustainability sukuk (from a low base) as issuers look to broaden the investor base and include funds aligned with sustainability themes. Moreover, digital sukuk could generate significant investor interest in the future once the necessary prerequisites are implemented,” said the report. “Based on these factors, we believe the market will expand about 10 per cent in 2022-23 after 10.2 per cent growth in total assets in 2021 (excluding Iran),” Damak said. — issacjohn@khaleejtimes.com Finance Farhat Omar Ben Gdara, Chairman of Al Masraf, welcomes Graham and said he will play a lead role in the bank's digital transformation strategy. Finance1 month ago Finance Taking place on May 17 in Dubai, the third edition of the event will take a deep dive into how organisations can prepare for any future uncertainty, where growth opportunities lie, and how CFOs can play a critical role in influencing business resilience and change Finance1 month ago Finance The FTA may impose the penalty maximum within six years from the date violation was committed but the time to impose the penalty for the offence of providing inaccurate information is a maximum of 12 months from the date on which the violation came to the attention of the FTA Finance1 month ago Finance Non-compliance with the ESR is subject to penalties ranging from Dh20,000 to D400,000. To avoid this, it is recommended that the licensee must comply with the ESR. Finance1 month ago Finance The government did not announce a replacement or say when a successor would be announced Finance1 month ago Finance If the entities are carrying business only in the UAE, or entities whose income is being taxed in other countries are not subject to ESR in the UAE. ESR is not applicable to natural persons, sole proprietorships, trusts and foundations Finance1 month ago Finance The bank's underlying profit before tax increasing five per cent on a constant currency basis while ncome grew 11 per cent during Jan-Mar quarter Finance1 month ago Finance The bank said higher revenue across net interest and other operating income, underpinned by solid loan growth, generated a robust increase in net profit Finance1 month ago 