Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 8:06 PM Last updated: Tue 7 Jun 2022, 6:31 PM A new tuition-free charter school model run by private school groups was announced in the UAE on Monday. Taking to Twitter, His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Vice-President and Prime Minister of the UAE and Ruler of Dubai, said the Ajyal or 'Generation Schools’ model will target around 14,000 students and will commence from August 29. The schools will follow the American curriculum while incorporating all the UAE subjects. Lectures will be delivered in English, spearheading a change in the delivery model that was traditionally taught in Arabic. However, subjects like Islamic studies, Moral education and UAE Social Studies will continue to be taught in Arabic. “Existing staff will be for the subjects taught in Arabic. We will be hiring new teachers for all the other American curriculum subjects,” said Heather Mann, Director of Education of Taleem, one of the private school groups that will be running these schools. “These are very firmly Emirates Schools Establishment (ESE) schools. But we are changing the curriculum and moving to the American curriculum, following New York standards. That, of course, is a big change," she said. "Apart from the UAE subjects, everything will be delivered in English, which will be a change for the students, who in these schools have traditionally had most of their teaching in Arabic.” In addition to Taleem, two other private school groups — Aldar and Bloom Education — will run 10 schools in the first year. This will be increased to 28 in a span of three years. “It is a new initiative to raise the profile of education and to improve the life chances and the outcomes for our Emirati youth. We will have four schools, one each in Dubai, Sharjah, Ras Al Khaimah and Fujairah,” Mann added. Throwing light on the future of education in the Emirates and how the public-private partnership will foster the learning landscape for the better, she underlined: “This seems to be the future of quality education as a major drive in improving the life chances, particularly for Emiratis, to ensure that they're well-equipped for the future. It's based on the charter school model. "We already have six charter schools growing to nine in September. It will support the improvements of education right across all the Emirates. We are excited because, for us as a company, it’s our ability to give back and be part of the growth of the Emirates and to do our part in raising the quality of education for everyone, whether you're Emirati or an expat. That's why we're so excited to be part of the whole new project.” Education From gorging on noodles to learning theory like a song, pupils reveal their whacky studying routines  Education1 week ago Education The council also approved promoting several university faculty members and renewing their contracts Education2 weeks ago Education Exhibition focuses on introducing creative projects that will improve services and the quality of life Education2 weeks ago Education Institutions enjoy action-packed few weeks before long vacations commence in July Education2 weeks ago Education The initiative was launched this year by T4 Education in partnership with Accenture and American Express Education2 weeks ago Education The innovative educational experience will be implemented in the current academic year in 10 schools  Education2 weeks ago Education Parents can get accurate and up-to-date list  Education2 weeks ago Education The graduation ceremony will pay tribute to the late leader Education2 weeks ago 