Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Thu 2 Jun 2022, 9:30 AM Last updated: Thu 2 Jun 2022, 10:16 PM It's jobs galore in UAE’s aviation sector as it takes off at an exponential pace post-Covid-19 period on the back of strong demand for international traffic with UAE airlines hiring throughout this year. The UAE’s carriers have been on a hiring spree over the last couple of quarters, led by Emirates, flydubai, Etihad Airways and Air Arabia. New vacancies The latest data available on the airlines’ careers sections shows that around 300 vacancies were available on June 1, 2022, for different positions such as cabin crew, pilots, finance officers, aircraft mechanics, IT and sales executives and many others. The massive recruitment by UAE airlines comes in the wake of airlines shrinking their workforce in 2020 after the outbreak of the pandemic. However, budget carrier flydubai retained most of its workforce even during the pandemic. “The proactive steps we took at the start of the pandemic enabled flydubai to retain the majority of its workforce and quickly ramp up its operations as soon as travel restrictions began to ease across the flydubai network. We introduced different voluntary and extended leave schemes which were well received by our employees, more than 90 per cent of those who opted for the scheme have since returned to the workforce,” said Ghaith Al Ghaith, chief executive officer at flydubai. As Covid-19-driven restrictions have been largely eased, airlines are expanding their network with the delivery of the new aircraft. The budget carrier has taken delivery of four new aircraft which has seen its fleet of Boeing 737s growing to 63 aircraft. “We will take delivery of 18 more aircraft over the next few months, this will support our expanding network which will grow to 100 destinations over the summer,” added Al Ghaith. To support this growth trajectory, flydubai's CEO said the airline is currently undergoing a recruitment drive to add more talented professionals to its workforce and this includes pilots, cabin crew and various positions across the business. “Since the start of the year, we have grown our workforce by 25 per cent. More than 800 skilled professionals have been recruited as pilots, cabin crew, engineers and in other positions. Our recruitment drive will continue throughout the year,” he added. Flydubai's chief said the airline is well positioned to continue its growth path and accommodate the increase in demand for travel across the network as it head towards full recovery. Abu Dhabi-based Etihad Airways has also announced that it will host a major recruitment drive to hire up to 1,000 individuals with hospitality experience to join the airline’s cabin crew as the aviation sector recovers from the Covid-19 pandemic. With Etihad Airways’ operations ramping up for a busy summer season and new Airbus A350s entering the fleet, the Abu Dhabi-based airline is recruiting for roles across the business in 2022. “Etihad is currently looking for talented people to join our team as cabin crew, pilots, finance specialists, software engineers and more… Etihad Airways offers a competitive benefits package for cabin crew that not only includes modern accommodation and travel allowances, but the opportunity to learn and grow, see the world and be part of an internationally-recognised and award-winning team,” said Etihad spokesperson. Dubai’s flagship carrier Emirates has announced that its recruitment team would scour 30 cities across six continents including Europe, the Middle East and Australia in May and June in order to expand its workforce that represents 160 nationalities. It aims to expand its operational staff by 6,000. The airline has witnessed a strong response as it has received over 300,000 applications from all over the world since its cabin crew recruitment drive in August 2021. “We continue to recruit crew and other operational roles, in addition to IT roles to ensure we have the right reinforcements to support our ramp-up of operations,” said Emirates spokesperson. Salary UAE-based airlines offer tax-free salary to their employees as no income tax is levied in the country. In addition, employees are offered an annual ticket to their home country, one month of annual leave, transportation, accommodation and other perks. As per data available on the Emirates website, the airline offers cabin crew an average monthly salary of Dh9,770. The selected candidates are offered Dh4,260 basic salary, plus Dh51.25 per hour flying pay (based on an average of 80-100 hours a month) which takes the average total pay to Dh9,770. ALSO READ: The crew is also offered furnished accommodation, free transportation, 30-day annual leave and one free annual ticket to their country of origin. While flydubai offers crew basic salary, housing allowance and transportation allowance which amounts to Dh7,195. It offers average monthly Dh3,360 flying pay based on an average of 80 flying hours. In addition, medical insurance, 30-day annual leave and annual ticket are offered to the employees. waheedabbas@khaleejtimes.com Aviation Global airlines went on the offensive at the aviation summit in Doha, criticising governments and airports over their handling of the recovery from the pandemic Aviation6 days ago Aviation Pakistan’s largest private sector airline will start flights to UK and Turkey to expand its international network  Aviation6 days ago Aviation After two SpiceJet incidents, third airline mishap reported in a single day Aviation1 week ago Aviation Jabalpur-bound plane took off from Delhi's Indira Gandhi International Airport Aviation1 week ago Aviation Plane grounded after locals notice sparks flying out of engine Aviation1 week ago Aviation Health Ministry to review programme in August Aviation1 week ago Aviation Flights struggle to maintain schedules amid worker, pilot shortages Aviation1 week ago Aviation It will also reduce forced diversions due to bad weather Aviation1 week ago 