Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 11:08 PM DP World Limited on Monday announced the appointment of independent non-executive directors Sir Tim Clark, Ms Phumzile Langeni and Vijay Malhotra with effect from June 1, 2022. Sir Tim Clark has been president of Emirates airlines since January 2003 and is also chairman of the Emirates Airline Foundation. He was the managing director of Sri Lankan Airlines until 2008 and has been in the civil aviation business for his whole professional career, having joined British Caledonian in 1972. Ms Phumzile Langeni is the co-founder and executive chairman of Afropulse Group (Pty) Ltd, South Africa. She was appointed by President Ramaphosa of South Africa as a special investment envoy and served as the deputy chairman of the Presidential Advisory Council on Investments and is deputy chairman of Imperial Logistics. Vijay Malhotra has served as chairman of KPMG Lower Gulf network until 2019. He is a member of the board of governors of Indian Business and Professional Council (IBPC), Dubai, the non-executive chairman of DP World Financial Services Limited, and a member of the Audit Committee of Jashanmal Group. ALSO READ: Group chairman and chief executive officer of DP World Limited Sultan Ahmed bin Sulayem, said: “I am extremely pleased to welcome Sir Tim, Ms Langeni and Mr Malhotra to the board. They bring a great wealth of knowledge and experience and will be of great value to the organisation as we continue to drive our business forward with strong governance and sound counsel." -- business@khaleejtimes.com Business Transport and warehousing activities led the GDP growth in first quarter; Economy climbs 6.2% in 2021 Business3 days ago Business Shurooq’s flagship project built on 38,000sqm is scheduled for completion in 2024 Business3 days ago Business The agreement with the Dubai entities will help modernise and turn the Port of Constanta into one of the Black Sea’s most important cargo and vehicle hubs Business3 days ago Business The spacious rooms and one and two-bedroom suites, all have fully equipped kitchens, sleeping areas, and distinct living and working spaces.  Business3 days ago Business The recognition highlights the role of the ‘Obaid’ in reviving the UAE’s trading heritage. Business3 days ago Business The overwhelming majority (90 per cent) intend to keep their wealth in the region for the foreseeable future. Business3 days ago Business The study indicates 63 per cent of respondents are interested to learn more about the metaverse in the UAE. Business3 days ago Business Innovation with the aid of new technology is one of the most significant components for improving operations and safety in the road transport business Business3 days ago 