Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Thu 2 Jun 2022, 10:18 PM In an amendment to a previous decision by the Sharjah Executive Council on the regulation of the tour guides profession, the authority has mandated the Sharjah Commerce and Tourism Development Authority (SCTDA) to oversee and manage tour guides in the emirate, and offer training and refresher courses. SCTDA is also entitled to suspend or revoke a permit in case of violations, and has been tasked to ensure that the regulations are in place. It will hold accountable any individual practising the profession without the required permits. “The amendments have come at a perfect time, as the domestic tourism sector is enjoying a notable boom and the post-pandemic recovery continues to gain traction, promising even greater numbers of visitors in the stages ahead,” said Khalid Jasim Al Midfa, Chairman of SCTDA. The amended decision prohibits any entity or organisation from employing tour guides who do not possess a valid permit issued by SCTDA. A set of conditions must be met by an individual in order to obtain a tour guide permit. Candidates must be over 18 years of age, speak at least Arabic and English, and pass the training programmes set by the Authority. The tour guide license is valid for one year and is renewable after passing the refresher course, which SCTDA will be offering yearly. ALSO READ: Failure to renew the license for a period exceeding two years will render the license void, and the candidate will need to obtain a new permit. UAE citizens, children of Emirati mothers and Sharjah Government employees are exempt from fees on licenses and training programmes for tour guides offered by the SCTDA. UAE Experts offer advice for runners to stay safe during summer UAE1 day ago UAE Two-week-long workshop trains frontliners from seven MENA countries UAE1 day ago UAE Drive also broadcasts information in Arabic, English and Chinese UAE1 day ago UAE Seek medical intervention if changes last longer than two weeks UAE2 days ago UAE The money will be used to build a mosque and dig wells in a needy country  UAE2 days ago UAE She highlighted her confidence in the capacities of Emirati women UAE2 days ago UAE Job seekers will be able to upgrade their resume and make it application-ready UAE2 days ago UAE Customers lined up at 4am outside stores on Thursday to buy the sneakers for their official price of Dh549 UAE2 days ago 