Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 4:02 PM Last updated: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 4:04 PM An Arab woman in her twenties has been instructed to return the Dh255,800 that she had borrowed from her friend. Official court documents from the Al Ain Court of First Instance state that the friend filed a lawsuit against the woman demanding that the latter pay her back. The plaintiff said in her lawsuit that her friend had contacted her through WhatsApp asking for help. She said the defendant said she was facing financial problems that were putting her business at risk, and asked her friend to lend her the money. The plaintiff presented copies of bank transfer receipts to the court as evidence that she transferred the money to her friend’s account. She said the defendant had promised to return in just a few months when her business improved. However when the plaintiff asked for the money to invest in her own business many months later, the defendant refused. In her lawsuit, the plaintiff said the defendant caused her financial loss since she could have made a profit on the money had it been returned to her earlier. After hearing from both parties, the court ordered the defendant to return the money she took from her friend and to pay an Dh5,000 in compensation for the material damages. The defendant was also told to pay for her friend’s legal expenses. ALSO READ: Crime Group removed trackers from vehicles that belonged to businesses country-wide Crime1 week ago Crime RTA and police helped the man locate his bag and nab the accused Crime1 week ago Crime Officials also handled 201 cases of trafficking, promotion Crime1 week ago Crime The man was left permanently disabled after the accident Crime1 week ago Crime The campaign came as part of the police's efforts to enhance security Crime1 week ago Crime The accused also harassed a security guard Crime1 week ago Crime Authorities have launched awareness campaigns aimed at preventing crime Crime2 weeks ago Crime The boy was left in the care of a housemaid after his parents separated Crime2 weeks ago 