Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 7:26 PM Last updated: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 9:57 PM A top Dubai Police official has revealed more details about the honest act of an Indian expat, who handed over a million dirhams he found in his elevator. On Sunday, the Dubai Police had honoured the expat, Tariq Mahmood Khalid Mahmood, after he returned the bag he found in his residential building in Al Barsha. Brigadier Abdul Rahim bin Shafi, director of Al Barsha Police Station, said a tenant of the same building had forgotten the bag full of cash in the elevator. “He had borrowed the money from someone to tide over some financial struggles. After returning from a shopping mall, he forgot the bag in the elevator while heading to his apartment,” the officer said. He immediately rushed to Al Barsha police station to report the missing bag. He told the police he couldn’t remember where he’d lost it. “By that time, Tariq had handed over the bag to the police,” said Brig bin Shafi. After the police verified the case, they handed over the bag to its owner. The police have awarded Tariq with a certificate of appreciation and stressed the importance of collaboration between the community and police. The police quoted the expat as saying that the honour gave him “great pride and joy”. ALSO READ: sahim@khaleejtimes.com UAE Experts offer advice for runners to stay safe during summer UAE1 day ago UAE Two-week-long workshop trains frontliners from seven MENA countries UAE1 day ago UAE Drive also broadcasts information in Arabic, English and Chinese UAE1 day ago UAE Seek medical intervention if changes last longer than two weeks UAE2 days ago UAE The money will be used to build a mosque and dig wells in a needy country  UAE2 days ago UAE She highlighted her confidence in the capacities of Emirati women UAE2 days ago UAE Job seekers will be able to upgrade their resume and make it application-ready UAE2 days ago UAE Customers lined up at 4am outside stores on Thursday to buy the sneakers for their official price of Dh549 UAE2 days ago 