Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Sun 5 Jun 2022, 6:15 PM As part of its strategic innovative plan, Expo Centre Sharjah plans to boost the exhibition sector in the middle region and enhance its competitiveness, with the primary objective of increasing Expo Al Dhaid's event calendar by hosting specialised and high-quality exhibitions that will contribute in the development of the Emirate's economy, industry, trade, and tourism. This was discussed at a meeting recently held at Expo Al Dhaid, which came after an inspection visit led by Saif Mohammed Al Midfa, CEO of Expo Centre Sharjah. Mohammed Misbah Al Tunaiji, director of the Sharjah Chamber’s Branch in Al Dhaid, as well as a number of Al Dhaid employees, also attended the meeting. During the meet, a variety of key topics were also covered, including Al Dhaid's development plans, the prospect of expanding its facilities, and providing a highly qualified human resource. In his address, Al Midfa said the Emirate's exhibition sector is progressing forward toward a new hopeful future. "This is consistent with the Emirate's recent success in hosting significant regional and international events. Such events helped to strengthen the exhibition sector's role in assisting various economic, cultural, and trade domains." "Expo Centre Sharjah is eager to revitalise the exhibition sector in the middle region and ensure its successful return following the pandemic. Thus, the meeting was a positive beginning toward developing plans for the Expo Centre Al Dhaid and anticipating its future prospects," he added. Mohammed Al Tunaiji emphasized the significant efforts made by the Sharjah Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SCCI) and the Expo Center Sharjah in developing the middle and eastern regions’ exhibition sectors. He also underlined Al Dhaid's past contributions to the exhibition sector, including meetings with organizers, traders, and various entities and institutions. As a result, there is a diverse events calendar and the availability of a perfect platform that fits the demands of the region and neighbouring emirates. On his inspection visit to Expo Centre Al Dhaid, Al Midfa examined the exhibitions' organizational procedures. He was also introduced to the main events that would be hosted and organized in the future, such as the Al Asayel Exhibition and the Al Dhaid agriculture exhibition, by Al Dhaid's personnel. — muzaffarrizvi@khaleejtimes.com Business Transport and warehousing activities led the GDP growth in first quarter; Economy climbs 6.2% in 2021 Business3 days ago Business Shurooq’s flagship project built on 38,000sqm is scheduled for completion in 2024 Business3 days ago Business The agreement with the Dubai entities will help modernise and turn the Port of Constanta into one of the Black Sea’s most important cargo and vehicle hubs Business3 days ago Business The spacious rooms and one and two-bedroom suites, all have fully equipped kitchens, sleeping areas, and distinct living and working spaces.  Business3 days ago Business The recognition highlights the role of the ‘Obaid’ in reviving the UAE’s trading heritage. Business3 days ago Business The overwhelming majority (90 per cent) intend to keep their wealth in the region for the foreseeable future. Business3 days ago Business The study indicates 63 per cent of respondents are interested to learn more about the metaverse in the UAE. Business3 days ago Business Innovation with the aid of new technology is one of the most significant components for improving operations and safety in the road transport business Business3 days ago 