Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 23 May 2022, 3:22 PM Long weekend alert, the likely dates of Islamic festival Eid Al Adha have been revealed. The start of an Islamic month in the Hijri lunar calendar is determined by the sighting of the crescent moon. However, the likely dates can be predicted based on astronomical calculations. Eid Al Adha or the festival of sacrifice is marked on 10th of Islamic month Dhul Hijjah. According to Ibrahim Al Jarwan, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Emirates Astronomy Society, Saturday, July 9, is likely to be the first day of Eid Al Adha. According to the UAE’s official holidays calendar, Arafah Day — which is marked on the day before Eid Al Adha — is also a day off. Residents will, therefore, enjoy a four-day holiday from Dhul Hijjah 9 to 12. As per astronomical calculations, this would likely be from Friday, July 8, to Monday, July 11. That means it’s going to be a four-day weekend for public and private sector employees in the UAE for Eid Al Adha 2022. The UAE holidays list specifies four more breaks after Eid Al Adha. The breaks for Islamic new year and Prophet Muhammad’s (Peace Be Upon Him) birthday are likely to fall on Saturdays, so those won’t convert into long weekends. However, residents will get December 1-3 off to mark Martyrs’ and National Days. Residents will get a four-day weekend — from Thursday, December 1, till Sunday, December 4. ALSO READ: UAE Holidays Visitors will also be able to enjoy a dinner and watch the dazzling fireworks from viewing spots in cafes and restaurants  UAE Holidays6 months ago UAE Holidays Executives in the travel and hospitality sectors say the UAE is regarded as one of the safest destinations  UAE Holidays6 months ago UAE Holidays Church leaders and believers have said the festival "brings hope in darkness."  UAE Holidays6 months ago UAE Holidays Parking arrangements, QR codes requirement for access: All you need to know UAE Holidays6 months ago UAE Holidays The festivities would adhere to extensive Covid safety measures UAE Holidays6 months ago UAE Holidays Ras Al Khaimah will first attempt the 'largest number of drones used simultaneously in fireworks displays' UAE Holidays6 months ago UAE Holidays Outdoor, adventure destinations are preferred among UAE nationals and expatriates UAE Holidays6 months ago UAE Holidays Activities include children workshops, colouring, decoration, pottery restoration, art, painting, Islamic beads, aviation and creative installations, in addition to food trucks UAE Holidays6 months ago 