New video shows the harrowing moment Manhattan bodega worker Jose Alba was apparently stabbed himself while fending off and fatally slashing a violent ex-con who attacked him.
Advertisement
A 15-year-old boy has been charged with murder in the fatal subway stabbing of a 14-year-old kid in Upper Manhattan over the weekend, according to police and cop sources Sunday.
Advertisement
The eldest son of Prince William and Kate Middleton made a surprise appearance at the Wimbledon finals — and showed off some funny facial expressions.
Advertisement
Tiger Woods played an 18-hole practice round Sunday at St. Andrews.
A US Army medic recently ripped the overturning of Roe vs. Wade in a TikTok post that attracted new attention after right-wing Internet personality Jack Posobiec shared it on Twitter.
The bombastic Australian got frustrated at a fan in attendance at Centre Court during Sunday’s match against Novak Djokovic.
Russian President Vladimir Putin, 69, has two children with ex-gymnast lover Alina Kabaeva, who is 30 years younger — and is reportedly not pleased she’s expecting another girl.
“Keep protesting. Keep making your point. It’s critically important,” President Biden said to reporters while riding his bike near his family’s Delaware beach house.
The seven cops who continued to safeguard de Blasio after he left office Dec. 31 were reassigned July 1, 2022.
A Sydney-based blogger and influencer, Hatzi has been dating Kyrgios for several months, with the couple going public with their romance in December 2021.
Raul Hardy was shot dead by NYPD officers after he threatened to “blow up” the world and “change the government” by assassinating Gov. Kathy Hochul — and then opened fire on cops.
The comedy legend walked his daughter down the aisle on Saturday as she tied the knot to Michael Xavier in a stunning ceremony attended by friends and family.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky accused Russian troops of purposely targeting “ordinary houses” over the weekend.
The “Modern Family” icon posted photos of an intimate poolside luncheon with close relatives at Los Angeles’ Tower Bar on the eve of her milestone birthday.
Birds started panting like dogs in the Southern states as heat index values soared to a blistering 110 degrees in Collierville, Tennessee.
Because he is not vaccinated against COVID-19, Novak Djokovic will not be allowed to enter the United States for the US Open.
The Mets knew they’d have little margin for error against one of the most dominant starting pitchers in the NL this season, only to see an error lead to the decisive margin.
In a message posted on social media, Hatzi, 22, celebrated the Australian tennis star, 27, for making it as far as he did in the tournament following a dramatic week.

The on-again, off-again couple, who share two children, looked so loved up when they were spotted leaving a dinner date in West Hollywood.
Several of the Kardashians shared pics and videos from Khloé’s 38th birthday vacay to Turks and Caicos, dubbing the trip “#KampKoKo.”
In this week’s snaps, Kendall Jenner, Brie Larson, and Olivia Jade Giannulli have fun in the summer sun wearing their best bathing suits!
Twitter is assembling a high-profile legal team to sue Telsa CEO Elon Musk for terminating his $44 billion deal to buy the platform.
You like, my hair? Gee thanks, just bought it.


				Get the best of the New York Post				straight to your inbox.
				Choose the newsletters that are right for you.			

				Because the approaching full moon shines on you from your opposite sign you may find that partners and loved ones are a bit too emotional for your tastes this week. Don't take what they say and do too seriously - it's unlikely they mean it.			
