
		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
A group of topless pro-choice protesters rushed on the court during Tuesday’s WNBA game between the New York Liberty and the Minnesota Lynx at Barclays Center.
While some of the women — who took their tops off but covered their chests — rushed down to the court mid-game, others held up signs in support of the Roe v. Wade ruling.
Video footage taken by onlookers at the game shows the Rise Up 4 Abortion Rights protesters marching to the game holding up signs in support of abortion rights, while others were smothered in green paint. 
The women were eventually escorted out by security.
No charges were filed, according to the NYPD.
One sign read, “Overturn Roe? Hell no!” while another read, “Abortion on demand & without apology.”
After the game, the organization tweeted out a photo of the protesters who interrupted the game, writing, “This was the audience we wanted. We aren’t protesting to change the hearts & minds of woman-hating fascists. No. 
Protestors at Barclays being dragged past Ben Simmons at my first WNBA game was a vibe pic.twitter.com/GbOhQz4txE
This was the audience we wanted. We aren't protesting to change the hearts & minds of woman-hating fascists. No. We are calling on those who can stop the overturning of #RoeVWade: THE MILLIONS of ppl who support #abortionrights. YOU! No business as usual. Shut the country down! pic.twitter.com/2HvCTfNIti
“We are calling on those who can stop the overturning of #RoeVWade: THE MILLIONS of ppl who support #abortionrights. YOU! No business as usual. Shut the country down!”
Barclays Center did not immediately respond to The Post’s request for comment.
Rise Up 4 Abortion Rights recently carried out public protests at a Mets-Dodgers baseball game in Los Angeles over the weekend.
On Sunday, three abortion activists interrupted celebrity pastor Joel Osteen’s service at a Texas megachurch by stripping down to their underwear.
The protests come weeks after news of the US Supreme Court’s potential overturning of the landmark Roe v. Wade abortion ruling.
The draft document, which was leaked to Politico and revealed last month, says a majority of the Supreme Court is prepared to overrule the Roe case, which legalized abortion nationwide nearly 50 years ago.
The right to have an abortion until around 23 or 24 weeks has been federally protected under the Constitution since that decision.

Share Selection
