
Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
There’s nothing we love more than sought-after sweetheart dresses, punchy prints and swanky shoes going on sale — especially for summer.
We’re beaming more than ever during Saks Fifth Avenue’s up-to-60%-off Designer Sale — not only because we can snag Alexander Wang and Stella McCartney at a discount — but because all those jaw-dropping styles aren’t full-price anymore (yay!)
The decked-out-designer department store is one of our favorites for scoring top-rated beauty products under $25 and splurge-worthy clutches alike, so we’re adding items to our wishlists.
Ahead, find our favorite brands hosted at a markdown during Saks Fifth Avenue’s up-to-60%-off Designer Sale. We couldn’t name a better sale to shop in honor of Memorial Day, either.
With an eye for moody colors and a funky flair all at once, Isabel Marant is a designer to look out for during this sale. From the lovely-in-lilac Eggie Openwork Mohair Sweater (now $536) to the on-trend Nadia Striped Denim Shorts (now $286), you’ll want to give your wardrobe a restock filled with this waitlist-inducing, unique pieces.
As one of Saks Fifth Avenue’s most-wished-for designers, Alexander Wang has a slew of feminine-forward fashions and elevated styles to transition you into summer. We adore the brand’s sweet marshmallow-like Cropped Oxford Puffer Jacket (now $239) and the cozier-than-ever (and on trend) Cami-Detailed V-Neck Sweater (now $181) specifically, but we recommend looking at all the dreamy selects.
OK, if we’re being honest — it’s never too soon to buy a sleek pair of boots (or, two-toned pink sneakers we can’t get enough of). Not only do Valentino’s Garavani Rockstud Chelsea Boots (now $810) give your look a mature edge, but its Leather & Textile Sculpted Sole Sneakers (now $510) are the Legally Blonde-esque pair we’re all heart eyes for.
Valentino Garavani has many other on-sale selects to comb through, too.
If you haven’t heard of Khaite, we need to turn you on to this doting brand. For one, the styles are a stunning spin on your basics (think: black dresses and jeans) and are worth grabbing now. We love the flattering Laine Cut-Out Dolman Top (now $462) and the beautifully chunky and warm Lima Cashmere Sweater (now $1,365) too much not to mention.
The dream closet has been unlocked. With Stella McCartney’s perfect-for-summer Silk Elastic Waistband Shorts (now $313) and Striped Tie-Dye Denim Midi Dress (now $439), you’ll be photo-ready at your next backyard bash or fancy evening-time dinner.
With a name like Michael Kors Collection, you can’t pass these deals up. As some of our favorite styles during Saks Fifth Avenue’s Sale, we can’t stop looking at the warm-weather-ready Ribbed Off-the-Shoulder Top (now $176) and work-appropriate Samantha Gingham Trousers (now $311). They’re both polished, posh and perfect for the season.
Behold: Frederick Anderson, one of Saks Fifth Avenue’s more ornate designers with a traditional edge that’ll never go out of style. We love how precious the brand’s Embroidered Tulle Minidress is (now $675) and how eye-catching its white-and-black Contrast Lace Poplin Minidress is (now $536), too. Shop the brand for all the hottest (and classiest) looks.
If you’re seeking that casual coastal style (you know, those dresses that feel as if you’re walking on air), Fabiana Filippi is the designer you need to order from during Saks Fifth Avenue’s Sale. Its vacation-ready Striped Knit Slip Dress (now $506) and Tiered Mini Shirtdress (now $423) are two numbers we wish we had in our closets — so score them now while they’re discounted.
Check out the New York Post Shopping section for more content.
Share Selection
