This live blog is now closed, you can find our latest coverage of the Russia-Ukraine war here
Ukraine’s deputy defence minister, Hanna Maliar, said Russia has gathered almost all of its forces to storm the settlements near the embattled eastern city of Sievierodonetsk.
“Decisive” battles are taking place in the area of Sievierodonetsk with the Russian leadership aiming to reach the borders of the Luhansk region by the end of the week, Maliar was quoted by the Ukrainian News Agency as saying.
Maliar told reporters:
The Russian army has thrown virtually all its forces and means in order to storm the settlements around. They seek to break through the defences of our troops and are trying to encircle the grouping of our troops, which is carrying out the defence of Lysychansk and Sievierodonetsk.
Ukrainian troops are doing “everything possible” to hold its territory in order to prevent encirclement, she said, adding:
But we must understand that the enemy has an advantage in armament, so the situation is extremely difficult now, and at night and today, there is a maximum intensity of these decisive battles.
Thank you for joining us for today’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine.
It is currently 3am in the capital Kyiv. We will be pausing our live reporting overnight and returning in the morning.
In the meantime, you can read our comprehensive summary of the days’ events in our summary below.
Here is a quick snap from another Russian official responding to Lithuania’s ban on the transit of goods to the Russian outpost of Kaliningrad.
Ambassador Mikhail Ulyanov, head of the delegation of the Russian Federation and permanent representative of Russia to the international organisations in Vienna, has spoken of “countermeasures” if the transit of goods is not restored.
Russia stated that if the transit of goods to and from Kaliningrad through Lithuania is not restored in the near future Moscow reserves the right to take countermeasures. 
Very mild reaction at this stage despite the fact that Vilnius violated 2002 EU-Russia agreement.”
Russia stated that if the transit of goods to and from #Kaliningrad through #Lithuania is not restored in the near future Moscow reserves the right to take countermeasures. Very mild reaction at this stage despite the fact that Vilnius violated 2002 #EU-Russia agreement.
The United States is in talks with Canada and other allies to further restrict Moscow’s energy revenue by imposing a price cap on Russian oil, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said on Monday.
Speaking to reporters in Toronto alongside Canadian finance minister Chrystia Freeland, Yellen said:
We are talking about price caps or a price exception that would enhance and strengthen recent and proposed energy restrictions by Europe, the United States, the UK and others, that would push down the price of Russian oil and depress Putin’s revenues, while allowing more oil supply to reach the global market.
We think a price exception is also an important way to prevent spillover effects to low income and developing countries that are struggling with high costs food and energy.”
Yellen said a price exception is an effective cap that could be achieved through a mechanism to restrict or ban insurance or financing for Russian oil shipments above a certain amount.
The United States, Canada, Britain and some other countries have banned imports of Russian oil, but the European Union remains highly dependent on Russian crude.
Asked if US President Joe Biden planned to seek consensus on an oil price plan at the G7 leaders summit in Germany next week, Yellen said: “We are very active, actively working on this with our partners.”
Freeland said Canada “thinks it is a really good idea” to try to limit Russia’s oil revenues, but recognises that this will be challenging for European countries.
The Americans captured in Ukraine have been described by Moscow as “mercenaries” engaged in illegal activities and should take responsibility for their “crimes”, reports say.
Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that the detained men were not covered by the Geneva convention as they were not regular troops, adding that they had shot at at Russian servicemen and put their lives in danger, according to a report from Russia’s RIA news agency.
Putin fears the “spark of democracy” spreading to Russia, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz told local media, adding that he was trying to divide Europe and return to a world dominated by spheres of influence.
Scholz was responding to a question in an interview with the Muenchner Merkur newspaper, published on the government website on Monday, on whether Putin would accept Ukraine moving closer to the European Union.
The Russian President must accept that there is a community of law-based democracies in his neighbourhood that is growing ever closer together.
He clearly fears the spark of democracy spreading to his country.”
The Russian foreign ministry’s spokesperson Maria Zakharova rejected the comments, responding: “German sparks have spread onto us a couple of times. We will not allow any more fires.”
The upcoming decision whether to grant Ukraine candidacy for membership to the EU is making Russia “very nervous”, Ukraine’s president says.
Volodymyr Zelenskiy made the comments in his latest nightly address on Monday night. 
The next days of the week will also be busy. We are moving towards the main decision of the European Council, which will be adopted on Friday.
As I predicted, Russia is very nervous about our activity.”
Providing an update on the battlefield, Zelenskiy said Russian shelling of Kharkiv and Odesa continue, as do attempts of “brutal offensive actions” in Donbas. 
Ukraine continues to defend the twin eastern cities of Lysychansk and Sievierodonetsk, he added. 
“This whole region is the most difficult, there are the hardest battles.”
A Moscow court has rejected an appeal brought by Meta Platforms Inc, the parent company of Facebook, after it was found guilty of “extremist activity” in Russia in March, the Russian state media agency Tass reports.
Russia restricted access to Meta’s flagship platforms Facebook and Instagram, as well as Twitter, in the wake of Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine.
Lawyer Victoria Shakina in March told a court that Meta was not carrying out extremist activity and was against Russophobia.
Russia initially banned Facebook for restricting access to Russian media while Instagram was then targeted after Meta said it would allow social media users in Ukraine to post messages urging violence against Russian President Vladimir Putin and troops Moscow sent there.
Meta subsequently narrowed its guidance to prohibit calls for the death of a head of state and said its guidance should never be interpreted as condoning violence against Russians in general.
A lawyer representing Meta on Monday told the court that refusing to block access to content and labelling state-controlled media were not activities that qualified as extremist, according to a Kommersant reporter in the courtroom and as reported by Reuters.
The ruling caused some confusion in March because Meta’s WhatsApp service remained available and prosecutors said that individuals would not be charged simply for using Meta’s services, which are still accessible through virtual private networks (VPNs).
It is 1:06am in Ukraine.
Reuters is reporting that the Russian foreign ministry will summon the European Union ambassador to Moscow, Markus Ederer, over the ban of the transit of goods by Lithuania through Kaliningrad.
Lithuania banned the transit of goods under EU sanctions through Lithuanian territory to and from the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad, which is sandwiched between Lithuania and Poland. 
Anton Alikhanov, Kaliningrad’s governor, appeared on Russian television on Monday to discuss the situation. 
“This is, of course, a situation that can be resolved by diplomatic means,” Alikhanov said. “As far as I know, tomorrow Marcus Ederer, the European Union ambassador to Russia, will be summoned to the foreign ministry … and he will be told of the appropriate conditions involved here.”
There was no immediate official confirmation from the Russian foreign ministry about the summons.
Brittney Griner, the US basketball star who has been detained since February in Russia, tried to call her wife nearly a dozen times through the American embassy in Russia on the couple’s fourth anniversary on Saturday, but they never connected since the phone line at the embassy was not staffed, the Associated Press is reporting.
The couple has not spoken by phone in the four months since Griner was arrested after Russian officials said they found vape cartridges containing hashish oil in luggage. Saturday’s phone call was going to be the first time the couple could hear each other’s voices again in months.
“This was such a big moment because this would have been the first time where I truly could tell if she’s okay,” Cherelle Griner told the Associated Press. “This would have been the first time for me to actually just hear her in real time and to truly know if she’s okay or to know if she’s seconds away from not being in existence anymore.”
The call never happened. Today Cherelle Griner learned from her wife’s lawyers that her wife had actually tried to call 11 times over a period of several hours, dialling a number she’d been given at the US embassy in Moscow, which the couple had been told would then patch the call through to Cherelle Griner in Phoenix. 
But each time, the call went unanswered because apparently nobody worked the desk at the embassy where the phone rang on Saturdays - even though this call had been scheduled for two weeks in advance. Cherelle Griner spent the day anguished, wondering what went wrong and suspecting at least initially that Russian authorities had thwarted the call.
“I was distraught. I was hurt. I was done, fed up,” Cherelle Griner said. She had gone to bed at 5pm that day so she could be awake and alert at midnight for the anticipated call. 
The US state department said Monday that it was aware of the issue and was looking into it. Cherelle Griner said she had received an apology for the error, but the whole experience has left her with “zero trust” in the US government. 
“I find it unacceptable and I have zero trust in our government right now,” she said. “If I can’t trust you to catch a Saturday call outside of business hours, how can I trust you to actually be negotiating on my wife’s behalf to come home? Because that’s a much bigger ask than to catch a Saturday call.”
