Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 6:36 PM Last updated: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 9:56 PM Emiratis and eligible expat students, who are enrolled in government schools, can apply to join in the ‘Ajyal (generation) Schools that are in the areas near their homes, according to the Emirates Schools Establishment (ESE). The new model for government schools will be implemented from academic year 2022-23 in partnership with the private sector. Parents have the right to choose an appropriate school for their children within the vicinity of their residential area. According to the ESE, the school timings and calendar for the new model schools will remain the same as in public schools. Also, there will be no additional fees paid by students as the government will bear students' fees and all operating expenses. ALSO READ: The new model will be applied to all students from grade one to four in 10 schools under the supervision of the Emirates Schools Establishment. The model will be extended to the fifth and sixth grades in 2024. The establishment said it will communicate to parents when new classes from cycle-2 have been approved to be included in the new model. The student can then move to government schools that follow the UAE curriculum at any time. The ESE said no student will be affected by the new model as all their academic results and reports will be kept and they will be equated according to the institution’s marking system. Education From gorging on noodles to learning theory like a song, pupils reveal their whacky studying routines  Education1 week ago Education The council also approved promoting several university faculty members and renewing their contracts Education2 weeks ago Education Exhibition focuses on introducing creative projects that will improve services and the quality of life Education2 weeks ago Education Institutions enjoy action-packed few weeks before long vacations commence in July Education2 weeks ago Education The initiative was launched this year by T4 Education in partnership with Accenture and American Express Education2 weeks ago Education The innovative educational experience will be implemented in the current academic year in 10 schools  Education2 weeks ago Education Parents can get accurate and up-to-date list  Education2 weeks ago Education The graduation ceremony will pay tribute to the late leader Education2 weeks ago 