Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 7:10 PM India is facing major diplomatic outrage from Muslim countries after top officials in the ruling Hindu nationalist party made derogatory references to Islam and the Prophet, drawing accusations of blasphemy across some Arab nations that have left New Delhi struggling to contain the damaging fallout. At least six Arab nations have lodged official protests against India, and Pakistan and Afghanistan also reacted strongly Monday to the comments made by two prominent spokespeople from Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party. Anger has poured out on social media, and calls for a boycott of Indian goods have surfaced in some Arab nations. The anger has been growing since last week after the two spokespeople, Nupur Sharma and Naveen Jindal, made speculative remarks that were seen as insulting Islam’s Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and his wife Aisha. A chorus of diplomatic outrage began with Qatar and Kuwait summoning their Indian ambassadors to protest. The BJP suspended Sharma and expelled Jindal and issued a rare statement saying it “strongly denounces insult of any religious personalities,” a move that was welcomed by Qatar and Kuwait. Later, Saudi Arabia and Iran also lodged complaints with India. On Sunday, India’s embassies in Qatar and Doha released a statement saying the views expressed against the Prophet and Islam were not that of the Indian government but made by “fringe elements.” Both statements said that strong action has already been taken against those who made the derogatory remarks. Qatar’s Foreign Ministry said it expected a “public apology” from the Indian government and Riyadh said the comments were “insulting” and called for “respect for beliefs and religions.” The remarks made by Sharma during a TV programme in India and Jindal in a tweet risk damaging India’s ties with Arab nations. They also led to anger in Pakistan and in Afghanistan. On Monday, Pakistan’s Foreign Ministry summoned an Indian diplomat and conveyed Islamabad’s “strong condemnation,” a day after Prime Minister Shahbaz Sharif said the comments were “hurtful”. The UAE has also condemned the statements, reiterating that it rejects "all practices and behaviours that contradict moral and human values ​​and principles". ALSO READ: Asia Oil cargoes that were due last week delayed, says minister Asia1 day ago Asia This is the first major international summit to be held in the Union Territory Asia1 day ago Asia $3.6 billion overpass took over eight years to build Asia1 day ago Asia US had placed a $5 million bounty on Sajid Majeed Mir, who is one of India's most-wanted terrorists Asia2 days ago Asia Police personnel have been directed to ensure the safety of all politicians Asia2 days ago Asia Summer floods are common in the country Asia2 days ago Asia Move aims to ease international travel, protect against identity theft Asia2 days ago Asia Move aims to stabilise economy, tackle spiralling inflation Asia2 days ago 