
Sign In

The Treasury Department has been accused of stonewalling lawmakers’ requests into the business dealings of President Biden’s son Hunter Biden.
Hundreds of illegal immigrants being detained at an ICE facility in Georgia were kept in rooms covered in mold, were served cold meals, faced bug infestations and got substandard medical care, according to a new inspector general’s audit released Wednesday.
A multinational task force designed to seize Russian oligarchs’ wealth has blocked and frozen $30 billion in sanctioned individuals’ property and funds in its first 100 days in operation, the Treasury Department reported Wednesday.
President Trump told White House Counsel Pat Cipollone and Chief of Staff Mark Meadows that former Vice President Mike Pence “deserves it” when told that Capitol rioters who were chanting “Hang Mike Pence,” former aide Cassidy Hutchinson told the House Jan. 6 Committee Tuesday.
The IRS commissioner has asked the Treasury Department's internal watchdog to immediately review the circumstances surrounding intensive tax audits that targeted ex-FBI Director James Comey and former Deputy Director Andrew McCabe, frequent targets of Donald Trump's ire during his presidency.
Antitrust legislation that would give the Department of Justice new tools to go after the countries that make up the OPEC oil cartel is receiving fresh attention from a bipartisan group of lawmakers in the face of soaring prices at the pump.
An Iraqi national whose fraud scheme caused the U.S. government to shut down a critical lifeline for Iraqi refugees was sentenced to a little more than three years in prison.
A former Army helicopter pilot has pleaded guilty to taking thousands of dollars from China to hand over aviation-related information from his work as a defense contractor.
Georgia investigators are reportedly poring over Rudolph W. Giuliani's actions in their state as part of a broader investigation into whether former President Donald Trump and his allies violated the law in pushing to reverse President Biden's victory in 2020.
Federal authorities searched the home of Jeffrey Clark, a former Justice Department official alleged to have been involved with President Donald Trump's efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election, according to reports.
A judge gave final approval Thursday to a settlement topping $1 billion for victims of the collapse of a Florida beachfront condominium building that killed 98 people, one of the deadliest building failures in U.S. history.
Washington Commanders owner Dan Snyder ran a "shadow investigation" in an attempt to discredit his accusers and influence the NFL's internal investigation of his team's workplace misconduct, according to a memo from the House Oversight and Reform Committee.
Manage Newsletters
High winds send F-18 fighter jet overboard from aircraft carrier
Kamala Harris ducks question on impeaching conservative justices for overturning Roe v Wade
Trump seeking to attend Abe's funeral in Japan
Here's why Nationals manager Dave Martinez is coaching in 2022 All-Star Game
Hunter Biden disparaged Jill Biden as 'vindictive moron,' 'selfish' in alleged texts
Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Reparations: The left’s new segregation
Democrats offer word salad in response to unspeakable tragedy
If abortion politics helped Democrats, there would be no need to lie about it
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
