Investigators searching a home previously occupied by Harmony Montgomery’s father and stepmother left with a fridge and floorboards, according to the current tenant.
The Manchester Police Department spent Tuesday and Wednesday at the apartment where Harmony’s father and his estranged wife lived in 2019, the New Hampshire Attorney General’s Office confirmed last week, part of the ongoing hunt for the now-8-year-old girl who disappeared between Nov. 28 and Dec. 10, 2019.
Officials would not disclose any details of the search but the new renter told Boston 25 that police ripped up a closet in the bedroom, tore up carpet and floorboards, cut a hole in the ceiling over the bathtub to access water pipes and took off door knobs and shower faucets.
[ Police search New Hampshire home in hunt for missing 8-year-old Harmony Montgomery ]
Harmony Montgomery (Manchester Police)
Harmony’s mother, Crystal Sorey, lost custody in July 2018 to her husband, Adam Montgomery, due to her substance abuse issues. She last saw Harmony on video chat around Easter 2019, telling police the young girl seemed “frightened.”
Adam Montgomery was arrested in early January and charged with felony second-degree assault for a 2019 incident, one misdemeanor charge of interference with custody and two misdemeanor charges of endangering the welfare of a child, all tied to Harmony’s disappearance, then arrested again in April on gun charges.
Montgomery’s estranged wife, Kayla, has been charged with two felony counts of perjury for allegedly lying to a grand jury about where she was when Harmony disappeared. She has also been arrested on gun charges and for allegedly collecting food stamps and other benefits even while Harmony was missing.
Despite the ongoing search, Sorey said Friday that she is starting to lose hope she’ll ever see her daughter again.
“This is no longer a rescue mission. It’s not a missing person anymore. I know in my heart it’s going to switch from a missing person’s case to a homicide,” she told Boston 25 Friday.
“It’s really a waiting right now at this point. I was told things are going to get really intense in the next few weeks to come. A lot is going to happen.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
