It didn’t take long for New York City homicide detectives huddled at a secluded spot outside the Polo Grounds where a young woman was found raped and strangled to realize the killer had likely struck before.
The signs of the gruesome slaying being the handiwork of a serial sex predator were all there. The victim, a young wife and mother named Kathleen Stewart, was found nude in a poorly lit area near a grandstand ramp of the upper Manhattan stadium the Giants baseball team called home.
Her hands were tied behind her back with strips torn from her slip. The other half of the shredded undergarment had been used to squeeze the life out of the 25-year-old woman. It was wrapped tightly around her neck.
Detectives surmised the Harlem housewife had exited the nearby subway station at 155th Street and Eighth Ave. around 1 a.m. and was headed home when she was stalked by the killer through the dark, empty streets.
On that early morning of May 28, 1954, Stewart was sexually assaulted in a parking lot, murdered and then dumped in the shadows of the Polo Grounds before she could make it safely to her nearby apartment at W. 159th St. and Harlem River Drive.
The details were eerily similar to an unsolved case that took place five months earlier just a few blocks away. In that Jan. 2, 1954 incident, Mrs. Margaret Branch, 40, was followed into her W. 151 St. apartment at 9 a.m. and accosted before she could make it upstairs.
The predator took her to a fifth-floor stairwell, where he choked and raped her, then strangled her to death with her stockings.
Like the Stewart slaying, the killer didn’t just leave the body where he’d committed his heinous crimes. He took it to another location — the building’s roof. For whatever reason, he then dragged Branch to an adjoining rooftop and left her body in the cold.
Norman Roye (New York Daily News Archive)
The striking similarities between both cases had detectives from the 135th St. stationhouse convinced the same person was responsible. Yet both murders got practically no ink in the daily papers, perhaps because they had occurred in Harlem at a time when crimes in New York’s inner city neighborhoods weren’t deemed worthy of extensive coverage.
The city was also focused on a grisly murder case at around the same time that dominated the news. A few days after Stewart’s body was found, a 14-year-old parochial school student was beaten with a pipe, stabbed and brutally raped in the stairwell of her East Side building. Dorothy Westwater was left in a coma and died several days later.
Her assailant, a career burglar named John Roche, was arrested days later and tied to at least two other vicious sex-related murders in the E. 60s — as well as the random murders of a cabbie and a sailor.
Detectives, however, found no reason to connect him to the pair of the recent rape-slayings uptown.
But as details of Roche’s fiendish crime spree were splashed across front pages, a third woman turned up dead in the same vicinity as the Stewart and Branch murders — and seemingly slain by the same sadistic perp.
On June 7 at around 1:30 a.m., 66-year-old Isadora Goomes was attacked in the hallway of her building on W. 143rd St. The man strangled the defenseless senior with a rope, raped her, then dragged her body up several flights of stairs to a sixth-floor stairwell, where he sexually assaulted her again.
As in the Branch murder, the killer took Goomes’ body to the roof, then dragged it to the roof of an adjoining building before fleeing the scene.
There was now no doubt the same sex-crazed demon was responsible for all three neighborhood murders.
New York Daily News for Tuesday, June 8, 1954. 
The next morning, as police examined Goomes’ body, a sharp-eyed detective noticed a young man spying on the horde of cops from an adjoining roof. Acting Detective Lt. Thomas McCabe and Det. Nicholas Romano called the youth over and began grilling him.
Minutes later, the case was solved.
As the young man struggled to explain why he had been watching the cops, a suspicious McCabe reached over and opened his shirt. The youth, 18-year-old Norman Roye, had fresh scratch marks on his stomach.
Roye, police said, broke down and promptly confessed to all three rape-murders.
The details he gave police were horrifying. In the January killing, he had set out to rob Branch of her pocketbook — but the crime quickly escalated into something far worse.
Stewart’s death happened after he confronted her in the street and told her he had a knife. He forced the young woman to a parking lot before committing his dastardly deeds and dumping her body a couple of blocks away.
Goomes’ murder followed his robbing her of five pennies — the only money the old lady had on her. When he demanded more, he jerked the noose he had fastened around her neck, and Goomes stopped breathing.
“She just died on me,” Roye said, according to police. The young killer added he spent the five cents on crackers and candy. The scratches on his stomach were from lifting her body over the low walls between buildings.
New York Daily News for Monday, July 7, 1954. 
Roye’s sad life story failed to swing much public sympathy his way. After both his parents died when he was a child, he lived with his grandmother and sister — in the same building where Groomes’ body was found on the roof.
The teen had recently served a year in reform school for burglary, but after a falling out with his grandmother he’d been sleeping on rooftops while committing a series of purse snatchings and burglaries that soon escalated to murder.
In January 1956, two years after his first killing, Roye was strapped to the electric chair in Sing Sing prison and became one of the youngest New York inmates to be executed.
JUSTICE STORY has been the Daily News’ exclusive take on true crime tales of murder, mystery and mayhem for nearly 100 years. Click here to read more.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
