The naysayers can no longer complain about the Yankees beating up on a soft schedule.
As the team blitzed everything in sight on their way to a historic start, many people pointed out that their April and May schedules included a lot of Orioles, Tigers and Royals. The sentiment grew strong enough to become a bit of a meme on Yankees Twitter, adding fuel to the fire for a fanbase that somehow believes rooting for the most successful franchise in North American sports is some kind of hardship.
But the Yankees have dominated in June as well, handling several teams that are currently in playoff position or were when the Yankees stomped them out. The test continues this weekend, as the Astros come to Yankee Stadium for a four-game series that also serves as the first meeting between these long-simmering rivals. Houston — a team currently hosting the Mets — will stick around in the Big Apple after their jaunt in the Bronx, not to see the tourist attractions, but for another quick two-gamer at the Mets’ place.
The Astros have undoubtedly been baseball’s biggest bully of the last five years. Most fans, even the casual ones, recognize Houston’s place in Major League Baseball’s hierarchy. The well-publicized cheating scandal helped with that, giving them much more haters than admirers, but people rarely waste their energy despising losing teams.
No American League team has won more games since 2017 than the Astros, who enter Tuesday with the AL’s second-best record (41-25) behind the Yankees and are poised for their sixth straight postseason appearance. With the Angels’ star-studded roster and the Mariners retooling during the offseason, skeptics started to speculate about the end of the Astros’ reign of terror. Both the Angels and Mariners have been wildly disappointing in their own ways this year, and Houston has shown no signs of slowing down despite aging, injuries and losing one of the faces of their fabled but ongoing run at the top.
The Astros haven't missed a beat with Jeremy Pena taking over at shortstop for Carlos Correa. (Reed Hoffmann/AP)
When Carlos Correa walked out the door in March, he opened it for Jeremy Pena, his 24-year-old replacement at shortstop. Pena and his .277/.333/.471 slash line with nine home runs makes him one of the early frontrunners for Rookie of the Year and, more importantly, extends the Astros’ championship window for what feels like an eternity. Not many teams could withstand a loss of Correa’s magnitude, brush it off, and win 41 of their first 66 games. As the last half decade has proved, though, most teams are not the Astros, who seem to grow elite talent on trees.
That’s what happened with Yordan Alvarez, the latest and greatest behemoth in the Astros’ lineup. Originally signed by the Dodgers, the Cuban slugger was traded to Houston before ever appearing in a minor league game for L.A. Alvarez went to Houston in a win-now move in 2016, as he was a fresh 19-year-old and the Dodgers wanted to win a World Series. The man he was traded for, reliever Josh Fields, did help them reach the Fall Classic in 2017. Unfortunately, he surrendered three hits (two of which left the yard) and two earned runs in that 2017 World Series without recording an out, posting the dreaded infinite ERA. The Dodgers’ opponent in that seven-game showdown? The Houston Astros.
While that ring will forever be tainted, Pena and Alvarez’s production is not. The two have paired up for 5.3 Wins Above Replacement this season — more than Aaron Judge and Giancarlo Stanton and Pete Alonso and Francisco Lindor’s combined totals — and neither Pena nor Alvarez have blown out 25 candles yet. We haven’t even mentioned Kyle Tucker yet, who himself just turned 25 and leads the team in stolen bases while also ranking eighth among AL position players in WAR.
It’s not quite an A to B connection like Pena taking over for Correa, but Alvarez and Tucker have been more than effective tourniquets on the George Springer wound. Springer bolted after the 2020 season and the Astros have not missed a beat, getting both younger and more right-left balanced. Of course, holdovers Jose Altuve, Alex Bregman and Michael Brantley are still in the mix. Each member of that trio has a wRC+ above 112.
On the pitching side, the Astros haven’t gotten a single inning from Lance McCullers Jr. this season as he makes his way back from a forearm problem. Veteran starter Jake Odorizzi was also carted off the field in his seventh start of the year. Not to worry, Justin Verlander has found his old form in his age-39 season. The future Hall of Famer made all of one start in 2020 before missing all of 2021 with injury. This year, he’s gotten back on the horse to post a 2.30 ERA in his first 13 appearances, becoming Houston’s best pitcher despite the lowest strikeout rate of his Astros tenure.
For the Yankees, who are slated to throw Jameson Taillon, Luis Severino, Gerrit Cole and Nestor Cortes Jr. in the four-game series, the Astros are actually not a terrible matchup. Houston grades as below average against two major pitch types: cutters and changeups. Each of those four Yankee pitchers throws a cutter on more than 10% of their pitches, and each of Taillon, Severino and Cole offer a changeup that causes whiffs more than 20% of the time.
The Mets will have the luxury of familiarity. As of now, three of their four games against the Astros are scheduled to be against righties Luis Garcia and Jose Urquidy. The Mets are the second-best offensive team against right-handed pitchers, and while the long ball hasn’t been a reliance for them, both Garcia and Urquidy are allowing more than 1.60 home runs per nine innings. Especially for Tuesday and Wednesday’s games vs. Garcia and Urquidy in the cramped confines of Minute Maid Park, the Mets should look to be in launch mode.
Nobody breathes easily when playing the defending AL champs. But if anyone is equipped to take them down, it’s the Yankees and Mets. Both teams from the Big Apple are among the best in the game, full stop, but they also have the personnel to bring the Space City boys back to earth.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
