CINCINNATI – Jacob deGrom is expected to remain on a five-day schedule as he progresses through his rehab assignment.
This is terrific news for the Mets ace, who came out of his first rehab start on Sunday night for the Single-A St. Lucie Mets feeling good. If deGrom can advance without any setbacks, then his quest to return to the major leagues should only take him about three more weeks.
DeGrom is penciled in to pitch Friday for Single-A St. Lucie at Daytona. He will likely need four more rehab starts before he’s stretched out to a pitch count with which the Mets are comfortable. That should line him up to make his season debut either in the Padres series, July 22-24 at Citi Field, or during the Subway Series, July 26-27 also in Queens.
The two-time Cy Young winner threw 24 pitches in 1.2 innings on Sunday against the Single-A Hammerheads at Clover Park. As expected, his video-game numbers returned. DeGrom struck out five of the six batters he faced, topped out at 101 mph and threw a handful of fastballs that were triple digits.
If there are no further setbacks, deGrom could be back with the Mets in about three weeks. (Elsa/Getty Images)
Mets manager Buck Showalter was not too concerned about deGrom clocking in at 100 mph on Sunday, which was his first time pitching in a pro game since July 7. The skipper believes deGrom’s velocity will likely settle down once he’s back on a normal schedule. For now, Showalter said the triple-digit heaters are an indicator that deGrom is feeling strong and fully rested.
“What are you going to do? It’s coming out good,” Showalter said of deGrom’s fastball velocity. “It’s not because he’s at max effort, torque. He’s just got a rested arm. … What do you think he’s going to do when he comes up here? I don’t think he’s going to dial it back here. So, get him ready for what he’s going to be asked to do up here.”
With Max Scherzer’s left oblique strain completely behind him, he will make his long awaited return to the Mets rotation on Tuesday against the Reds. Besides his Hall of Fame results, Scherzer’s addition will finally offer some stability to a starting pitching staff that has had little of it.
Since Scherzer pulled himself out of his start against the Cardinals on May 18 at Citi Field, the Mets rotation entered Monday 17-13 with a 4.94 ERA, ranked 23rd in MLB in that span. Comparatively, Mets starters posted a 3.23 ERA (fourth-best in MLB) in the 39 games before Scherzer went on the injured list.
Showalter already knows Scherzer’s performance will hold up. The Mets manager is more excited that the ace is back with the team.
“Let’s throw out how effectively he pitches,” Showalter said. “Just to have a piece of your team back, it’s the emotional lift for everybody. Max seems like he’s been active for a while because he’s been so involved with the team in a positive way.”
Looking ahead, David Peterson (paternity list) will join the Mets here on Tuesday and start on Wednesday in the series finale against the Reds. He was able to squeeze in his usual between-starts work at home in Denver while he welcomed his first born, a son, into the world.
Trevor Williams will start again for the Mets on Thursday against the Marlins at Citi Field to open the team’s four-game homestand. Williams struggled in his most recent outing, allowing five earned runs on five hits, including three home runs, in 3.2 innings against the Texas Rangers. He will hope for better results on Thursday, which will be his eighth start of the season for the Mets.
Chris Bassitt (COVID IL) is a “long shot” to be healthy in time to start Thursday, said Showalter, which is why the team opted to pitch Williams for that series opener. Bassitt missed his scheduled start this past Friday against the Rangers after he tested positive for the virus. Showalter said the right-hander has been able to get his work in while he remains distanced from the team.
“He’s been throwing,” Showalter said. “But we have to be careful, not legally, but health-wise, to follow protocols.”
There is no minimum or maximum stay on MLB’s COVID IL. So Bassitt can return to the Mets as soon as he feels better/tests negative for the virus.
Travis Jankowski (left 4th metacarpal fracture) began a rehab assignment with Triple-A Syracuse on Monday. He was penciled in to play center field for about five innings while working in at least three at-bats. Jankowski will have an off day on Tuesday and return to game action on Wednesday, with the expectation that he will play seven innings.
Showalter sounded optimistic that the outfielder will be able to return to the team before the All-Star break. The Mets want to see Jankowski log enough at-bats before he comes off the IL and is activated. Jankowski served as a key fourth outfielder in 33 games for the Mets before he underwent left hand surgery. His speed on the basepaths, particularly as a pinch-runner, was also a boon for a club that could certainly use more wheels.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
