Some players could be worried about their team using a high draft on a player at their position which will directly impact their ability to produce stats, especially after leading the team in scrimmage yards.
Not Michael Carter, though.
“Man, there’s enough for all of us to eat,” Carter said. “Breece is a good player, and I have nothing but respect for him. And he works hard. He asked questions. And he’s not afraid to ask questions. He’s not afraid to mess up right now. Like, he understands that it’s a marathon and not a sprint. So like it’s really cool to have him in the room just because he has a very decorated college career. And he has a great chance to do something special in the league.”
This response shows how selfless the second-year running back is and reveals his laser focus on the teams’ success and doing whatever it takes to help the Jets to win games.
And with second-round pick Breece Hall in the fold after rushing for almost 4,000 yards and 50 touchdowns at Iowa State, the duo can produce explosive plays in the run game to help the Jets secure more wins.
He also respects how the Jets called him after Hall was selected to let him know about the pick.
“What am I gonna do,” Carter said with a chuckle. “I do appreciate it. But at the end of day they drafted him and I’m happy that we got him. It’s not like I’m like ‘Oh my god.’ He’s a great player and I’m trying to win.”
There’s a chance Carter’s overall carries may be reduced. But fewer touches? No problem to him.
Carter isn't worried about the possibility of losing touches this season. (Eric Espada/Getty Images)
Carter’s experience with sharing the load dates back to his days at North Carolina. He shared the backfield with Broncos’ running back Javonte Williams throughout his college career as Williams had 366 carries and Carter had 417 during their three year stint together.
Also in 2019, UNC’s offense featured two 1,000-yard receivers in Commanders’ Dyami Brown and Bears’ Dazz Newsome along with Carter and Williams amassing over 900 yards rushing.
So Carter is used to this setup.
“It goes to a point where the beggars can’t be choosers. We won four games last year,” Carter said. “We got to do whatever it takes…Like football has a life of its own. So, if Elijah gets the ball in a speed sweep and I go block for him and I do a good job blocking, the game gone reward me for that. And I’m going to get the ball soon because we are moving the ball down the field. The longer we stay on the field, the more that people can get the ball.”
Becton is expected to be present at mandatory minicamp on June 14 to 16, per a source.
The third-year tackle out of Louisville hasn’t participated in any of the voluntary workouts as he’s attended to the birth of his child. But if Becton skipped the three upcoming practices he could have been fined nearly $100,000.
With Becton back in the fold the Jets can figure out who will be at left tackle and right tackle between George Fant and Becton.
“Once we get them all in here and we’re able to work through it all,” Robert Saleh said Wednesday before an OTA practice. “We’ll be able to work through that part of it.”
Fant played exceptionally well in Becton’s absence in 2021 by allowing only one sack, which led Saleh to announce during the Senior Bowl that Fant would be given every opportunity to compete for the left tackle spot.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
