Jose Trevino and Gleyber Torres were scratched from Sunday’s Yankees lineup before the series finale against the Cubs at Yankee Stadium. The catcher has a back issue and Torres felt ill before the game.
Trevino has been the Yankees best catcher this season. He is hitting .440/.472/800 with five home runs and 15 RBI over his last 18 games.
“He had actually played with it last night and obviously played very well with it, but he’s got a little back thing going on and came in with it still lingering today,” Yankees manager Aaron Boone said. “So just kind of with the (scheduled) off day tomorrow ahead of 20 in a row, it isn’t something I wanted to mess with ... He’s available, too. So you know, I’ll treat it like a normal day where he’s on the bench. So pinch hitting situations and things like that, he’s good to go but just something we didn’t want to mess with.”
Torres was nauseous Sunday morning. Boone said they were not concerned at this time that it had anything to do with COVID.
The second baseman homered in Friday and Saturday night’s games. His homer Saturday night was his 12th of the season, matching his total for the 2021 and 2020 seasons combined.
Trevino has been a bright spot in a bright season for the Yanks. (Adam Hunger/Getty Images)
Right-handed reliever Jonathan Loaisiga, who is on the injured list with right shoulder inflammation, returned from his trip home to Nicaragua and the Yankees are hopeful he will be able to begin a throwing program on Monday.
“I was just in there with him in the training room. He’s kind of going through a whole physical assessment just to make sure he’s good to go again, because obviously we haven’t had hands on him in a few days,” Boone said. “But the hope is he goes through normal workout and everything today. And then starts his throwing program tomorrow.” Loaisiga had to return to Nicaragua unexpectedly to deal with a personal issue.
Matt Carpenter made a big impact when he joined the Yankees May 26, but he’s only contributed as a designated hitter or pinch hitter. He got his first start on defense Sunday with the Yankees having two players scratched. Carpenter has played 671 games at third base with the Cardinals.
“He’s been working really hard, obviously hasn’t gotten any starts here in the last several days, but his work has been really good,” Boone said. “He’s been out there taking ground balls every day at third, at second, at first, so he’s been trying to stay sharp, busy and obviously he’s got a lot of experience at third and second. So I feel good about him being out there.”
Manny Banuelos wasn’t one of the pitchers who helped carry the load in Friday night’s 13-inning game, so it raised some eyebrows when the lefty didn’t get the call on Saturday. Boone said that they were only going to use Banuelos in a multiple-inning situation, so once Jordan Montgomery went seven innings they decided to save that length for another day.
“I knew I had [Ron] Marinaccio and [Lucas] Luetge for an inning apiece. And Manny was our length last night, but having pitched two innings two days before it was kind of just going to be length because we had no other options. So today, I feel like he kind of genuinely gets his length back,” Boone said. “Once Jordan did what he did, it put us in a pretty good spot.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
