The 22-year-old cops believe carried out a mass shooting at a 4th of July parade is a rap artist who has a history of disturbing social media posts.
Advertisement
As millions of Americans celebrated the nation’s 246th birthday, major media outlets and prominent liberals used the holiday to denigrate the US.
Advertisement
It’s been exactly 40 years since the showbiz power couple said “I Do.”
Advertisement
Joey Chestnut chomped his way to the top of Nathan’s Hot Dog Eating Contest again Monday, winning a record-setting 15th victory at the annual Fourth of July competition.
Far-left ​Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.) was met by a chorus of boos​ and calls to “get the f–k out” when she appeared onstage at a music festival in Minneapolis over the weekend. ​
The headbanger is the second ’80s song to skyrocket up music charts after making it to the soundtrack of the show’s fourth season.
From “Risky Business to “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off,” the sprawling homes and tree-lined streets of Highland Park, Ill., gave movie fans a sense of the affluence and comfort.
California Gov. Gavin Newsom launched an ad urging Florida residents fed up with Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis to pack their flip-flops and head west.
The 27-year-old victim was sitting in a gray Toyota Camry in front of the high-end Dior New York Soho shop at 105 Greene St. when the drive-by shooting took place around 5 p.m.
New Yorkers gathered to watch the Macy’s annual Fourth of July fireworks display along the East River.
Zach Gallo said he was at Smith Point Beach in Suffolk County playing a victim in an ocean-training exercise when he suddenly felt a “sharp pinch” in his hand.
It’s the first time in more than a decade that there have been formal changes made to the Queen’s job description.
“I’m allergic to strong emotions,” said the MCAS sufferer of her harrowing saga.
The point guard is celebrating his four-year, $104 million Knicks deal with his longtime girlfriend.
LA producer David Pearce, 40, has been charged with murder in the overdose deaths of a model and her architect friend.
Where the Knicks’ free agency signings leave two of the Knicks’ best young players — Immanuel Quickley and Obi Toppin — is uncertain.
For a Rangers team that essentially put an end to its rebuild with its longest playoff run in seven years, the 2022 draft seems like a bit of an afterthought.
The Mets have needed an ace with their two highest-profile pitchers on the injured list, and Taijuan Walker has filled the role nicely.

The “Kardashians” momager showered her new son-in-law with love after he was hospitalized in Los Angeles last week with Kourtney Kardashian by his side.
The former couple, who share a 9-year-old daughter, appeared to be on good terms as they attended Wimbledon with their new partners in London over the weekend.
The “Wild Things” star got wild in a patriotic bikini on the beach this Fourth of July to celebrate her new OnlyFans account
The moment of truth is at hand for the former Domino Sugar plant at 300 Kent Ave. in Williamsburg, an 1865 designated landmark transformed behind its weathered brick facade into a one-of-a-kind office building.
The deals you should keep on your radar this holiday weekend.

				Get the best of the New York Post				straight to your inbox.
				Choose the newsletters that are right for you.			

				There are so many interesting things going on in your world at the moment and they will get more interesting still over the next few days now that mind planet Mercury is joining the Sun in your sign. Be positive and act quickly in all situations.			
