How to avoid “pillow face,” “trout pout” and other pitfalls of our filler-happy age.
Fiorella Valdesolo
May 4, 2022
Twelve Mother’s Day gifts that you don’t have to be a mom to covet, including a stylish laptop tote, comfortable garden clogs and an elegant linen robe.
Lizzy Wholley
May 3, 2022
Get a peek at some of this season’s chicest accessories.
Kevin Huynh | Photography by Emily Lipson for WSJ. Magazine | Fashion Editor Jenny Hartman 
April 27, 2022
Sports-inspired looks are a slam dunk for men’s fashion this season.
Photography by Casper Kofi for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Jason Rider 
April 24, 2022
Khouri—a favorite of celebrities like Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen—is preparing to sell one-of-a-kind pieces and, for the first time, her sculptures at Tefaf New York.
Lane Florsheim | Photography by Adrian Gaut 
April 21, 2022
Take a trip to the adventurous side of fashion this spring with looks that inspire wonder.
Photography by Dario Catellani for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Vittoria Cerciello 
April 21, 2022
Hint: It’s Alaïa. The runway star on the food, music and books that keep her going backstage and through life.
Barbara Anastacio
April 19, 2022
The watch world’s annual trade show Watches and Wonders Geneva reconvened in person for the first time in three years. Here are the top timepieces that made their debut.
Michael Clerizo and Jenny Hartman
April 7, 2022
When it comes to skin care, we’ve turned our attention below the neck.
Fiorella Valdesolo
April 5, 2022
With a new, beefier sneaker releasing this week and a sold-out Loewe collaboration under its belt, the Zurich-based shoe company is broadening its audience outside of minimalist marathoners
Jacob Gallagher
March 30, 2022
After last year’s partially remote celebrations, Hollywood’s biggest night finally returned, and the fashion along with it. See every notable look from the Academy Awards’ red carpet
Alexander Fisher, Lane Florsheim and Kevin Huynh
March 27, 2022
Going close-up with their imperfections, middle-aged stars are sparking a conversation around aging skin.
Fiorella Valdesolo 
March 25, 2022
Skin-care influencers on the freewheeling social-media platform have unleashed a slew of trendy beauty routines. But do these treatments have any real benefit, or can some actually be harmful?
Fiorella Valdesolo
March 17, 2022
The two brands meld their signature styles by mixing crystal buckles and jewel-tone velvets with low-key comfort.
Jessica Iredale | Photography by F. Martin Ramin for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Jill Telesnicki 
March 11, 2022
Unusual embellishments and sinuous shapes define the season’s most striking accessories.
Photography by David Abrahams for WSJ. Magazine | Set Design by Georgina Pragnell 
March 10, 2022
This season, some designers responded to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as others chose to focus on joy. Here’s the best of those fall collections, including looks from Chanel, Fendi and Prada.
Jenny Hartman, Lizzy Wholley and Alexander Fisher
March 9, 2022
The striking shadows, clean light and simple lines of a pueblo-style ranch near Santa Fe, New Mexico, form the ideal backdrop for effortless styles.
Photography by Annemarieke van Drimmelen for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Giovanni Dario Laudicina 
March 6, 2022
The long and short of today’s tailoring means tight waists, sharp shoulders and cropped lines that bare some skin.
Photography by Katsu Naito for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Julie Ragolia 
March 5, 2022
Models Andreea Diaconu and Simon Nessman are the picture of wedded bliss—in real life and on camera.
Photography Cass Bird for WSJ. Magazine | Styling By Katelyn Gray 
March 4, 2022
New complicated timepieces and sturdy briefcases are built for a busy schedule.
Photography by Benjamin Bouchet for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Jenny Hartman 
February 28, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
