Clare Ansberry writes the Turning Points column for The Wall Street Journal, exploring the various turning points in people’s lives. She was previously the Journal's Pittsburgh bureau chief, overseeing coverage of various industrial industries, while also writing about issues involving aging, family, community and people with developmental disabilities.
She is the author of “The Women of Troy Hill: The Back-fence Virtues of Faith and Friendship,” about a community of women growing older together on a small hilltop neighborhood. She also co-authored the book “Comes the Peace, My Journey to Forgiveness” about a young man’s journey to reconnect with his family. Both books are based on stories she wrote for The Wall Street Journal. A graduate of St. Francis University in Loretto, Pa., she has been awarded the Missouri Lifestyle Journalism Award, a Casey Medals Award, and the Darrell Sifford Memorial Prize in Journalism from the Missouri School of Journalism.
To contact her, email Clare.Ansberry@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter @clare_ansberry

More babies are likely to be available for adoption in the next few years if the Supreme Court ends the constitutional right to abortion, many adoption centers, sociologists and nonprofit groups say. 
Clare Ansberry
June 23, 2022
Clergy members are spreading their message in audio shows like ‘Clerically Speaking,’ which delves into religious and secular questions of our day. ‘Who do you love more? Mary or Joseph?’
Clare Ansberry
June 20, 2022
For families with strong habits to curb spending, sticking to their strict household budget is the plan.
Clare Ansberry
June 17, 2022
For parents, the return home often means shelving retirement plans, facing new worries about their child’s emotional and mental health.
Clare Ansberry | Photographs by Carlos Bernate for The Wall Street Journal 
May 15, 2022
The posts can raise awareness but also spark debate about privacy and consent.
Clare Ansberry | Photographs by Jim McAuley for The Wall Street Journal 
May 4, 2022
Caregivers for aging or infirm family members are heading back to the workplace with a mix of fear, frustration and uncertainty.
Clare Ansberry
April 14, 2022
Two churches on the same block outside Pittsburgh are negotiating the anxiety and outrage over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Clare Ansberry | Photographs by Ross Mantle for The Wall Street Journal 
April 3, 2022
Popular cloth masks might not offer enough protection against the fast-spreading variant, doctors say. Here is what you need to know about stronger options.
Alex Janin, Clare Ansberry and Nidhi Subbaraman
March 23, 2022
Within one circle of family and friends in the U.S., perceptions of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine reflect wider differences in history, age and experience.
+Clare Ansberry | Photographs by Justin Merriman for The Wall Street Journal 
March 22, 2022
Covid-19 brought some families together and divided others. As case counts fall, many people want a fresh start but are unsure how to begin.
Clare Ansberry
February 25, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
