Advertisement
A federal grand jury in Manhattan has issued subpoenas regarding the merger, which is also under investigation by financial regulators.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
This article is part of our Daily Business Briefing
By Matthew Goldstein
The public listing of former President Donald J. Trump’s social media company took a fresh blow on Monday when the cash-rich shell company merging with Mr. Trump’s company disclosed in a regulatory filing that a federal grand jury in New York recently issued subpoenas to the company and its directors.
The grand jury subpoenas were issued within the past week, according to the filing by Digital World Acquisition, a special purpose acquisition company, or SPAC, that announced a merger with Trump Media & Technology Group in October. After the merger, Trump Media would assume Digital World’s listing and trade as a public company.
The disclosure by Digital World is the first indication that federal prosecutors in Manhattan have joined in the scrutiny of the merger between Digital World and Trump Media, which has been under investigation by financial regulators for months. The investigation threatens to further delay the completion of the merger, which would provide Mr. Trump’s company and its social media platform, Truth Social, with up to $1.3 billion in capital, in addition to a stock market listing.
The Securities and Exchange Commission and Financial Industry Regulatory Authority opened investigations within weeks of the merger announcement. Digital World’s filing on Monday said the grand jury subpoenas sought information similar to what the S.E.C. had already requested.
The federal grand jury also sought “information regarding Rocket One Capital.” The filing did not disclose what information the grand jury wanted about Rocket One, a venture capital firm in Miami.
In a separate filing, Digital World disclosed that Bruce Garelick had resigned as a director. Mr. Garelick is listed in Digital World filings as the chief strategy officer at Rocket One.
Mr. Garelick did not immediately respond to request for comment. The filing did not give a reason for his resignation.
The S.E.C. investigation has focused on whether there were serious discussions between the leadership of Digital World and Trump Media before the SPAC went public in September and why those talks were not disclosed in regulatory filings. SPACs, which raise money to go public in the hopes of finding a merger candidate, are not supposed to have an acquisition target in mind when they raise money from investors.
Regulators also requested information about unusual trading activity in securities of Digital World before the merger announcement. There was a big surge in trading of Digital World warrants — a security that gives the holder the right to buy shares at later date and at a specified price — before the merger announcement.
Trump Media issued a statement in response to Digital World’s disclosure that said it was “focused on reclaiming the American people’s right to free expression.” The company added, “We encourage — and will cooperate with — oversight that supports the S.E.C.’s important mission of protecting retail investors.”
Grand jury subpoenas are typically issued in connection with a potential criminal investigation. A spokesman for the U.S. attorney in Manhattan, Damian Williams, declined to comment on the grand jury subpoenas issued to Digital World.
Trump Media’s Truth Social, a Twitter-like social media clone that Mr. Trump has taken to posting messages on and, after a slow start, has begun gathering adherents, especially among conservatives and other supporters of the former president. Mr. Trump was barred from Twitter in January 2021 after repeatedly posting messages that claimed the 2020 presidential election was stolen and for not quickly denouncing the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol building.
Elon Musk, the multibillionaire entrepreneur who has made an offer to buy Twitter, has said he would permit Mr. Trump to return to the much bigger social media platform if he completed his deal. Mr. Trump has said he has no intention of returning to Twitter.
But a licensing deal between Trump Media and the former president permits him to post messages of a political nature on Twitter or other social media platforms.
In regulatory filings, Digital World has said Truth Social “exists to provide its users a true free speech platform and avoid cancellation by Big Tech.”
Mr. Trump is the chairman of Trump Media, a title he is expected to retain if the merger is completed. Devin Nunes, a former Republican congressman from California, is the chief executive of Trump Media, which recently moved its corporate office to Sarasota, Fla.
It does not appear anyone associated with Trump Media has received any subpoenas, according to Digital World’s filings.
Numerous inquiries. Since Donald J. Trump left office, the former president has been facing civil and criminal investigations across the country into his business dealings and political activities. Here is a look at the notable inquiries:
White House documents investigation. The Justice Department has begun a grand jury investigation into the handling of classified materials that ended up at Mr. Trump’s Florida home. The investigation is focused on the discovery by the National Archives that Mr. Trump had taken 15 boxes of documents from the White House to Mar-a-Lago when he left office.
Manhattan criminal case. The Manhattan district attorney’s office has been investigating whether Mr. Trump or his family business, the Trump Organization, intentionally submitted false property values to potential lenders. But new signs have emerged that the inquiry may be losing steam.
New York State civil inquiry. The New York attorney general’s office has been assisting with the Manhattan district attorney’s investigation while conducting its own civil inquiry into some of the same conduct. The civil inquiry is focused on whether Mr. Trump’s statements about the value of his assets were part of a pattern of fraud or were simply Trumpian showmanship.
Georgia criminal inquiry. Mr. Trump himself is under scrutiny in Georgia, where the district attorney of Fulton County has been investigating whether he and others criminally interfered with the 2020 election results in the state. A special investigative grand jury has been seated in the case, and as many as 50 witnesses are expected to be subpoenaed.
Jan. 6 inquiries. A House select committee and federal prosecutors are investigating the Jan. 6 assault on the Capitol and examining the possible culpability of a broad range of figures — including Mr. Trump and his allies — involved in efforts to overturn the results of the 2020 election.
Westchester County criminal investigation. The district attorney’s office in Westchester County, N.Y., appears to be focused at least in part on whether the Trump Organization misled local officials about the value of a golf course, Trump National Golf Club Westchester, to reduce its taxes.
Washington, D.C., lawsuit. The attorney general for the District of Columbia sued Mr. Trump’s inaugural committee, saying it vastly overpaid the Trump Organization for space at the Trump International Hotel during the January 2017 inaugural celebration. The committee and Mr. Trump’s family business later agreed to pay $750,000 to settle the lawsuit.
It is unclear how Rocket One Capital has been drawn into the investigation. The venture capital firm is led by Michael Shvartsman, who did not return requests for comment. Shortly after Digital World disclosed the grand jury subpoena, Rocket One took down much of its public website.
The parallel investigation by federal prosecutors and securities regulators comes as the clock is ticking down on the Sept. 8 deadline for completing the merger. The proposed merger agreement permits the deadline for the deal being extended to March 8, 2023.
But shareholders in SPACs have become increasingly reluctant to extend the deadlines for completing mergers as the share prices of many SPACs have cratered in recent months.
Shares of Digital World, which closed last week at $27.82, fell more than 10 percent in early trading on Monday. The stock has declined more than 70 percent from its March peak, but remains well above its $10 listing price.
If the merger is not completed, Digital World will have to return the nearly $300 million raised in the I.P.O. to shareholders. The $1 billion that dozens of hedge funds have said they would invest in a completed deal would be canceled.
The poor performance of SPACs has led to a number of planned mergers being canceled by agreement of the parties. The proposed deal between Trump Media and Digital World permits the parties to mutually agree to terminate the deal.
Earlier this year, Trump Media raised about $15 million in financing from a group of unnamed investors.
Kitty Bennett contributed research.
Advertisement
