On June 24, 2022, the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, eliminating the constitutional right to an abortion after almost 50 years. This will lead to all but total bans on the procedure in about half of the states.
The New York Times is tracking the status of abortion laws in each state.
By The New York Times
Some have offered to cover travel and other expenses for employees, and are working to ease worker fears about safety and confidentiality.
By Emma Goldberg
Both medications come in pill form and are often confused for each other. Here’s how they differ.
By Dani Blum
On Monday, plaintiffs will ask a judge to block Florida’s law banning abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy. It is set to take effect on Friday.
By Kate Zernike
The representative called for a House investigation into whether the justices, Neil Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh, were dishonest when discussing Roe v. Wade during confirmation hearings.
By Ed Shanahan
Some women are stockpiling birth control, emergency contraception and abortion pills in case legislation prevents them from accessing it in their home state.
By Amanda Holpuch
With little hope of legislative action following the Supreme Court’s ruling, lawmakers urged the president to take “bold action” to defend Americans’ reproductive rights.
By Stephanie Lai
The state passed one of the most restrictive abortion laws in the country in 2019. But it has never been enforced, pending court decisions.
By Felice Belman
They argued that a ban on abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy would violate the state constitution.
By Alexandra Glorioso
The Jackson Women’s Health Organization was at the center of the case that overturned Roe v. Wade. Already, supporters are planning new ways to help women in one of the poorest spots in the nation get access to abortions.
By Richard Fausset
New York Times reporters are providing analysis of the landmark Supreme Court decision that overturned Roe v. Wade.
By The New York Times
Sales of the emergency contraceptive surged after the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade.
By Katherine Rosman and Gina Cherelus
There are no abortion bans that attempt to prosecute women who cross state lines to seek an abortion.
By Ava Sasani
Abortion will remain legal in about half of states, but the rest will probably ban it. The number of abortions will probably fall, particularly among poor women in the South and Midwest.
By Claire Cain Miller and Margot Sanger-Katz
The initial response by President Biden and other Democratic leaders to the overturning of Roe struck many Democrats as painfully inadequate.
By Shane Goldmacher
CVS temporarily set a three-pack purchase limit to ensure “consistent supply on store shelves,” and Walgreens said it was pausing deliveries.
By Emma Goldberg and Julie Creswell
As the fall of Roe v. Wade rocked the country, Carrie and Roger Severino celebrated the realization of decades of work that has been complicated in recent years by health challenges.
By Blake Hounshell
As Roe falls, new works including a documentary, a feature film and a comedy show disrupt the taboos and clichés around abortion.
By Amanda Hess
Three women lived through a time without Roe, and the early years after it. Their experiences working for abortion rights mimic the fight that continues today.
By Fahima Haque
The annual Pride parade returned to the streets of Manhattan, but this year the mood was one of protest.
By James Barron
Plus Russia strikes Kyiv as G7 leaders meet and a Times investigation into China’s surveillance state.
By Amelia Nierenberg
Democrats used the ruling to criticize Republicans as threats to women and their health care providers, while G.O.P. leaders stressed that states will continue to determine policy on the issue.
By Azi Paybarah
Lawyers, politicians and advocacy groups responded to Friday’s Supreme Court ruling with fresh plans for the fight over abortion rights.
By Kate Zernike
The lawsuit argues that the state’s ban violates several provisions in the State Constitution, including the right to determine family composition and the right to equality between the sexes.
By Amanda Holpuch
Advertisement
Advertisement
