Advertisement
Did you follow the news this week? Take our quiz to see how well you stack up with other Times readers.
The stock market this week fell to more than 20 percent below its January peak. What is the term for that?
Bear market
Bull market
Depression
Gray market
Recession
The Federal Reserve raised interest rates by three-quarters of a percentage point this week, in an effort to stem inflation. When was the last time the central bank made a move that large?
1929
1944
1994
2017
They never have.
Senators reached a deal this week on a bipartisan outline for a gun-safety bill. Which three provisions does their framework include?
A constitutional amendment abolishing the right to bear arms
Funding for states that enact “red-flag laws”
Money to increase access to mental health treatment
Reinstating the assault weapons ban
Stricter background checks for gun buyers under 21
Done
The F.D.A.’s advisers this week recommended that the agency authorize Covid vaccines for which group?
Children between 6 months and 5 years
Infants younger than 6 months 
People with a pre-existing condition 
People 90 and over 
Unvaccinated adults
Representative Tom Rice, a South Carolina Republican, lost his primary to a challenger endorsed by Donald Trump. Rice was criticized by Trump for doing what?
Agreeing to serve on the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 Capitol attack
Saying he would never vote to impeach any president
Voting for President Biden’s infrastructure law
Voting to impeach Trump for withholding military aid to Ukraine
Voting to impeach Trump over the Jan. 6 attack
Which national park, known for its wilderness and active geysers, closed this week after record rainfall washed away roads and bridges?
Acadia National Park
Arches National Park 
Denali National Park
Yellowstone National Park
Zion National Park
John Allen, a retired four-star general, resigned this week as president of a prestigious Washington think tank. What led to his resignation?
He announced that he was running for president in 2024.
He is under investigation for secretly lobbying for Qatar.
He objected to staff cuts imposed by the board of directors.
He published a book containing several classified secrets.
He said Putin was a “good guy” who “means well.”
Jennifer Hudson has now won an Emmy, a Grammy, an Oscar and — as of Sunday — a Tony. She rose to fame on which show?
“American Idol” 
“America’s Got Talent”
“Dreamgirls”
“Sex and the City”
“Smash”
In this year’s Stanley Cup Finals, the two-time defending champions (from Florida) are facing a team from the state that is home to Pikes Peak. Choose the two teams.
Colorado Avalanche
Florida Panthers
Miami Porpoises
Seattle Kraken 
Tampa Bay Lightning
Done
Several countries in the Middle East and Southeast Asia have threatened to ban “Lightyear,” a new Pixar movie, because it contains what? 
A same-sex kiss
Alcoholic drinks
Blood and gore
Mild swearing
Pro-Ukraine messages
A New York court ruled this week against an animal-advocacy group arguing on behalf of an Asian elephant named Happy. What had the group been seeking?
For Happy to be legally considered a “person” and released from the zoo
For Happy’s name to legally change to Louise, which she responds to more often
For permission to give Happy hallucinogenic drugs, which she is said to enjoy  
For the Bronx Zoo to remove all birds, who had been pecking Happy and making her sad
For the government to build Happy a luxury enclosure with an infinity pool
Jessica Anderson, Matthew Cullen and the staff of the Morning newsletter compiled this week’s quiz.
Advertisement
