Shells for Soviet-era weapons were running short, and powerful Western weapons were not arriving fast enough to make up the difference, giving Russia a big advantage in artillery on the battlefields in the east.
Follow the latest updates on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
 Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Andrew E. Kramer and Natalia Yermak
DONETSK REGION, Ukraine — Nearly four months after Russia invaded, the Ukrainian military is running low on ammunition for its Soviet-era artillery and has not received enough supplies from its allies to keep the Russians at bay, Ukrainian officials and artillery officers in the field say.
The shortage has put Ukrainian troops at a growing disadvantage in the artillery-driven war of attrition in the country’s east, with Russia’s batteries now firing several times as many rounds as Ukraine’s. While the West is sending in weapons, they are not arriving fast enough or in sufficient numbers to make up for Ukraine’s dwindling arsenal.
The Western weapons, heavy, long-range artillery pieces and multiple-launch rocket systems, are more accurate and highly mobile, but it takes time to deploy them and train soldiers to use them. In the meantime, Ukraine is running out of ammunition for the older weapons.
On the front lines in Donbas, Ukrainian soldiers are being forced to conserve shells, and are often unable to return fire one for one.
At one Ukrainian artillery position on Friday, several Russian shells had just sailed overhead, landing in a field with methodic thuds, when the gun’s crew was told to get ready to fire. Their drones had spotted a group of Russian howitzers a few miles away.
The soldiers scrambled, pulling branches from their 122-millimeter self-propelled gun camouflaged on the edge of a wooded area. The barrel angled skyward before firing only two shots, sending dirt and leaves into the air.
A few weeks ago, the gun would have been firing constantly, its crew said. Now, instead of blanketing Russian positions with ordnance, they can engage only specific targets, like the Russian howitzers.
“We’re running out of shells,” said Oleg, one of the soldiers in the crew, clad in dirty trousers and skateboard sneakers. “They are not supplied fast enough since we fire too often.”
Mariana Bezugla, a member of Ukraine’s Parliament who is the deputy head of the National Security, Defense and Intelligence Committee, said similar shortages of ammunition for Soviet-era weapons were occurring throughout the eastern theater, where Ukrainian forces have been battling to hold the resource-rich Donbas, which comprises the Luhansk and Donetsk regions.
“They have a lot of resources, a lot of ammunition,” Ms. Bezugla said of the Russians. “It is not comparable with ours.”
Ms. Bezugla said that Ukraine has received plenty of ammunition for its new NATO artillery pieces, it still does not have enough of those weapons to replace the older equipment. “We have munitions of the new type, but we still lack guns” to fire them, she said.
Pentagon officials say that they have exhausted all efforts to scrounge up available Soviet and Russian weaponry and munitions for Ukrainian troops to use, after months of horse-trading with allies who were still using the old systems. A senior American military official acknowledged that the well had run dry, and said that Ukraine would likely need to depend on Western munitions systems to defend against Russia in the East.
But that means speeding up training of Ukrainian troops on the new systems, the official said, which can take some time. Pentagon officials have sharply condensed the time for Ukrainian troops to train, compared to what American troops spend before being declared proficient on some of the weapons systems.
On Friday, Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence, Vadym Skibitsky, told The Guardian newspaper that Ukraine was losing the artillery battle with Russia on the front lines because of the shortage of artillery shells for its older guns. He said Ukraine was firing 5,000 to 6,000 artillery rounds a day and had “almost used up all of our ammunition.”
By contrast, Russian forces are firing about 60,000 artillery shells and rockets each day in the Donbas fighting, according to a senior adviser to the Ukrainian military command who was not authorized to speak publicly.
Michael Kofman, the director of Russia studies at CNA, a research institute in Arlington, Va., said ammunition supplies would be critical to the final outcome in the battle for eastern Ukraine.
“This war is far more about attrition by artillery than maneuver, which means one of the deciding factors is who has more ammunition,” he said.
That Ukraine was running low on ammunition has hardly been a secret. Ukrainian officials flagged the problem months ago. On the front lines, commanders watched, alarmed, as stocks dwindled mid-battle. Soldiers say requests for artillery support go unanswered, for lack of shells.
Vadym Mischuk, 32, a Ukrainian soldier who had just rotated off the frontline near the eastern city of Bakhmut, said Thursday that there is so much Russian artillery fire that “we don’t even hear ours.” One soldier, who declined to provide his name for security reasons, estimated that for every one Ukrainian shell fired, the Russians fired 10.
The Ukrainian military has been honest about the shortfalls — something an army would not typically telegraph to the enemy in a war — perhaps because doing so adds a sense of urgency to appeals for more powerful Western weaponry.
“In early March we were already well aware that during intensive war with Russia our resources were depleting,” Ukraine’s defense minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, wrote on Facebook on Thursday. He added, “Relying solely on Soviet weapons was definitely a losing strategy.”
Even before the invasion, Ukraine’s ammunition depots had been targets for saboteurs, regularly blowing up like gigantic, lethally dangerous fireworks displays.
Spies or drones dropping incendiary devices were blamed in many cases. Between 2015 and 2019, six ammunition depots blew up in Ukraine, burning about 210,000 tons of ammo, or three times more than the Ukrainian army expended in the same time span fighting Russian-backed separatists, according to Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
Following Russia’s invasion, NATO countries have stepped in to bolster Ukraine’s supply of ammunition, but the transfers have not always gone smoothly. Countries of the old Warsaw Pact and NATO countries used different calibers of ammunition — an enduring legacy that means much of Ukraine’s arsenal, built decades ago to Soviet specifications, cannot fire Western ammunition.
Ukraine’s newly acquired hoard of NATO’s 155-millimeter artillery shells is now larger than its entire artillery ammunition stockpile before the war started, Mr. Reznikov said. But the Ukrainian forces have too few guns at the front to fire the munitions, and are facing extensive logistics challenges not only to get them into the fight, but also to maintain them once there.
Some European countries have shipped so many of their own ammunition reserves to Ukraine — in some cases up to 30 percent — that they’re increasingly anxious about replenishing their stocks, European Union officials said.
Officials said that while there was still a relatively steady flow of military equipment from the E.U. and its allies, Ukraine was not receiving as much heavy artillery as it needs.
With artillery shells in short supply, Ukrainian forces have adjusted their tactics to compensate for the lack of artillery support. On Friday, for example, a tank unit in Donbas was using a Ukrainian T-64BV tank more like an artillery piece than a main battle tank.
Instead of attacking targets directly, the tank drove several kilometers toward the front, positioned itself in a tree line, and lobbed shells at Russian positions while a Ukrainian officer adjusted its aim over the radio and using a drone overhead — the procedure typically used with mortars or howitzers.
“It is a fact already that the tanks are used because there is not enough artillery,” said the artillery unit commander, who asked to go by his nom de guerre, Razor. His unit of 122-millimeter, self-propelled howitzers had run out of Ukrainian ammunition and was now using Czech-supplied shells.
But ammunition can be fickle. Decades-old ammunition can become unreliable if not stored properly over time, potentially leading to more duds. Another soldier, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that a batch of Czech-supplied rockets were faulty, with only three out of 40 firing.
Ukrainian soldiers wounded in combat have also voiced dismay about the paltry artillery support, which they blamed on a lack of ammunition.
“There is not an hour with a pause” in Russian bombardments, Lt. Oleksandr Kolesnikov, who was wounded late last month, said in an interview in an ambulance while being evacuated to a hospital to the west. “The artillery is very intense.” He said his commander called in artillery in response but received only one salvo.
The Russian artillery superiority has frightened soldiers, he said. “In war, everything is scary and we fear everything. Only idiots are not afraid.”
Reporting was contributed by Oleksandr Chubko from Kramatorsk, Ukraine, Maria Varenikova from Barvinkove, Ukraine, Matina Stevis-Gridneff from Brussels and Helene Cooper and John Ismay from Washington.
 Maham Javaid
The new U.S. ambassador to Ukraine, Bridget A. Brink, said on Friday that she had met with Ukraine's prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, to discuss enhanced cooperation for Ukrainian support. “With $7.5 billion in direct budget support on the way, we are committed to ensuring Ukraine stays strong,” she said via Twitter.
Looking forward to working with @Denys_Shmyhal to help Ukraine defend itself against Russia's aggression and bolster Ukraine’s resilience and recovery. With $7.5 billion in direct budget support on the way, we are committed to ensuring Ukraine stays strong. pic.twitter.com/paLGElbYtS
 Emma Bubola
More than three months into a war that has ravaged Ukraine and its economy, the country’s banks are holding up, the head of the country’s banking association says.
“The economy is going through a shock contraction,” Olena Korobkova, chairwoman of the board at the Independent Association of the Banks of Ukraine, said Thursday.
But, she said, compared with what has happened in other conflicts, the banking situation in Ukraine is good. Banks, she said, are sufficiently capitalized, deposits are protected by the state and A.T.M.s are being refilled.
“The banking system is working, which is good news,” she said.
Vitaliy Vavryshchuk, the head of macroeconomic research at ICU, a Ukrainian investment bank, said that banks learned lessons after the 2014 crisis, when tensions with Russia spiked. Also thanks to regulations imposed by the National Bank of Ukraine, banks’ balance sheets were better prepared.
When the war started, Mr. Vavryshchuk said, Ukrainians initially rushed to take out their savings, but they were reassured about payments and withdrawals.
“There was no bank run,” he said. “The banking sector is operating very well, surprisingly well.”
Because of reforms enacted before the war and in response to the coronavirus pandemic, Ms. Korobkova said, a large share of banking activity takes place online, allowing Ukrainians to open a bank account at home without “risking your life.”
Still, in the country’s east, many businesses require payment in cash because of power cuts and because war has made working off the books much easier. Cash circulation has significantly increased, Ms. Korobkova said.
Recently, Ukraine has been forced to take tough steps to keep its economy afloat. The central bank has more than doubled its interest rate to slow inflation and the sharp fall of the currency.
Mr. Vavryshchuk said that he still expected the banks to endure significant losses, because companies have lost a lot of business, and many will be unable to repay their loans.
“Losses will be huge,” he said.
 
Maria Varenikova contributed reporting.
 Maham Javaid
Zelensky also said he met with Ben Wallace, the British defense secretary, in Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital. He said they talked about “how to stop Russian aggression, how to deprive it of offensive potential, what other supplies are needed for our army.” Very fierce fighting continues in the Donbas region.
 Maham Javaid
In his nightly speech, President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said he spoke to British university students on Friday about what Ukrainian life would be like after the war. The dialogue made him realize that the students were “not indifferent to the war in Ukraine, that the lies about this war are noticeable and disgusting, but the truth is known, necessary and important,” he said, via Telegram.
 Nicole Tung
Ivan Bondarenko, 11, practices kickboxing in the yard of his destroyed home in Novoselivka, Ukraine, on Friday, as his grandmother, Olga Navozenko, 64, was watching. Novoselivka, a village in northern Ukraine near the city of Chernihiv, was heavily shelled by Russian forces in March. Approximately 80 percent of the village’s residences were damaged or destroyed, and locals say their biggest challenge now is finding building materials they can afford to begin the reconstruction.
 Anton Troianovski and Ivan Nechepurenko
Yevgeny Shumilkin is going back to work on Sunday. To prepare, he pulled the familiar “M” off what had been his McDonald’s shirt and covered the “M” on his McDonald’s jacket with a Russian flag patch.
“It will be the same buns,” promised Mr. Shumilkin, who maintains the equipment at a restaurant in Moscow. “Just under a different name.”
McDonald’s restaurants are reopening in Russia this weekend, but without the Golden Arches. After the American fast-food giant pulled out this spring to protest President Vladimir V. Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, a Siberian oil mogul bought its 840 Russian stores. Because almost all of the ingredients came from inside the country, he said, the restaurants could keep on serving much of the same food.
The gambit might just work — underscoring the Russian economy’s surprising resilience in the face of one of the most intense barrages of sanctions ever meted out by the West. Three and a half months into the war, it has become clear that the sanctions — and the torrent of Western companies voluntarily leaving Russia — have failed to completely dismantle the economy or set off a popular backlash against Mr. Putin.
Russia spent much of Mr. Putin’s 22 years in power integrating into the world economy. Unraveling business ties so large and so interwoven, it turns out, is not easy.
To be sure, the effects of the sanctions will be deep and broad, with the consequences only beginning to play out. Living standards in Russia are already declining, economists and businesspeople say, and the situation is likely to get worse as stocks of imports run low and more companies announce layoffs.
Some do-it-yourself efforts by Russia may fall short of Western standards. When the first post-sanctions model of the Lada Granta — a Russian sedan co-produced by Renault before the French automaker pulled out this spring — rolled off an assembly line at a plant near the Volga on Wednesday, it lacked airbags, modern pollution controls or anti-lock brakes.
But the economic decline is not as precipitous as some experts had expected it would be after the Feb. 24 invasion. Inflation is still high, around 17 percent on an annual basis, but it has come down from a 20-year peak in April. A closely watched measure of factory activity, the S&P Global Purchasing Managers’ Index, showed that Russian manufacturing expanded in May for the first time since the war began.
Behind the positive news is a combination of factors playing to Mr. Putin’s advantage. Chief among them: high energy prices, which are allowing the Kremlin to keep funding the war while raising pensions and wages to placate ordinary Russians. The country’s oil revenues are up 50 percent this year.
In addition, deft work by the Central Bank prevented a panic in the financial markets after the invasion and helped the ruble recover from its initial crash. Store shelves, for the most part, remain stocked, thanks to ample inventories and alternative import routes being established through countries like Turkey and Kazakhstan — and the fact that Russian consumers are buying less.
Even the new Lada Granta is less of a clunker than observers predicted: Despite shortages of foreign components, it will still come with power steering and power windows.
“Everything is not as bad as expected,” a Russian car website proclaimed.
The Russian economy’s survival is strengthening Mr. Putin’s hand by bolstering his narrative that Russia will stand tall in the face of the West’s determination to destroy it. He met with young entrepreneurs on Thursday in a town-hall-style event, his latest effort to show that even as he waged war, he was keen to keep the economy functioning and foreign trade moving. Even if the West will not do business with Russia, he insisted, the rest of the world will.
“We are not going to have a closed economy,” Mr. Putin told a woman asking about the effects of sanctions. “If someone tries to limit us in something, they are limiting themselves.”
For the rich, luxury goods and iPhones are still widely available, but more expensive, ferried into Russia from the Middle East and Central Asia. The poor have been affected by rising prices, but they will benefit from a 10 percent increase in pensions and the minimum wage that Mr. Putin announced last month.
Those most affected by the economic upheaval are in the urban middle class. Foreign goods and services are now harder to come by, Western employers are pulling out and travel abroad is becoming difficult and prohibitively expensive.
But Natalya V. Zubarevich, an expert in social and political geography at Moscow State University, notes that many middle-class Russians have no choice but to adapt to a lower standard of living: At least half of the Russian middle class, she estimates, works for the state or for state-owned enterprises.
“Sanctions are not going to stop the war,” Ms. Zubarevich said in a phone interview. “The Russian public will bear it and adapt because it understands that it has no way to influence the state.”
Chris Weafer, a macroeconomic consultant who has long focused on Russia, published a note to his clients last week, saying that “some of our previous assumptions were wrong.” Inflation, and the economy’s contraction, turned out to be less severe than expected, the note said. His firm, Macro-Advisory Eurasia Strategic Consulting, revised its forecast to show a smaller decline in gross domestic product this year — 5.8 percent rather than 7 percent — while also forecasting a recession lasting into next year.
In a phone interview, Mr. Weafer described Russia’s economic future as “more dull, more debilitating,” with lower incomes, but with basic goods and services still available. A major juice company, for instance, warned customers that its boxes would soon all be white because of a shortage of imported ink.
“The economy is now moving into almost a stagnant phase where it can avoid a collapse,” he said. “It’s a more basic level of economic existence, which Russia can continue for quite some time.”
On Friday, with inflation stabilizing, Russia’s Central Bank reduced its key interest rate to 9.5 percent — the level before the invasion. On Feb. 28, the bank had raised it to 20 percent to try to head off a financial crisis. The ruble, after plummeting in value in the days after the invasion, is now trading at four-year highs.
One reason for the ruble’s unexpected strength is that global energy demand surged coming out of the pandemic. In June alone, the Russian government is expecting a windfall of more than $6 billion because of higher-than-expected energy prices, the Finance Ministry said last week.
At the same time, Russian consumers have been spending less — further propping up the ruble and giving Russian companies time to set up new import routes. 
Russian officials acknowledge, however, that the most difficult times for the economy may still be to come. Elvira Nabiullina, the central bank head, said on Friday that while “the effect of sanctions has not been as acute as we feared at the beginning,” it would be “premature to say that the full effect of sanctions has manifested itself.”
For example, it remains unclear how Russian companies will be able to obtain microchips used in a wide variety of goods. At Mr. Putin’s meeting with entrepreneurs, one developer said he was “very concerned about our microelectronics.”
Mr. Putin cut in: “Me too. Honest.”
The ties binding Russia’s economy to the West, now coming undone, go back decades — sometimes more than a century. Aeroflot, the national carrier, acquired scores of new Boeing and Airbus jets and styled itself as a convenient transit airline for people traveling between Europe and Asia. In the Ural Mountains, a factory worked with Siemens, the German manufacturing giant, to produce modern trains to replace rusting Soviet stock.
Banned from using European airspace, Aeroflot is now focusing on domestic routes and working to switch to Russian planes — a process that will take years. Siemens, which built telegraph lines across the Russian Empire in the 1850s and helped bring the country into the industrial era, announced last month it was pulling out of Russia.
“Sanctions suffocate the economy, which doesn’t happen all at once,” said Ivan Fedyakov, who runs Infoline, a Russian market consultancy that advises companies on how to survive under the current restrictions. “We have felt only 10 to 15 percent of their effect.”
But when it comes to food, at least, Russia is more prepared. When McDonald’s opened in the Soviet Union in 1990, the Americans had to bring in everything. Soviet potatoes were too small to make fries, so they had to acquire their own russet potato seeds; Soviet apples did not work for the pie, so the company imported them from Bulgaria.
But by the time McDonald’s pulled out this year, its Russian stores were getting almost all of their ingredients from Russian suppliers. So when McDonald’s, which employed 62,000 workers in Russia, announced in March that it was suspending operations because it could not “ignore the needless human suffering unfolding in Ukraine,” one of its Siberian franchisees, Aleksandr Govor, was able to keep his 25 restaurants open. Last month, he bought the entire Russian business of McDonald’s for an undisclosed sum.
On Sunday — Russia Day, a patriotic holiday — he will reopen 15 stores, including the former flagship McDonald’s on Pushkin Square in Moscow, the place where, in 1990, thousands of Soviets famously lined up for a taste of the West. The chain will operate under a still-to-be-disclosed new brand, though the new logo has been unveiled, said to represent a hamburger and French fries.
The hash browns will go by a Russian name, according to a menu leaked to a Russian tabloid. And, since the secret sauce is proprietary, there will be no Big Mac on offer.
 Aurelien Breeden
France said on Friday that it was “extremely concerned” after two Britons and a Moroccan who had fought for the Ukrainian armed forces were sentenced to death by a court in Russian-occupied territory. The French Foreign Ministry said in a statement that the three men had been subjected to a “sham trial” and that they should be “treated in accordance with international humanitarian law.”
 Jim McKinley
The British defense secretary, Ben Wallace, paid an unannounced visit to the Ukrainian capital on Friday and met with President Volodymyr Zelensky, who again made a case for the United Kingdom to provide Ukraine with more heavy weaponry, Zelensky’s office said. Wallace’s office said the meeting “focused on the U.K. continuing to provide operationally effective lethal aid that meets the current and future threats facing Ukraine.” 
 Michael Schwirtz and Marc Santora
While a lack of weapons, ammunition and equipment hampers the Ukrainian military, there are signs that a partisan insurgency is growing in potency, allowing Ukrainian forces to deliver deadly strikes on Russian-controlled territory even in areas where it is dangerous and sometimes impossible to commit troops.
This week, partisan scouts working for Ukraine’s military behind enemy lines directed artillery attacks on two Russian bases in the occupied Kherson region that killed scores of enemy soldiers, according to a senior Ukrainian military official with knowledge of the attacks.
In one episode this week, the scouts approached a Russian army installation in the village of Chkalove, and discovered many foreign fighters stationed at the base along with Russian soldiers and heavy weaponry, the senior official said. They fed the coordinates for the base to a Ukrainian artillery unit stationed about 12 miles away.
The Ukrainians then pulverized the base with shells, killing scores of fighters just after midnight on Thursday, said the senior official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive military operations.
Later that day, scouts directed another artillery attack, this time on a resort complex in Stara Zburivka, near the mouth of the Dnipro River, killing dozens of enemy soldiers, including two generals, the senior official said. One of the generals was from the Russian army and another from the domestic intelligence service, the F.S.B., the official said.
The scouts are local partisans who aid the Ukrainian military on Russian-occupied territory. They might be former soldiers or simply civilians gathering information like the location of enemy units. They can be men pushing potato carts, or farmers, or a grandmother with a cellphone.
Ukrainian partisans have claimed credit for attacking Russian trains; targeting Russian proxies appointed to local government administrations; killing Russian soldiers; and supporting Ukrainian military efforts. Their support can prove crucial, both in southern Ukraine where Russia has captured territory, and in the east where Ukraine finds itself outgunned and fighting to hold onto its land.
Details of the two attacks this week could not be independently verified. The Ukrainian military did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Neither did the Russian foreign ministry.
The strike in Chkalove was near an area of active fighting in Ukraine’s south. To determine the number of dead, spotters counted body bags as they were loaded onto rescue vehicles, the senior official said.
The death toll in the strike was apparently so high because the shells struck a cache of munitions, sparking an explosion and a blaze that burned for six hours early Thursday morning, the official said.
The official said that before the attack, the partisans approached some of the foreign fighters and after trying to speak with them, surmised that they were Arab. The foreign fighters appeared to be living in tents near buildings occupied by Russian troops, the official said. He said they were possibly part of a contingent of Syrian troops that arrived in Russia three weeks ago.
It has long been rumored that Syrian fighters would join Russia’s fight in Ukraine, but there has been no official confirmation of this.
The exact shape and size of the insurgency in southern Ukraine is unclear and the resistance to Russian occupation can come in many forms — from helping direct attacks on enemy forces in coordination with the Ukrainian military to posting leaflets on street corners to demoralize the occupiers. 
 Jim McKinley
After Friday’s report showing U.S. inflation was above 8 percent in May, President Biden blamed President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and the war in Ukraine for rising costs and vowed to do everything possible to reverse the trend. “Putin’s price hike is hitting Americans hard,” he said.
 Dan Bilefsky
As Western governments on Friday condemned the death sentences given to two Britons and a Moroccan by a court in Russia-occupied eastern Ukraine, Moscow defended the decision, saying the men were mercenaries who did not have the right to be treated as prisoners of war.
Russia’s foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, speaking during a news conference in Yerevan, Armenia, said the “crimes” the men were convicted of had been committed in the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic, adding that he would not “hinder the operation of the judiciary and law enforcement authorities” in the territory.
Maria Zakharova, the Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman, asserted on Friday that the Britons sentenced to death were not defined as combatants under international law and, as such, were not entitled to prisoner of war status — a contention vehemently rejected by experts in international law and the British government.
“No matter what British officials say, these two persons are not prisoners of war, they are mercenaries,” Ms. Zakharova said in a statement. “According to international humanitarian law, the mercenaries sent by the West to assist the nationalistic regime in Kyiv are not combatants and do not have the right to the prisoner of war status.”
But British officials and human rights experts countered that the death sentences were a blatant violation of international humanitarian law under the Geneva Conventions, since all three men had joined the Ukrainian military, and, as prisoners of war, would be protected from prosecution for taking part in hostilities. The only exception, legal experts said, would be prosecutions on war crimes charges.
Under the Geneva Conventions, prisoners of war must be treated humanely and be protected from violence, intimidation, insults and public curiosity, as well as sheltered and provided with food, clothing and medical care.
The death sentences, handed down on Thursday, have alarmed human rights advocates and Western governments, raising questions about the protections afforded to thousands of foreign-born fighters serving in Ukraine, some of whom have been taken prisoner on the battlefield.
Prosecutors had accused the three men — Aiden Aslin, 28, Shaun Pinner, 48, and Brahim Saadoun — of being mercenaries and terrorists seeking to overthrow the government of the Donetsk People’s Republic. But people who know the men said all three had emigrated to Ukraine, made lives for themselves there and been caught up in an elaborate show trial driven by politics and the optics of wartime propaganda.
Liz Truss, Britain’s foreign secretary, wrote on Twitter on Friday that she had discussed the case of the three men with Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba. She said the judgment against them “is an egregious breach of the Geneva convention.” Earlier, she had called the sentences a “sham judgment with absolutely no legitimacy.”
At a time when Britain has been supporting and helping to arm Ukraine in the face of the Russian invasion, the sentences present a difficult conundrum for the British government, which has acrimonious relations with the Kremlin and has grown closer to Ukraine since the war began. Like much of the world, Britain does not recognize the government of the Donetsk People’s Republic, one of two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine that Russia recognized after fomenting a separatist movement.
Since both of the British men were living in Ukraine and serving in its armed forces, Britain may have calculated that it could be counterproductive to engage Russia directly over the case. That may explain why, so far, there has been no British effort to reprimand the Russian ambassador to Britain.
The episode is also a sensitive one for Ms. Truss because, earlier this year, she suggested that she would offer her support to any Britons who wanted to go to Ukraine to help resist the Russian invasion. That was not an official policy and the government later insisted that it was advising British citizens to avoid travel to Ukraine.
The three men have one month to appeal, and there has been some speculation that the harsh sentences could be a pretext by Russia and its proxies to increase their bargaining power in a potential prisoner swap between Russia and Ukraine.
Mr. Aslin’s family, calling for the men’s return, stressed in a statement published on Friday by Sky News, a British broadcaster, that the two Britons were not mercenaries.
“We love Aiden with all our hearts. He and Shaun, as members of Ukrainian armed forces, should be treated with respect just like any other prisoners of war,” the family said in a statement. “They are not, and never were, mercenaries.”
Stephen Castle contributed reporting from London and Ivan Nechepurenko from Tbilisi, Georgia.
 Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Natalia Yermak and Andrew E. Kramer
DONETSK REGION, Ukraine — Nearly four months after Russia invaded, the Ukrainian military is struggling in the artillery war in the country’s east, because it is running short of Soviet-era ammunition and has not received enough from its allies to keep the Russians at bay, Ukrainian officials and artillery officers in the field say.
On the front lines in the Donbas, those shortages have meant that Ukrainian soldiers are conserving their shells and often are unable to return fire one-for-one.
At one Ukrainian artillery position on Friday, several Russian shells had just sailed overhead, landing in the field behind the soldiers with methodic thuds, when the gun’s crew was told to get ready to fire. Their drones had spotted a group of Russian howitzers a few miles away.
The Ukrainian soldiers scrambled, pulling branches from their 122-millimeter self-propelled gun camouflaged on the edge of a wooded area on the front line in eastern Ukraine. The barrel angled skyward before firing only two shots, sending dirt and leaves into the air.
A few weeks ago, the gun would have been firing constantly, its crew said, but now it was firing significantly less. And instead of blanketing Russian positions with ordnance, they could engage only specific targets, like the Russian howitzers.
Mariana Bezugla, a member of Ukraine’s Parliament who is the deputy head of the national security, defense and intelligence committee, said similar shortages of Soviet-era ammunition were occurring throughout the eastern theater, where Ukrainian forces have been battling to hold the line against a Russian offensive aimed at capturing the entire resource-rich Donbas region.
“They have a lot of resources, a lot of ammunition,” Ms. Bezugla said. “It is not comparable with ours.”
Ms. Bezugla said that Ukraine was quickly running out of Soviet-era ammunition for its big guns, and while it has plenty of ammunition for NATO artillery pieces, it still does not have enough of those weapons to replace the older equipment. “We have munitions of the new type, but we still lack guns” to fire it, she said.
On Friday, Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence, Vadym Skibitsky, told The Guardian that Ukraine was running out of Soviet-era shells and losing the artillery battle with Russia on the front lines. He said Ukraine was firing 5,000 to 6,000 artillery rounds a day and had “almost used up all of our ammunition.”
In the battle in the Donbas, Russian forces are firing about 60,000 artillery shells and rockets each day, according to a senior adviser to the Ukrainian military command who was not authorized to speak publicly.
Michael Kofman, the director of Russia studies at CNA, a research institute in Arlington, Va., said ammunition supplies would be critical to the final outcome in the battle for the east of Ukraine.
“This war is far more about attrition by artillery than maneuver, which means one of the deciding factors is who has more ammunition,” he said.
 Valerie Hopkins
Reporting from Yahidne, Ukraine
More than two months after the residents of Yahidne kicked down the bolted basement door where the Russian army had held them hostage, the village is being rebuilt but the memories remain fresh — and deeply painful.
On March 3, eight days after the full-scale invasion began, Russian forces swept into Yahidne, a village on the main road north of Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv. For nearly a month, until March 31, when Ukrainian troops liberated the town, more than 300 people, 77 of them children, were imprisoned in several rooms in the dank basement of the village school — a human shield for the Russian troops based there. Ten of the captives died. Among those held inside were a baby and a 93-year-old, Ukrainian prosecutors said.
“This is our concentration camp,” said Oleh Turash, 54, one of those imprisoned. He had helped to bury the people who perished there. For most of the time there was virtually no light. Despite the freezing winter weather, he said, people were packed in so tightly their body warmth was all the heat they needed.
But there was never enough oxygen to breathe normally, causing some people to black out and others, mainly older, to suffer hallucinations. “They would start babbling about the need to plant potatoes, and other things that they could not do,” said Ivan Petrovich, the school’s janitor.
Mr. Turash, 54, slept in the largest room. It had the only source of air, a tiny hole the people made themselves, Mr. Petrovich said. A bucket sat at the far side of the room, a makeshift toilet for children and others who could not wait until morning, when there was hope that the Russian soldiers would let people out to use the regular toilets.
A tally on the door of the largest room noted that 136 people had stayed there, nine of them children. Originally, the number had been 139, but that had been scratched out to reflect three deaths, Mr. Turash said.
 Eshe Nelson
Russia’s central bank cut interest rates to 9.5 percent from 11 percent on Friday as officials said inflation was slowing more than expected — but the country still faces a large number of economic risks and uncertainty.
The annual inflation rate in Russia was 17.1 percent in May, down from 17.8 percent the previous month, separate data showed this week. Price growth was low in May and June, the bank said, thanks to the appreciation of the ruble and weakening demand for consumer goods.
But Elvira Nabiullina, the central bank leader, warned during a news conference on Friday that inflation was still a major risk to Russia’s economy and that a downward trend wasn’t assured. The bank is forecasting an annual inflation rate of 14 percent to 17 percent at the end of the year.
“The very low price growth rate we have been observing in recent weeks cannot be considered to be steadily low inflation,” Ms. Nabiullina said. Prices are adjusting lower after a surge in March, immediately after the start of Russia’s war in Ukraine. Inflationary risks are “still considerable,” she added.
As Russia is increasingly isolated from the rest of the global economy by sanctions due to the war, companies and consumers are facing a painful period of broken supply chains and absent technology, while the economy is set for a sharp recession this year. Lowering the interest rate is one way the central bank can help prop up the economy. The central bank said on Friday that retail and corporate lending operations were weak.
“The external environment for the Russian economy remains challenging and significantly constrains economic activity,” the central bank said in a statement. 
Amid a large decline in imports, companies are struggling to fix production and logistics problems, the statement said, and there has been only “nascent diversification” in finding new suppliers and customers to sell to. Consumer spending was also down because households are choosing to save their money even as inflation eats into their incomes.
“Today, most companies engaged in external trade are facing problems,” Ms. Nabiullina said. It will take a long time to resolve bottlenecks created by the need to find new suppliers, payments systems, customers and trade routes, she added. There is also the risk of secondary sanctions, she said, referring to penalties against foreign entities that do not comply with prohibitions on doing business with Russia. The Biden administration is said to be developing plans for such sanctions. 
Two weeks ago, the bank hastily cut rates to 11 percent from 14 percent after the ruble climbed to a multiyear high against the U.S. dollar, partly driven by capital controls imposed after Russia’s Feb. 24 invasion of Ukraine. While the strengthening currency helped ease some inflationary pressures, it also put pressure on Russia’s budget, which relies on energy sales that are often denominated in dollars.
 In late February, after the invasion, the central bank more than doubled interest rates to 20 percent and took steps to stop the outflow of rubles from the economy. Since then, some of these restrictions have been loosened.
Thes invasion has sent global energy, food and commodity prices soaring, leading to sharp downward revisions to economic growth for countries around the world. This week, both the World Bank and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said the risks of recession were growing as they slashed their forecasts to acknowledge the economic toll of the war.
This global impact is spilling back into Russia’s economy. “The materialization of growing risks of a global recession could in turn further weaken external demand for Russian exports,” Russia’s central bank said on Friday.
A day earlier, President Vladimir V. Putin said Russia would not close itself off from the rest of the world. Even if the United States and the European Union do not want to do business with Russia, he said, countries in Asia, Latin America and Africa will.
“Our economy will be open — whoever isn’t interested will be robbing themselves,” Mr. Putin said.
 Marc Santora
The Ukrainian military high command said on Friday that fighting in the battered city of Sievierodonetsk in eastern Ukraine was ongoing even as Russian forces try to surround thousands of Ukrainian soldiers fighting to hold their positions.
 Marc Santora
European expressions of solidarity with Ukraine must now be followed with action — specifically, the formal acceptance of his nation’s candidacy to join the European Union — President Volodymyr Zelensky said on Friday.
“It will prove that words about Ukraine being a part of the European family are not just words,” he said in a virtual address to the Copenhagen Democracy Summit, an annual gathering of political and business leaders from around the world. Ukraine, Mr. Zelensky said, must not be forced to remain in a “gray zone” stranded between the prospect of a better future within the European Union and continued threat from Moscow.
While he has made similar appeals in the past, his comments came as he seeks to steady his country’s resolve at a moment when the war is taking an increasing toll and looks likely to last for some time. The bloc’s 27 members are expected in the coming weeks to consider Ukraine’s application for candidacy.
Yet such a move is controversial, despite continuing words of support for Ukraine by leaders across the continent, and despite a declaration in February by Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, that Ukraine was “one of us and we want them in the European Union.”
There has been no E.U. enlargement since 2013, when Croatia joined — a reflection of the onerous and politically challenging path to membership. Even if Ukraine’s candidacy were accepted, the process of becoming a full member could take years.
Roberta Metsola, the president of the European Parliament, said after Mr. Zelensky’s remarks that the continent’s handling of the war would be judged in the years to come and that Europe must demonstrate its resolve. “In Europe, we know the cost of appeasement,” she told the Copenhagen summit. “We know the weight of walls and iron curtains.”
She said that while the United States, Europe and other democratic allies had been united in support of Ukraine, the real test would come as the costs of the war grow and public attention to it fades.
“Ultimately, Putin is staring down the world, hoping that we will blink first,” she said of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. “But we cannot do that.”
Just as the war itself is now as much a contest of will and endurance, maintaining united political support for Ukraine will require steadfastness and the ability to remain focused on the long-term stakes.
A day after Mr. Putin compared himself with Peter the Great, the 18th-century Russian emperor — saying that he was engaged in a similar struggle to win back lands he sees as rightfully Russian — both Mr. Zelensky and Ms. Metsola said it was time to take such aggressive stances seriously.
“The aggressor must feel the pressure of the democratic world when the threat is issued,” Mr. Zelensky said. “We must learn to act preventively and not just respond.”
Ms. Metsola also cited a “real, clear and present danger” that Mr. Putin’s forces present.
“Putin did not stop in Crimea,” Ms. Metsola said, referring to the Russian leader’s 2014 annexation of the Ukrainian peninsula. Likewise, she said of his forces’ assault on Ukraine’s capital in the current conflict, “He would not have stopped in Kyiv.”
 Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Andrew E. Kramer and Marc Santora
Ukrainian leaders are stepping up their pleas for the quick delivery of heavy weapons from the West — requests made ever more urgent as field officers and Ukrainian officials warn that soldiers are running out of ammunition for their Soviet-era weaponry.
Artillery is critical for the war in the east, which is being fought mostly at long distances. Shortages of equipment and ammunition have left Ukrainian soldiers increasingly prey to withering attacks by the Russians and their superior firepower in cities like Sievierodonetsk, where Ukraine’s soldiers are trying to hold out despite being surrounded on three sides.
Mariana Bezugla, the deputy head of the national security, defense and intelligence committee for Ukraine’s Parliament, said Ukraine was quickly running out of Soviet-era ammunition for its big guns, and while it has plenty of ammunition for NATO artillery pieces, it still does not have enough of those weapons to replace the older equipment. On the front lines in the Donbas region, those shortages have meant that Ukrainian soldiers are conserving their shells and often are unable to return fire one-for-one. 
With the Ukrainians reporting the death of 100 to 200 soldiers every day and the war now a grueling contest of will and endurance, President Volodymyr Zelensky and his top aides are looking for ways to stiffen the resolve of both his nation and Western allies. On Friday, he again pleaded for admittance to the European Union — a prospect that is considered unlikely in the short term — saying that Ukraine must not be forced to remain in a “gray zone” between the hope of a better future within the European community and continued threats from Moscow. 
And on Thursday, Defense Minister Oleksiy Reznikov said that while he was grateful to the West for sending weapons and promising more, he was not “satisfied with the tempo and quantity of weapon supplies. Absolutely not.”
In other developments:
There are signs that a partisan insurgency is executing strikes in Russian-controlled territory, as scouts working for Ukraine’s military directed artillery attacks on two Russian bases in the occupied Kherson region, according to a senior Ukrainian military official. Separately, Ukrainian and Russian authorities have described attacks on Russian-appointed officials by partisans.
Russia is struggling to provide basic services to people living in its occupied territories in Ukraine, Britain’s Defense Ministry said on Friday. Kherson, the first city to be taken by Russian troops, is facing a shortage of medicines, and Mariupol is at risk of a major cholera outbreak, the ministry said.
Western governments condemned the death sentences handed down to two Britons and a Moroccan who fought for Ukraine by a court in Russian-held eastern territory. The men were accused of being mercenaries, and Russia defended the court’s decision, saying the men were not prisoners of war.
There are now at least 4.8 million refugees from Ukraine across Europe, the U.N.’s refugee agency reported on Thursday, citing new data from national authorities. The war has caused “one of the largest human displacement crises in the world today,” the agency said.
 Melissa Eddy
Stefan Fritsche, who runs a centuries-old German brewery in Neuzelle, near the Polish border, has seen his natural gas bill jump a startling 400 percent over the past year. His electricity bill has increased 300 percent. And he’s paying more for barley than ever before.
But the soaring inflation for energy and grains in the wake of the Ukraine invasion is no match for the biggest challenge facing Mr. Fritsche’s brewery, Klosterbrauerei Neuzelle, and others like it across Germany: a severe shortage of beer bottles.
While brewers buy their glass from a number of countries across Europe, the war has caused glass factories in Ukraine — previously an important supplier — to cease operation. Sanctions have cut off supply chains from Russia and Belarus.
The price of bottles produced elsewhere, including in the Czech Republic, France or even Germany, has reached record levels of 15 to 20 euro cents each, because glassmaking involves huge levels of heat, and energy prices have soared.
The problem is “unprecedented,” Mr. Fritsche said. “The price of bottles has exploded.”
The issue is not so much a lack of bottles: Germany’s roughly 1,500 breweries have up to four billion returnable glass bottles in circulation, about 48 for every man, woman and child.
But dragging a crate — or several — of empty glass bottles back to a store can be a hassle, even if it means getting back the deposit fee of 8 euro cents per bottle. People tend to let them stack up in the basements or balconies, biding their time until they are running out of either space or spare cash.
Faced with a broad variety of other problems as the busy summer season approaches, including a shortage of truck drivers and high fuel costs, beer makers have a plea for German drinkers: Bring back your empties.
 Victoria Kim
Russia is struggling to provide basic services to people living in its occupied territories in Ukraine, according to Britain’s defense ministry. Kherson, the first city to be taken by Russian troops, is facing a shortage of medicines, and Mariupol is at risk of a major cholera outbreak, the ministry said.
 Jesus Jiménez
Ukraine’s military and its government renewed their pleas for more Western arms as fierce fighting continued in the city of Sievierodonetsk, which President Volodymyr Zelensky has said is pivotal to the fight for the eastern region of Donbas.
While the United States and other countries have sent Ukraine many weapons and promised more, officials say they are not coming fast enough to hold off Russian forces. Defense Minister Oleksiy Reznikov said on Thursday that while he was grateful for the support, he had not been “satisfied with the tempo and quantity of weapon supplies. Absolutely not.”
Mr. Reznikov and other officials are making no secret of the challenges Ukraine faces in the east, perhaps to add a sense of urgency to their daily calls for heavy Western weaponry.
Although the Ukrainian military has “a clear artillery supply plan until the end of July,” Mr. Reznikov said, soldiers on the front lines are increasingly asking for more powerful weapons as the grueling battles continue, three and a half months into the war.
Mykhailo Podolyak, a senior adviser to Mr. Zelensky, told the BBC that 100 to 200 Ukrainian military personnel were now dying each day. Mr. Zelensky said last week that the army was losing 60 to 100 soldiers a day. Mr. Podolyak said a “complete lack of parity” with Russia’s military capabilities was the reason Ukraine’s losses were so high.
 Ivan Nechepurenko
Yandex, often described as Russia’s Google, said it had de-emphasized national borders in its maps, one of its most popular products. The move prompted many observers to speculate online that the company wanted to avoid being pressured to redraw borders as Russia captures more of Ukraine. As of Thursday night, lines designating many countries were barely visible on Yandex maps. The border between Ukraine and Russia, for instance, was denoted with the same line as the borders between different regions in Ukraine. In a statement, the company explained the move by saying that it wants its maps to be oriented around local use. “Yandex Maps is a universal service that helps people find organizations and places nearby, choose public transport and plan comfortable routes,” the company said.
 Jesus Jimenez
In his nightly speech, President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said he and other officials had held a meeting about Ukraine's current and postwar economic policy. They discussed a grant program for small and medium-sized businesses, he said, as well as developing the country’s security sector, industrial recovery and attracting investment.
 Jesus Jimenez
Mykhailo Podolyak, a senior adviser to President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, said in an interview with the BBC on Thursday that Ukrainian military casualties are now between 100 and 200 per day. Zelensky said last week that the Ukrainian army was losing 60 to 100 soldiers a day.
 Dan Bilefsky and Valerie Hopkins
Two Britons and a Moroccan who had fought for the Ukrainian armed forces were sentenced to death Thursday by a court in Russia-occupied eastern Ukraine after being accused of being mercenaries, Russia’s Interfax news agency reported.
The death sentences were the latest ominous step in a trial that has alarmed human rights advocates and Western governments, raising questions about the protections afforded to thousands of foreign-born fighters serving in Ukraine, some of whom have been taken prisoner on the battlefield.
Britain’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, wrote on Twitter that the court verdict was a “sham judgment with absolutely no legitimacy.” One British member of Parliament called the proceedings a “Soviet-era-style show trial.”
Prosecutors had accused the three men — Aiden Aslin, 28, Shaun Pinner, 48, and Brahim Saadoun — of being mercenaries and terrorists who were seeking to violently overthrow the government of the Donetsk People’s Republic, one of two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine that Russia has recognized.
But defenders of the three men said all three had immigrated to Ukraine, had made homes there and were fighting for their adopted country’s army before they were ensnared in what appeared to be a trial in which the verdict was predetermined. 
The harsh sentences received a swift and angry rebuke from the British government. A spokesman for Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain said that “prisoners of war shouldn’t be exploited for political purposes,” according to the BBC.
Legal experts said the trial appeared calculated to discourage foreign volunteers, including Americans, from joining Ukraine’s military by warning them that they could be denied the protections granted to prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions.
But on Thursday, judicial officials in the Donetsk People’s Republic, where Russian-allied forces have been fighting Ukrainian troops since 2014, doubled down on their contention that the men were violent mercenaries deserving of death.
Prosecutors claimed that the three men were guilty of “training for the purpose of carrying out terrorist activities” and that they undertook their activities “for a fee.”
Alexander Nikulin, the chairman of the board of the Appellate Chamber of the Supreme Court of the Donetsk People’s Republic, said the men had intended to overthrow the region’s de facto government, which is allied with Moscow and which Ukraine, along with much of the rest of the world, does not regard as legitimate.
Mr. Nikulin said that the court had convicted the men and sentenced them to death after they had pleaded guilty to the charges of being mercenaries.
“When handing down the sentence, the court used not only written regulations and rules, but also the main, unshakable principle of justice,” he told reporters, according to Interfax. The men have one month to appeal.
At a hearing on Wednesday, the three men stood in a glass cage in a courtroom in Donetsk, the capital of the region, according to video released by the Russian government. All three were asked if they would plead guilty to the charges, and each said yes.
Interfax said that Mr. Pinner and Mr. Aslin had surrendered in the southern port city of Mariupol in April, while Mr. Brahim had surrendered in the eastern town of Volnovakha in March.
The British prime minister’s office stressed that, under the Geneva Conventions, “prisoners of war are entitled to combatant immunity and they should not be prosecuted for participation in hostilities.”
Robert Jenrick, a Conservative member of Parliament in Newark, Mr. Aslin’s hometown in central England, wrote on Twitter that Mr. Aslin was not a mercenary, but had been living in Ukraine and had served in its armed forces before Russia’s invasion. Mr. Aslin is entitled to protection under the Geneva Conventions, Mr. Jenrick said.
“This disgusting Soviet-era-style show trial is the latest reminder of the depravity of Putin’s regime,” he wrote, adding: “They cannot treat British citizens like this and get away with it.”
Under the Geneva Conventions, prisoners of war must be treated humanely and be protected from violence, intimidation, insults and public curiosity, as well as sheltered and provided with food, clothing and medical care.
Denis Krivosheev, an official with Amnesty International, said that the sentences were a “blatant violation of international humanitarian law.”
“The three were members of the Ukrainian regular forces,” he said, “and under the Geneva Conventions, as prisoners of war, they are protected from prosecution for taking part in hostilities.” The only exception, he said, is prosecutions on war crimes charges.
According to the BBC, Mr. Aslin moved to Ukraine in 2018 and joined its military. He is engaged to a Ukrainian woman, the broadcaster said. Mr. Pinner comes from Bedfordshire, had served in the British Army and married a Ukrainian, the BBC reported.
Mr. Saadoun arrived in Ukraine in 2019, learned Russian, and signed up for the Ukrainian army a year ago, a friend, Ilya Zub, said.
“Brahim is not a mercenary,” Mr. Zub said, adding that he had known Mr. Saadoun for more than a year. “He came to Ukraine in 2019 and decided he wanted to start a new life.”
 Anushka Patil
At least 4.8 million refugees from Ukraine have been recorded across Europe, the U.N.’s refugee agency reported on Thursday, citing new data from national authorities. The war has resulted in “one of the largest human displacement crises in the world today,” the agency said.
 Anton Troianovski
Among President Vladimir V. Putin’s motives for invading Ukraine, his view of himself as being on a historic mission to rebuild the Russian Empire has always loomed large. On Thursday, Mr. Putin went further, comparing himself directly to Peter the Great.
It was a new, if carefully staged, glimpse into Mr. Putin’s sense of his own grandeur.
Mr. Putin on Thursday marked the 350th anniversary of Peter’s birth by visiting a new multimedia exhibit about the czar in Moscow. He then held a town-hall-style meeting with young Russian entrepreneurs and opened it by reflecting on Peter’s conquest of the Baltic coast during his 18th-century war with Sweden.
Mr. Putin described the land Peter conquered as rightfully Russian.
“He was returning it and strengthening it,” Mr. Putin said, leaning back in his armchair, before hinting with a smile that he was now doing the same thing in his war in Ukraine. “Well, apparently, it has also fallen to us to return and to strengthen.”
Mr. Putin said that when Peter founded the city of St. Petersburg on the captured land, “none of the countries of Europe recognized it as Russian.” That remark seemed to be a clear reference to the present day, when no Western country has recognized Moscow’s claim to Crimea, much less to the parts of eastern and southern Ukraine Russia has seized in the last three months.
Mr. Putin seemed to suggest that the West, as it did centuries ago, would eventually come around and recognize those regions as Russian.
Peter, Russia’s first emperor, has always been an object of fascination for Mr. Putin, who himself comes from St. Petersburg. The Russian president keeps a bronze statue of the czar by his ceremonial desk.
But in recent days, Russian officials have been promoting the comparison between Mr. Putin and Peter with special energy; the governor of St. Petersburg on Thursday said that he felt the same pride for today’s Russian soldiers in Ukraine “as we take pride in the memory of Peter’s warriors.”
There is at least one historical problem with the official Putin-Peter comparisons.
The czar is known for opening Russia’s “window to Europe,” building St. Petersburg in a European mold and bringing Western technology and culture to Russia. Mr. Putin’s Ukraine invasion, many Russians fear, has slammed that window shut.
Last week a Russian journalist asked the Kremlin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, whether the window to Europe was closing. He responded: “No one is planning to close anything.”
On Thursday, Mr. Putin repeated that message in his meeting with entrepreneurs, insisting that Russia would not close itself off from the rest of the world as the Soviet Union did. Even if the United States and the European Union do not want to do business with Russia, he said, countries in Asia, Latin America and Africa will.
“Our economy will be open — whoever isn’t interested will be robbing themselves,” Mr. Putin said. “It’s impossible to fence off a country like Russia, and we are not planning to put up a fence like that around us ourselves.”
