Advertisement
Did you follow the news this week? Take our quiz to see how well you stack up with other Times readers.
The Supreme Court this week struck down a New York law, ruling that Americans have a right to do what?
Burn the American flag in protest
Carry guns outside their homes for self-defense
Emit planet-warming gases from their own homes without limit
Form a union
Receive medical care even if they can’t afford it
This week, a 5.9-magnitude earthquake brought widespread devastation to which region?
Russia’s Kamchatka peninsula
The Afghanistan-Pakistan border
The Gobi Desert in northern China
The Himalayas in western Bhutan
The islands of southern Indonesia
President Biden asked Congress this week to take what step, which he said would lower the price of gas nationwide?
Authorize a “pay what you want” option at certain gas stations
Offer subsidies to fuel companies that sell gasoline at a discount
Require all cars on federal highways to get at least 30 miles per gallon
Require states to offer free gas for government workers
Suspend the federal gas tax for three months
Which two actions did the F.D.A. take this week in an effort to reduce smoking-related illnesses?
It announced a plan to slash nicotine levels in cigarettes.
It banned flavored cigarettes.
It ordered Juul to stop selling e-cigarettes.
It outlawed the use of colors in cigarette packaging.
It prohibited the sale of cigarettes in cartons.
Done
The House committee investigating the Capitol attack found that a senator from Wisconsin wanted to hand-deliver a list of fake electors to Vice President Mike Pence on Jan 6. Name the senator.
Chuck Grassley
Mike Braun
Ron Johnson
Roy Blunt
Tammy Baldwin
Which Latin American country elected its first leftist leader?
Brazil
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Venezuela
Which currency (charted below) became the world’s best-performing currency this week?
Euro (the E.U.)
Peso (Mexico)
Ruble (Russia)
Rupee (India)
Yen (Japan)
International leaders voted this week to officially make Ukraine a candidate to join which group? 
European Union
Group of 8
NAFTA
NATO
OPEC
Employees at a Baltimore-area store of which company — valued at more than $2 trillion — voted to unionize last weekend?
Apple
Costco
Dunkin’
The Home Depot
Walmart
Which sport’s international governing body effectively barred transgender women from competing in women’s events?
Basketball (FIBA)
Gymnastics (FIG)
Soccer (FIFA)
Swimming (FINA)
Volleyball (FIVB)
Trumpet, pictured above, won best in show at the Westminster Dog Show. What breed is he?
Bloodhound
Corgi
French bulldog
German shepherd
Samoyed
Jessica Anderson, Matthew Cullen and the staff of the Morning newsletter compiled this week’s quiz.
This quiz has been updated to change an answer regarding abortion in the question about the Supreme Court, which was published before Friday’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade.
Advertisement
