The Russian invasion has devastated several Ukrainian cities, caused a humanitarian crisis and fueled insecurity around the world.
Group of 7 leaders meeting in Germany were receptive to a Biden administration plan to cap the price of Russian oil in world markets, limiting Kremlin revenue.
By Jim Tankersley
Ms. Griner, a seven-time W.N.B.A. all-star, has been in custody since February.
By Ivan Nechepurenko
Economic sanctions that blocked bond payments have strengthened efforts to seal off Moscow from global markets.
By Eshe Nelson
Videos of the site, near the railway station in the central city of Kremenchuk, showed a fire raging as emergency workers frantically attempted to extinguish the flames.
By Valerie Hopkins, Ivan Nechepurenko, Megan Specia and Dan Bilefsky
The dozens of the missiles launched by Russian forces into Ukraine over the weekend have raised anxiety in Lviv, even in the relative peace of the country’s northwest.
By Megan Specia
On the first day of their gathering, Group of 7 leaders moved to increase the economic pressure on Russia, but a missile attack on the Ukrainian capital made clear that Moscow is not backing down.
By Jim Tankersley
In March, talk of victory was in the air. Now, maintaining unity against President Vladimir V. Putin is looking harder, with President Biden heading to Germany and Spain to rally Europe.
By David E. Sanger
With the withdrawal from Sievierodonetsk, the fighting shifts to neighboring Lysychansk, the last city in the Luhansk region still under Ukrainian control.
By Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Marc Santora and Michael Levenson
Some fled to Poland’s capital alone. All feel deeply uneasy about the future. For the young Ukrainians packing into Poland’s capital, a park offers a place where they can try to cope, together.
By Jeffrey Gettleman
The routine summer practice of filling Europe’s natural gas tanks has become a battle after Russia cut deliveries by more than half.
By Stanley Reed and Melissa Eddy
Many business owners and intellectuals fled Russia after the invasion of Ukraine, but others stayed behind, struggling to redefine their lives. Their diverging choices do not add up to a broad challenge to Vladimir Putin’s war.
By Anton Troianovski
The funeral for a marine who loved the sport of parachuting was the first of four on Tuesday for local soldiers killed in heavy fighting against Russia in eastern Ukraine.
By Megan Specia
A New York Times analysis of visual evidence from Ukraine showed widespread use by Russia of cluster weapons banned under certain international treaties.
By Danielle Ivory, John Ismay, Denise Lu, Marco Hernandez, Cierra S. Queen, Jess Ruderman, Kristine White, Lauryn Higgins and Bonnie G. Wong
Russian forces launched a large-scale missile attack across Ukraine.

The Ukrainian Army has tried to modernize, but still falls short in coordination among units, so they often fight independently of one another — with sometimes deadly results.
By Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Natalia Yermak
Ukraine’s top prosecutor arrived with a team of investigators to collect evidence about what she said constituted a “war crime” under Ukrainian law and a crime against humanity.
By Valerie Hopkins
The planned commitment, more than half of it from the U.S., reflects worldwide alarm at shortages in wheat and sunflower oil caused by Russia’s invasion.
By Michael D. Shear
G7 leaders are considering putting price caps on Russian oil.
By Yana Dlugy
Residents of Lysychansk, across the river from a city that fell to Russian control last week, should leave over “the real threat to life and health,” the region’s military governor said.
By Megan Specia and Matthew Mpoke Bigg
Plus Russia strikes Kyiv as G7 leaders meet and a Times investigation into China’s surveillance state.
By Amelia Nierenberg
The strike on Sunday morning shook many out of the relative sense of security that has prevailed in Ukraine’s capital since the Russians were pushed out of its periphery in early April.
By Valerie Hopkins
As leaders of the Group of 7 gather in Germany, the scramble to replace Russian fossil fuels is raising concerns that hard-won climate targets will be missed.
By Katrin Bennhold and Jim Tankersley
President Biden announced the decision before the start of a G7 summit meeting in Germany.
By Jim Tankersley and Austin Ramzy
A secretive operation involving U.S. Special Operations forces hints at the scale of the effort to assist Ukraine’s still outgunned military.
By Eric Schmitt, Julian E. Barnes and Helene Cooper
Advertisement
Advertisement
