Economic sanctions that blocked bond payments have strengthened efforts to seal off Moscow from global markets.
Follow our latest coverage of business, markets and the economy.
By Eshe Nelson
Russia missed a deadline for making bond payments on Sunday, a move signaling its first default on international debt in more than a century, after Western sanctions thwarted the government’s efforts to pay foreign investors. The lapse adds to efforts to seal Moscow off from global capital markets for years.
About $100 million in dollar- and euro-denominated interest payments failed to reach investors within a 30-day grace period after a missed May 27 deadline. The grace period expired Sunday night.
A formal declaration of default would need to come from bondholders because ratings agencies, which normally declare when borrowers have defaulted, have been barred by sanctions from reporting on Russia. The Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee, a panel of investors that rules on whether to pay out securities linked to defaults, hasn’t been asked to make a decision on these bond payments yet.
But it appeared that the payments had not reached bondholders’ accounts as of Sunday night, as required by the bonds’ contracts. On Monday, Russia’s finance ministry said that it had made the payments in May and that they had been transferred to Euroclear, a Brussels-based clearinghouse, but subsequently blocked from reaching bondholders. 
Russia is rejecting the default declaration, on the grounds that it has made efforts to pay. Dmitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesman, told reporters on Monday that the statements about default were “absolutely illegal.”
“The fact that Euroclear withheld this money, did not transfer it to the recipients, it is not our problem,” Mr. Peskov said. “In other words, there are no grounds to call this situation a default.”
The finance ministry added that the actions of foreign financial institutions were beyond its control and that “it seems advisable for investors to contact the relevant financial institutions directly” over the payments.
Euroclear declined to comment.
“We can expect Russia to stick to its alternative narrative: The default isn’t a default, we tried and it isn’t our fault,” said Tim Samples, a legal studies professor at the University of Georgia’s Terry College of Business and an expert on sovereign debt, adding that Russia also hasn’t submitted to jurisdiction in foreign courts. Still, “that has to be a bit humiliating, even for a country that can survive and maintain a war on its hydrocarbon revenues,” he said.
The risk of default emerged in late February after Russia invaded Ukraine and sanctions were imposed to sever the country from international financial markets. In late May, Russia tried to navigate tightening sanctions that cut off its access to American banks and bondholders by sending the payments to a Moscow-based institution. But ultimately, the funds didn’t make it all the way to bondholders’ accounts because of far-reaching American and European sanctions.
News of Monday’s apparent default showed “just how strong” international sanctions against Russia have been, a senior U.S. administration official said in a background briefing for reporters at the Group of 7 summit in Germany, highlighting the “dramatic” effect on Russia’s economy.
This default is unusual because it’s a result of economic sanctions blocking transactions, not because the Russian government has run out of money. Moscow’s finances remain resilient after months of war, with nearly $600 billion in foreign currency and gold reserves, though about half of that is frozen overseas. And Russia continues to receive a steady influx of cash from sales of oil and gas. Still, a default would be a stain on the country’s reputation that will linger in investors’ memories and probably push up its borrowing costs if it is able to tap international capital markets.
Unlike other major defaults in recent history, such as in Greece and Argentina, this default is expected to have a relatively small impact on international markets and Russia’s budget. For one thing, Russia has already lost access to international investors, traditionally the worst consequence of default.
“The only clear negative outcome of the default is that the external market will be effectively closed for the ministry of finance,” said Sofya Donets, an economist at Renaissance Capital in Moscow. “But it’s already closed.”
The head of Russia’s central bank, Elvira Nabiullina, said this month that there wouldn’t be any immediate consequences of a default because there had already been an outflow of investors and a drop in the value of Russia’s assets. The central bank is more concerned about inflation, most recently at about 17 percent, and supporting the economy through a “large-scale structural transformation” after an exodus of foreign companies and imports.
The Western sanctions alone are expected to block Russia from large parts of international capital markets for a long time. Regardless, Russia has been reluctant to give up its reputation as a reliable borrower, which was hard won after its economic collapse in 1998, when the government defaulted on ruble-denominated bonds amid a currency crisis.
Last month, Russia insisted that it had fulfilled its debt obligations by sending funds to its payment agent in Moscow, the National Settlement Depository. Since then, the depository has fallen under European sanctions, further restricting Russia’s ability to pay bondholders. The finance minister, Anton Siluanov, has accused the West of artificially manufacturing a default and has threatened legal action against U.S. authorities.
This is Russia’s first major default on foreign debt since 1918, soon after the Bolshevik Revolution.
On Wednesday, President Vladimir V. Putin signed a decree saying that future payments to holders of debt denominated in dollars or euros would be made through Russian financial institutions and that the obligations would be considered met if paid in rubles and converted. Most of the bond contracts don’t allow for payment in rubles.
Over the following two days, nearly $400 million in dollar-denominated debt payments were due from bonds that had 30-day and 15-day grace periods. The finance ministry said it had sent the payments, in rubles, using the new procedure laid out by the presidential decree. But it remains unclear how foreign investors will gain access to the funds.
Overseas investors held about half of Russia’s $40 billion in outstanding foreign-currency debt at the end of last year. As the risk of default grew this year, PIMCO, the investment management firm, saw the value of its Russian bond holdings decline by more than $1 billion, and pension funds and mutual funds with exposure to emerging market debt have also experienced declines.
But exposure to Russian assets is limited in the United States and Europe because sanctions imposed since Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 have discouraged investors who didn’t want the geopolitical risk.
By international standards, Russia doesn’t have that much debt. Its public debt was only about 17 percent of gross domestic product last year, according to the International Monetary Fund, one of just a handful of countries with debt ratios under 25 percent. The United States, whose assets are in demand among global investors and deemed low risk, has a debt ratio of 125 percent of G.D.P.
Russia’s low debt levels are partly a result of “this new geopolitical era” since the annexation of Crimea, Ms. Donets said. “But it’s also a product of the default of 1998,” she added, when “the ministry of finance was burned badly.” Since then, the ministry has not been that active in issuing new foreign-currency debt, she said.
Russia hasn’t relied on borrowing from international investors for its budget. The finance ministry hasn’t issued dollar-denominated debt since 2019, when U.S. sanctions barred American banks from buying the debt directly. It last issued euro-denominated debt in May 2021.
Instead, Russia has depended on its oil and gas exports, and those dollar revenues that went into reserves and grew the national wealth fund.
“Why would you borrow and pay additional rates when you are a country that is accumulating oil funds, accumulating in hard currency, a country which has $600 billion in reserves?” Ms. Donets said. 
The war hasn’t changed that calculation. Russia’s current account surplus, a broad measure of trade and investment, has soared as revenues from energy exports jumped, capital controls stopped investments fleeing and sanctions slashed imports. It has helped push the ruble to its highest level in seven years.
If Russia does issue more debt, it will lean on local banks and residents in the short term to buy ruble-denominated bonds.
Russia “will have no access to the capital markets until the war stops and the sanctions are lifted,” said Richard Portes, an economics professor at the London School of Business.
The long-term consequences of a default are unclear because of the unusual nature of the financial breach. But it’s possible to envision a future where Russia is able to sell debt on international markets again, analysts say, if the war ends and Russia’s geopolitical ambitions change. Without Mr. Putin and with hundreds of billions of dollars in international reserves unfrozen, it could return to markets.
“Capital market access can be restored very quickly,” Mr. Portes said. “Once Russia is back in good political graces and sanctions are lifted.”
“If it’s not a political pariah, it won’t be an economic pariah,” he added.
Reporting was contributed by Ivan Nechepurenko, Andrés R. Martínez, Jim Tankersley and Alan Rappeport.
By Stanley Reed
Leaders of the Group of 7 nations meeting in Germany, seeking a new way to throttle Russia’s finances while limiting the harm to Western economies, are discussing imposing a ceiling on the price paid for Russian oil. Details of the plan are still being discussed, but the idea is to limit how much Russia can earn from the oil it sells while still keeping markets well supplied.
A price cap is being considered because, despite sanctions imposed by the West after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Moscow is still earning substantial revenue from oil.
While Russian output has declined around 8 percent since the war began, prices have risen, generating a steady of supply of cash to support the government. Crimping that revenue stream is a goal at the G7 conference,.
The United States and other countries are looking for ways to restrict Russia’s oil earnings while avoiding taking crude off the market, which would result in raising prices. Energy prices are contributing to sharp increases in inflation, and the Biden administration is concerned that recent European plans to ban around 90 percent of Russian oil exports by the end of the year may lead to higher gasoline prices.
The White House appears to be trying to find a magic bullet that would punish Russia without raising oil prices and putting more pressure on consumers in the United States and elsewhere. 
It remains unclear how caps would work, and there is more speculation than specifics. One approach that might be applied would be to put pressure on Western banking, insurance and shipping companies involved in the transport of Russian oil to drive down its price.
The countries likely to support a price cap include the United States, Canada and others that have already banned imports of Russian oil. The European Union, which is phasing out Russian crude, also may be willing to sign on.
But that leaves many other countries that are much more difficult to influence.
“If they continue to just focus on the E.U. and its allies, then the rest of the world will find a way to take Russian oil,” said James Davis, a director at FGE, a consulting firm.
A price cap might run into resistance from some of Russia’s major customers. Since the war in Ukraine began in February, India has emerged as a key buyer for Russian crude. Indian refiners’ purchases have soared to about one million barrels a day recently, compared with just 100,000 barrels a day on average during 2021.
China and Turkey are also key customers, taking advantage of discounts on Russian crude. None of these countries has agreed to go along with Western sanctions on Russian oil, and there is no guarantee that they would support new measures like those under discussion. China, for instance, may be happy to buy oil at low prices but would prefer to negotiate its own terms rather than apply a Western price cap, analysts say.
Even in Europe there may be obstacles. The 27 European Union members remain collectively Russia’s largest customer, and despite sanctions they averaged the same levels of imports in May as during 2021. The negotiations that led its agreement to cut Russian imports were tricky, with Hungary insisting on an exemption for landlocked countries. Brussels would reopen that deal warily.
Russia is being forced to find new markets for its oil, but it is not a spent force in either energy or geopolitics. It remains a key oil and natural gas exporter in a very tight market and has other geopolitical leverage, like its role as a major arms supplier to India. There are many ways Russia could use this clout to try to frustrate a price cap, including further tightening or stopping natural gas supplies to Germany and other European Union countries or leaning on India to keep buying crude.
While the details of the plan are still murky, analysts are skeptical that it would have much effect on price, which is more likely to be determined by global supply and demand. Brent crude, for instance, was up about 1.5 percent on Monday to about $115 a barrel as the G7 discussions proceeded.
Analysts say there are several reasons for current high prices. They include worries about a lack of output capacity and rock-bottom storage tank levels. Concerns about supplies from Russia also play a role.
“A cap on Russian crude prices is not going to change that materially to bring prices down,” Mr. Davis said.
Depending on where the price is set, refiners in countries like India and China could well gain an advantage on competitors in Europe and elsewhere, because access to cheaper crude might mean that the diesel and other products these refiners produce would be cheaper as well. Low prices might also stimulate additional purchases of Russian oil, and countries that have banned Russian crude could wind up paying more than those participating in the price-cap scheme.
It seems likely. As the war in Ukraine drags on, analysts say, the West seems to be moving toward an increasingly strict sanctions regime on Russia, potentially analogous to the one that has been imposed on Iran, another major oil producer. There is little doubt that the United States is becoming increasingly influential in determining what countries can produce oil and how much. Still, there is skepticism about how effective the moves under discussion will be.
“If the U.S. is really determined, it may be able to push through a watered-down version” of a price cap scheme, said Richard Bronze, head of geopolitics at Energy Aspects, a market research firm. “But that is unlikely to have much real impact on flows.”
By Patricia Cohen
The decision over the weekend to ban the purchase of newly mined and refined gold from Russia is the latest effort by the United States, Britain and their allies to notch up the wave of sanctions concentrated on Russia in response to its four-month-old invasion of Ukraine.
The announcement, made as President Biden and other leaders from the Group of 7 nations gathered for meetings this week in Germany, builds on steps already taken to cut off Russia from the international financial system, deprive it of additional revenues that are helping fund its war in Ukraine and punish President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and wealthy business executives in his circle.
Ukraine’s allies have already prohibited most trade with Russia, frozen hundreds of billions of dollars of assets belonging to the Bank of Russia held in their own financial institutions and blocked Russian banks from using the messaging system, known as SWIFT, that undergirds the system of international payments.
Russia, one of the world’s biggest producers of gold, cranked up the mining of new gold to compensate for some of the paralyzed assets, Christopher Swift, a national security lawyer at Foley & Lardner, said.
The Bullion Market Association in London, a major hub of the global gold trade, had already suspended transactions with six Russian silver and gold refineries in March.
Mr. Swift, who previously worked at the Treasury Department’s office of foreign assets control, said: “In order to make up for reserves held by Russian companies and oligarchs, they brought new gold online. The G7 is shutting down access to this new gold.”
Russia’s billionaire business magnates have been buying gold bullion in an attempt to blunt the impact of the sanctions. Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain underscored the point on Sunday, saying the move would “directly hit Russian oligarchs.”
Whether this latest move, which is scheduled to be formally announced on Tuesday, will also — in Mr. Johnson’s words — “strike at the heart of Putin’s war machine” is more debatable.
Ukraine’s allies have struggled to keep the pressure on and deprive Mr. Putin of resources for his war machine without putting their own economies at too much risk. The balancing act is particularly difficult for the European Union, which heavily depends on Russian oil and gas.
Skyrocketing oil prices combined with an enormous appetite for fuel around the world mean that Russia has been raking in even more money from the sale of crude than it did before the war, despite selling at a discount.
After weeks of tense negotiations, the European Union agreed last month to largely ban the import of Russian oil by the end of this year as well as prohibit European countries from insuring tankers carrying Russian oil. But so far the question of whether to ban Russian gas — which is much harder to find a substitute for than oil — has been off the table. Germany’s government and industrial leaders have warned that a gas embargo would be catastrophic for its economy.
Talking about the sanctions rollout, Jeffrey Schott, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington, said the buildup of pressure on the Russian economy “is going as planned.” He added that “if there’s any surprises, it’s how coherent the policy coordination has been across the Atlantic and East Asian countries.”
The various alliance members have been casting about for ways increase the penalties one notch at a time. The gold ban “gives the governments of the G7 some runway and the opportunity to ramp up,” said Andrew Shoyer, a lawyer at Sidley who advises companies on compliance with sanctions.
The distinction between newly mined and refined gold, and gold that was exported or purchased before the ban, is in line with the sanctions framework that prohibits new investment in Russian companies while permitting existing investments, Mr. Shoyer said.
The new ban is also aimed at depriving Russia of additional revenues earned from exporting gold, which is used for jewelry, in some industrial processes and for investment. As is often the case during crises, the purchase of gold for investment jumped after the coronavirus pandemic started upending the global economy. Investors expect it to retain its value. Central banks, including the Federal Reserve, had bought Russian gold through intermediaries.
Last year, Russia earned more than $15 billion from its gold exports, according to the British government. Since gold is widely held in reserve by central banks around the world, Russia had a ready market.
“Russia is a big producer of gold, and it is a reserve asset,” said Lucrezia Reichlin, a professor at the London Business School. “If they cannot sell, then that source of income is gone.”
After the early rounds of sanctions had stopped much of its existing international gold trade, Russia’s central bank announced that it would resume buying domestically produced gold, which was also seen as a way of helping to prop up its currency. The gold held by Russia’s central bank is estimated to be worth between $100 billion and $140 billion.
“Fundamentally this is an incremental tightening of the sanctions rather than a significant escalation,” Mr. Swift of Foley & Lardner said. “If your goal is to undermine Russia’s economic ability to wage war in Ukraine, this is a necessary but not sufficient measure.”
But he added, “If the G7 wants to have a strategic effect, then they really need to think about what they’re going to do about Russian gas.”
An earlier version of this article misstated the surname of an economist from London Business School. She is Lucrezia Reichlin, not Reichlein.
By Jack Ewing
Credit Suisse must pay fines and compensation of 21 million Swiss francs, or $22 million, for lax controls that allowed an employee of the bank to help a Bulgarian drug ring launder money, Switzerland’s Federal Criminal Court said on Monday.
The ruling was the latest setback for the bank, which issued a profit warning this month and has been suffering from boardroom turmoil.
Credit Suisse, based in Zurich, said it would appeal the decision, which stems from the actions of a bank employee in 2007 and 2008. The employee, who was not named, helped the cocaine-smuggling ring make bank transfers “despite concrete indications regarding the money’s criminal origins,” the court said in a statement.
During court hearings in February, the Credit Suisse employee testified that the bank was aware that the money — sometimes delivered in suitcases stuffed with cash — came from a gang that had been tied to murders and large-scale smuggling of cocaine from South America, Reuters reported.
Credit Suisse shared responsibility for the money laundering because the bank’s management, legal team and compliance department failed to ensure that anti-money-laundering rules were being followed, the court said.
Credit Suisse said Monday that it “is continuously testing its anti-money-laundering framework and has been strengthening it over time.”
The bank warned investors on June 8 that it was likely to report a loss for the quarter, its third in a row and an ominous sign as economic growth slows.
Credit Suisse is still recovering from billion-dollar entanglements with Greensill Capital, a bankrupt British lender, and Archegos, a collapsed hedge fund. In January, the bank’s chairman, António Horta-Osório, stepped down, less than a year after he was brought in to clean up the mess. He resigned amid an investigation into whether his travels broke pandemic rules. In April, Credit Suisse announced the departures of its finance chief, head of Asia and general counsel.
In its decision Monday, the Swiss court fined the bank 2 million francs for the money-laundering violation, confiscated 12 million francs held by the gang at the bank and ordered an additional payment of 19 million francs to cover funds it couldn’t recover because of “internal deficiencies” at Credit Suisse, the court said.
The bank employee, who has since left Credit Suisse, was sentenced to 20 months in prison for money laundering. A Bulgarian citizen accused of setting up the money-laundering operation for the drug ring was sentenced to 36 months in prison. A second Bulgarian citizen was sentenced to 12 months for acting as an intermediary.
All the sentences will be substantially reduced if the defendants maintain good behavior, the court ruled.
By Emma Goldberg and Julie Creswell
As people bought up Plan B and other emergency contraceptive pills after the Supreme Court’s decision overturning Roe v. Wade on Friday, at least two major pharmacies put limits on purchases or deliveries of the pills, which typically cost $10 to $50.
CVS said it would temporarily cap purchases of emergency contraceptives at three packs “to ensure equitable access and consistent supply on store shelves.”
On its website, Walgreens said the product was available for pickup in stores on Monday, and a spokeswoman said purchases were not being limited at this time. But the pharmacy said it would temporarily stop delivering the contraceptives to customers’ homes.
“Walgreens is still able to meet demand in-store,” the spokeswoman said in an email, adding, “We are working to restock online inventory for ship-to-home.”
Kroger’s website said its Plan B stock in its supermarkets was low. The company did not respond to a request for comment. Amazon’s website had various emergency contraceptives available, but most of them not for delivery before mid-July. The company did not immediately respond to an email asking if the fulfillment times were unusual.
Walmart, which had limited some purchases of the pills, said in a statement: “Many of our products have online purchase limits in place. During times of fluctuating demand, these limits may change.”
Birth control is legal in the United States, but some legal experts have warned that legislators will use abortion bans to limit access to contraceptives.
Morning-after pills can temporarily interfere with ovulation and prevent pregnancy if taken within 72 hours of sexual activity. Some companies that sell emergency contraception said sales jumped significantly after a draft ruling that was leaked last month revealed the Supreme Court was likely to overturn Roe v. Wade, ending federal abortion rights.
Abortion pills, which are different from emergency contraception and were used in more than half of recent abortions in the United States, have also become more sought-after since Friday.
By Emma Goldberg
Relatively few major companies have commented directly on the Supreme Court’s ruling that overturned Roe v. Wade, but far more have come forward to assure their employees that they would reimburse travel expenses related to abortions. 
Those employers, though, cover health care for only a fraction of the millions of people living in states where abortion is or could soon be banned. The country’s largest private employer, Walmart, declined to comment on the court’s decision.
Here are some of the companies that have committed to covering travel expenses:
Wells Fargo told its employees on Monday that the firm would expand its existing travel benefits for medical coverage to include reimbursement for abortion travel “in accordance with applicable law.”
PricewaterhouseCoopers said on Saturday its employees could apply for financial assistance for expenses associated with medical procedures. “I know that some of you will think that I haven’t said enough in this note and that some of you will think that I’ve said too much,” said the firm’s chairman in a message to staff. “What I hope you take away from it is that I care.”
Douglas Elliman said it would expand its health care coverage to reimburse employees who have to travel to get abortions: “Douglas Elliman stands firmly behind women and their reproductive rights,” said company leaders in an email to staff.
Nordstrom said it created a new travel benefit for employees who could not get abortions locally: “While we had reason to believe this ruling was coming, we recognize that this news still weighs heavily on many of us,” company leaders wrote in a message to staff.
Open Sea said it would cover travel for employee abortions. “We are heartbroken, and frustrated, and overwhelmed by the challenge ahead of us,” company leaders said in a message to staff. “We believe that access to safe and legal abortion is absolutely critical to keeping women and those with female assigned reproductive systems healthy and empowered to make their own choices about their future, and to pursue their missions and ambitions.”
By Isabella Simonetti
Global markets were mixed on Monday, as recession worries persist after a week in which stocks posted strong gains.
The S&P 500, which is down about 19 percent since the beginning of the year, fell about 0.3 percent by the end of the day, retreating slightly after its best day in two years on Friday. A report on durable goods orders, a signal of the strength of business investment, came in better than expected on Monday, as did data on pending home sales.
The stocks of major airlines fell, including United Airlines, which was down 3.4 percent, after mass flight cancellations over the weekend, as increased travel demand faces staffing shortages ahead of what’s expected to be a busy period of travel ahead of the July 4 holiday.
In Europe, the Stoxx 600 was up 0.5 percent. Asian stocks jumped sharply higher, with the prospect of looser pandemic restrictions in China helping the Hang Seng in Hong Kong rise 2.3 percent, while in Japan, the Nikkei 225 gained 1.4 percent.
The 10-year Treasury yield, a gauge of borrowing costs, rose somewhat to 3.2 percent. The price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil, the U.S. benchmark, rose more than 2 percent, to about $109.81.
By Matthew Goldstein
The public listing of former President Donald J. Trump’s social media company took a fresh blow on Monday when the cash-rich shell company merging with Mr. Trump’s company disclosed in a regulatory filing that a federal grand jury in New York recently issued subpoenas to the company and its directors.
The grand jury subpoenas were issued within the past week, according to the filing by Digital World Acquisition, a special purpose acquisition company, or SPAC, that announced a merger with Trump Media & Technology Group in October. After the merger, Trump Media would assume Digital World’s listing and trade as a public company.
The disclosure by Digital World is the first indication that federal prosecutors in Manhattan have joined in the scrutiny of the merger between Digital World and Trump Media, which has been under investigation by financial regulators for months. The investigation threatens to further delay the completion of the merger, which would provide Mr. Trump’s company and its social media platform, Truth Social, with up to $1.3 billion in capital, in addition to a stock market listing.
The Securities and Exchange Commission and Financial Industry Regulatory Authority opened investigations within weeks of the merger announcement. Digital World’s filing on Monday said the grand jury subpoenas sought information similar to what the S.E.C. had already requested.
The federal grand jury also sought “information regarding Rocket One Capital.” The filing did not disclose what information the grand jury wanted about Rocket One, a venture capital firm in Miami.
In a separate filing, Digital World disclosed that Bruce Garelick had resigned as a director. Mr. Garelick is listed in Digital World filings as the chief strategy officer at Rocket One.
Mr. Garelick did not immediately respond to request for comment. The filing did not give a reason for his resignation.
The S.E.C. investigation has focused on whether there were serious discussions between the leadership of Digital World and Trump Media before the SPAC went public in September and why those talks were not disclosed in regulatory filings. SPACs, which raise money to go public in the hopes of finding a merger candidate, are not supposed to have an acquisition target in mind when they raise money from investors.
Regulators also requested information about unusual trading activity in securities of Digital World before the merger announcement. There was a big surge in trading of Digital World warrants — a security that gives the holder the right to buy shares at later date and at a specified price — before the merger announcement.
Trump Media issued a statement in response to Digital World’s disclosure that said it was “focused on reclaiming the American people’s right to free expression.” The company added, “We encourage — and will cooperate with — oversight that supports the S.E.C.’s important mission of protecting retail investors.”
Grand jury subpoenas are typically issued in connection with a potential criminal investigation. A spokesman for the U.S. attorney in Manhattan, Damian Williams, declined to comment on the grand jury subpoenas issued to Digital World.
Trump Media’s Truth Social, a Twitter-like social media clone that Mr. Trump has taken to posting messages on and, after a slow start, has begun gathering adherents, especially among conservatives and other supporters of the former president. Mr. Trump was barred from Twitter in January 2021 after repeatedly posting messages that claimed the 2020 presidential election was stolen and for not quickly denouncing the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol building.
Elon Musk, the multibillionaire entrepreneur who has made an offer to buy Twitter, has said he would permit Mr. Trump to return to the much bigger social media platform if he completed his deal. Mr. Trump has said he has no intention of returning to Twitter.
But a licensing deal between Trump Media and the former president permits him to post messages of a political nature on Twitter or other social media platforms.
In regulatory filings, Digital World has said Truth Social “exists to provide its users a true free speech platform and avoid cancellation by Big Tech.”
Mr. Trump is the chairman of Trump Media, a title he is expected to retain if the merger is completed. Devin Nunes, a former Republican congressman from California, is the chief executive of Trump Media, which recently moved its corporate office to Sarasota, Fla.
It does not appear anyone associated with Trump Media has received any subpoenas, according to Digital World’s filings.
It is unclear how Rocket One Capital has been drawn into the investigation. The venture capital firm is led by Michael Shvartsman, who did not return requests for comment. Shortly after Digital World disclosed the grand jury subpoena, Rocket One took down much of its public website.
The parallel investigation by federal prosecutors and securities regulators comes as the clock is ticking down on the Sept. 8 deadline for completing the merger. The proposed merger agreement permits the deadline for the deal being extended to March 8, 2023.
But shareholders in SPACs have become increasingly reluctant to extend the deadlines for completing mergers as the share prices of many SPACs have cratered in recent months.
Shares of Digital World, which closed last week at $27.82, fell more than 10 percent in early trading on Monday. The stock has declined more than 70 percent from its March peak, but remains well above its $10 listing price.
If the merger is not completed, Digital World will have to return the nearly $300 million raised in the I.P.O. to shareholders. The $1 billion that dozens of hedge funds have said they would invest in a completed deal would be canceled.
The poor performance of SPACs has led to a number of planned mergers being canceled by agreement of the parties. The proposed deal between Trump Media and Digital World permits the parties to mutually agree to terminate the deal.
Earlier this year, Trump Media raised about $15 million in financing from a group of unnamed investors.
Kitty Bennett contributed research.
An earlier version of this article misstated the location of Trump Media’s corporate office. The office is located in Sarasota, Fla., not Naples, Fla.
