
		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	

					Meryl Streep's first breakout role was in the CBS miniseries "Holocaust," a drama about a Jewish family living in Nazi Germany. Streep won a Primetime Emmy for her performance, which opened many more doors in Hollywood.				

					Everett Collection / Everett Col				

					In 1979, Streep starred in "Kramer vs. Kramer" alongside Dustin Hoffman. Streep won a Golden Globe and the Oscar for Best Supporting Actress for her role in the film.				

					©Columbia Pictures/courtesy Eve				

					Streep continued to pursue stage acting throughout her career. Here, she performs in Shakespeare's "The Taming of the Shrew" at the Public Theater in 1979.				

					Getty Images				

					In 1985, Streep starred alongside Robert Redford in "Out of Africa," which cemented her reputation as one of the most talented actors in Hollywood.				

					Corbis via Getty Images				

					In 1995, Streep starred in Clint Eastwood's "Bridges of Madison County." Streep was nominated for an Oscar for her performance.				

					Getty Images				

					In one of her most recognizable roles of the 2000s, Streep played a fashion editor inspired by Anna Wintour in "The Devil Wears Prada" in 2006.				

					©20thCentFox/Courtesy Everett C				

					Streep starred in the film adaptation of smash hit musical "Mamma Mia" in 2008. The musical was an instant success, quickly becoming Streep's highest grossing film after netting $602 million at the box office.				

					©Universal/courtesy Everett Collection				

					In 2009, Streep played legendary chef Julia Child in the biopic "Julie & Julia." Streep was nominated for Best Actress for her performance.				

					©Columbia Pictures/courtesy Eve				

					Streep returned to musicals in 2014 when she portrayed the Witch in Disney's film adaptation of Stephen Sondheim's "Into the Woods."				

					ZUMAPRESS.com				

					Streep also continued to star in critically acclaimed television series, including HBO's "Big Little Lies" in 2018.				

					Jennifer Clasen/HBO				
