ADVERTISEMENT
The Supreme Court on Monday ruled in favor of a Washington state football coach who sought to kneel and pray on the field after games. The court ruled 6-3 along ideological lines that former high school football coach Joe Kennedy’s prayer was…
Advertisement
The House Select Committee investigating the Jan. 6 Capitol riot just scheduled a last-minute hearing on Tuesday after saying last week it was delaying the remainder of hearings until July. 
Advertisement
Paige Spiranac and Isabelle Shee may be among the most notable names in the golf influencer space, but a new social media sensation is quickly rising in the ranks.
Advertisement
Vice President Kamala Harris is facing backlash from liberals after posting a “tone-deaf” photo of her vowing to fight for abortion rights — as she watched coverage of the nationwide Roe v. Wade protests unfold from Air Force…
An 11,000 square-foot Mediterranean mansion complete with a Millennium Falcon-themed theater has hit the market for $15 million.
​More than a million voters have shifted to the Republican Party over the past year, including tens of thousands of swing voters, according to a report Monday.
The model returned the favor, reacting to an Instagram photo of the athlete playing baseball after news broke that their two-year relationship is over.
Judge Robin Giarrusso on Monday at least temporarily sided with Louisiana abortion providers who filed a lawsuit arguing that such a rapid state ban violated their due-process protections.
The “Material Girl” singer assured her followers that women are strong and will fight to change the laws on abortion so that there is federal protection.
Mayor Eric Adams called for Gov. Kathy Hochul to “lead the charge” in mapping out where handgun possession can be banned after last week’s Supreme Court ruling.
He’s reportedly setting sail with “Pirates” once again as part of a $301M deal. The Post has reached out to reps for Depp and Walt Disney Pictures for comment.
Ellie Musgrove was left stunned after a routine optometrist appointment ended with her being rushed into surgery the same day for a deadly brain tumor.
The Avalanche set a “new record” for damaging the Stanley Cup.
“People are shocked when they see Stephanie Tanner, something happened to her, and all of a sudden, it makes it more real,” the “Full House” alum said.
In his new Hulu documentary, “Life in Pink,” the “Emo Girl” rocker detailed a dark night in July 2020 while he was mourning the loss of his father.
Russian missiles hit a shopping center in the Ukrainian city of Kremenchuk Monday, killing at least 2 people and wounding 20 others, according to government officials.
A barmaid has revealed she has such bad amnesia that she regularly wakes up thinking she is 6 again — forgetting all her memories and even thinking her fiancé is a kidnapper. Chloe Barnard can wake up next to her fiancé not knowing who…
Freddie Freeman had an emotional return to Atlanta as a member of the Dodgers on Friday. While Clayton Kershaw appreciated the occasion, he also had a message for his teammate.
Taking to Instagram on Sunday, the second-year Jets quarterback posted a trio of photos from what appeared to be a recent trip to Mexico with his family.
Like uncle like nephew. Arch Manning is following down Uncle Peyton’s path as one of the most coveted recruits in college football. Last week, Arch committed to play for the Texas Longhorns. Peyton understands his nephew’s…

The supermodel, 26, and the NBA star, 25, spent some quality time together at Soho House in Malibu, Calif., on Sunday amid reports they called it quits.
A Japanese castaway who spent nearly three decades living alone on a remote island before being forced back to civilization has returned to his former home to say “farewell,” heartwarming video shows.
The Good American founder showed off two Instagram videos of her posing in one of the brand’s sexy bikinis, showing off her toned physique.
Credit Suisse was convicted by Switzerland’s Federal Criminal Court of failing to prevent money laundering in the country’s first criminal trial of one of its major banks.  A former employee was found guilty of money…
It’s time for some major Fourth of July appliance savings.

				Get the best of the New York Post				straight to your inbox.
				Choose the newsletters that are right for you.			

				Keep reminding yourself that you are negotiating from a position of strength and make sure the people you deal with know it too. The Sun in your sign is about to be boosted by a powerful new moon, so you don't have to give ground to anyone.			
