
Submit 



Δ

Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
A mass shooting in Harlem killed a college basketball star and injured eight people early Monday, leaving a total of at least 20 victims shot citywide in fewer than 6 hours — and signaling an ominous start to summer. 
At least 13 people were also shot citywide Friday through Sunday, authorities said.
“It’s only going to get worse,” a veteran NYPD detective in Manhattan told The Post of the bloodshed. “Unless the [Manhattan] DA starts enforcing these gun laws, this violence will continue, and it’s going to be total anarchy in the summer.”
Two women and seven men, including hoopster Darius Lee, 21, were shot near the intersection of East 139th Street and Fifth Avenue around 12:40 a.m. Monday, according to the NYPD. Lee, who police said was not an intended target, died of his wounds.
Rapper Rich Rhymer was trying to film a music video nearby when a dispute broke out between two groups, and the shooting occurred, cops said. It wasn’t clear if any of the people involved in the video shoot was part of the deadly fight, officials said. 
Responding officers found five people shot on a footpath just under the Madison Avenue Bridge, said NYPD Chief Brian McGee, commanding officer of Detective Borough Manhattan North, at a morning press conference. 
Those victims were transported to local hospitals by EMS, McGee said. The four other victims were taken to area hospitals by private means. 
The surviving victims were another 21-year-old man, a 22-year-old man, two 24-year-old men, a 31-year-old man, a 42-year-old man and two women, 22 and 23, cops said. 
“It’s Father’s Day weekend,” Police Commissioner Keechant Sewell told reporters early Monday. “It’s a weekend where people were supposed to be able to enjoy themselves with their families.”
“The emboldened individuals responsible for this are exactly who our officers are battling every day to make our city safe,” she said.
The Manhattan detective, with two decades on the job, ripped borough DA Alvin Bragg for his alleged soft-on-crime policies that have included not seeking bail or prison time for most defendants and downgrading certain felonies to misdemeanors.
“Gov. [Kathy] Hochul needs to remove Alvin Bragg. The criminals know to come to Manhattan because they know they’re going home after they’re arrested,” the source said.
The detective added, “You can’t put a band-aid on a bullet wound. We don’t have enough personnel.
“Now [Mayor Eric Adams] wants to separate cops and have them go out alone, and it’s not like it was in the ’90s, when people had some respect for them. He’s putting the cops in danger,” the cop said, referring to Hizzoner’s comments last week saying he wants the NYPD to start solo officer patrols in city subways to cover more ground.
“And any cop who came out in the past eight years? We call them the eight-year cops. They came out under [former Mayor Bill de Blasio], are the soft cops, and you can’t blame them. That’s the way they were trained. They want to negotiate everything, and you can’t negotiate with criminals.
“This is a physical job, and sometimes you have to get physical. When you got physical under de Blasio, you would get your gun and shield taken. At least Eric’s letting the police police. But it’s eight years of a mess that [de Blasio] created that has to be unfolded.”
Mayor Eric Adams said he was in Harlem until 2 a.m. after the shooting.
“We are going to continue to zero in on removing guns off the street,” Adams said. “We have removed over 3,000 guns thus far. We’re going to continue to go after those shooters, and I’m happy to hear that the court system is picking up some of these cases.
“But we have to move even further to ensure dangerous people go to trial and [get a] determination that they are guilty and serve time,” he said. 
Monday’s nine Harlem gunshot victims were among at least 20 people shot citywide between 8:45 p.m. Sunday and 2:30 a.m. Monday, law enforcement said.
Three people were shot on Taft Avenue near Westervelt Avenue in the Brighton Heights section of Staten Island around the same time as the Harlem mass shooting, authorities said.
A 22-year-old woman was shot in the back, a 32-year-old was grazed in the stomach and a 47-year-old grazed in the buttocks, cops said.
The woman was taken to Richmond University Medical Center by EMS, and the men were walk-ins at the same hospital, authorities said.
All three are listed in stable condition.
A few minutes later, a man was shot in the neck during a dispute on Grand Avenue near 69th Lane in Maspeth, Queens, cops said. 
He was taken to the Elmhurst Hospital Center with non-life-threatening injuries.
In the Bronx, a 30-year-old man was shot in the arm on East Burnside Avenue near Creston Avenue around 1:15 a.m., authorities said.
He was taken to St. Barnabas Hospital in stable condition, cops said.
And about an hour later, a man was shot in the groin and a woman in the left leg on Stanley Avenue near Van Siclen Avenue, part of East New York’s Linden Houses, cops said.
Both suffered non-life-threatening injuries. 
Around 11:20 p.m. Sunday, a 27-year-old man was struck in the stomach on Jerome Avenue near Featherbed Lane when shots rang out during a dispute, cops said.
He was taken to the same hospital, also with non-life-threatening injuries.
About five minutes earlier, a 50-year-old man was blasted in the chest and leg on West 121st Street near Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard in Harlem, cops said.
He was taken to Mount Sinai Morningside in stable condition, authorities said.
In Brooklyn’s Canarsie neighborhood, a 28-year-old man was shot on East 94th Street near Avenue K around 9:40 p.m., police said.
He was taken to an unspecified hospital in stable condition.
Around an hour earlier, a 45-year-old woman – an innocent bystander – was shot in the back during another gathering on Nelson Avenue near West 174th Street in Morris Heights, cops said.
She was taken to St. Barnabas Hospital, where she was listed in stable condition.
On Father’s Day overall, nine people were shot in seven incidents in the city. That figure includes those injured after 8:45 p.m. but does not cover the nine more Harlem victims shot early Monday.
Six people were shot in as many incidents Saturday and two people in as many incidents Friday. 
The city saw more bloodshed on Sunday’s date last year — with 13 people shot in 10 incidents, cops said. On Saturday’s date in 2021, four people were shot in as many incidents, and on Friday’s date, there were three gunshot victims in as many incidents.
“I think they’re trying, but I don’t know what you could do,” said resident Sean Ogburn, who lives next to the spot where Lee was shot and killed, of city officials. 
“Most of the guns don’t come from the city,” said Ogburn, 49. “It all comes from out of state, so as long as other states are going to be lax on guns and allow people to get them and access them freely, they’re going to come up here.”
Additional reporting by Kenneth Garger, Haley Brown and Jorge Fitz-Gibbon
Share Selection
