
Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
Three people, including an off-duty correction officer, were shot during a party at a Queens motorcycle club on Sunday night. 
The shooting happened during a BBQ and biker meet-up to honor a friend who had died outside of a Queens Village motorcycle club near Jamaica Avenue and 214th Place just after 8 p.m., according to police and the Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association. 
The off-duty CO, David Donegan, allegedly spotted another man, Mark Gibbs, whip out a gun and shoot at a vehicle, according to police sources. 
Donegan returned fire, striking Gibbs three times about the body. Another gunman then shot at Donegan and struck him once in the left leg, the sources told the Post. 
A third victim was also shot in the exchange of gunfire, which happened outside the Square Biz motorcycle clubhouse on its annual “Spazz Day” ride and barbecue. 
COBA President Benny Boscio said the shooters had fired at the crowd, and Donegan, and his quick response to the gunfire saved the lives of others. 
“Thankfully, Officer Donegan, who was off duty at the time, immediately pulled out his weapon and engaged them, firing several shots. During the exchange of shots fired, our officer was hit in the leg and transferred to a nearby hospital,” Boscio said. 
“While the police investigation remains ongoing, one thing is crystal clear, had our officer not exercised his training and made a split second decision, this incident could have cost many innocent people their lives, including his own. His actions were nothing short of heroic.” 
Boscio thanked Mayor Eric Adams for later visiting Donegan in the hospital and prayed for his recovery. 
Hours before gunfire erupted, the motorcycle club posted videos of the event which showed people dancing along to the “Cha Cha Slide,” a DJ playing music on the street and motorcycles lining Jamaica Avenue. 
The joyous scene was replaced with the sound of gunfire, roaring ambulances and spent shell casings following the shooting. Police recovered three used casings from the scene. 
The correction officer was taken to Manhasset Hospital and Gibbs was taken to Jamaica Hospital. 
The third person shot is also being treated at an area hospital. 
All three are expected to survive. 
Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association President Benny Boscio released a statement Monday praising the Officer.
“Yesterday evening, as a crowd of people were observing an event remembering the passing of a friend, two individuals pulled out weapons and pointed them, firing at the crowd including our Correction Officer David Donegan,” Boscio said. “Thankfully, Officer Donegan, who was off duty at the time, immediately pulled out his weapon and engaged them, firing several shots. During the exchange of shots fired, our officer was hit in the leg and transferred to a nearby hospital. While the police investigation remains ongoing, one thing is crystal clear, had our officer not exercised his training and made a split second decision, this incident could have cost many innocent people their lives, including his own. His actions were nothing short of heroic.”
Share Selection
