
Submit 



Δ

Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
Grammy-winning rapper Roddy Ricch was busted with a gun and large-capacity magazine outside the Governors Ball festival Saturday night, but the charges against him were dropped a day later, cops and law-enforcement sources said.
The 23-year-old rapper, whose real name is Rodrick Moore, was arrested at a security checkpoint before he was set to perform at the Citi Field event, cops said.
Moore and two other men were inside a 2020 black Cadillac Escalade when a security guard with a private firm hired for the Queens concert spotted a Canik 9mm under a seat inside the car around 6:20 p.m. — just hours before the event was set to begin, according to police.
Authorities also found a large-capacity magazine that contained nine rounds of ammunition, a police spokesman said.
“The reason we do these checkpoints is for expressly this purpose,” an NYPD official told The Post on Sunday. “We don’t want people introducing guns in this venue.”
Moore of Los Angeles and the two other men — Carlos Collins, 57, of New Jersey, and Michael Figueroa, 46, of Brooklyn — were all arrested for gun possession.
But the charges against Moore and Collins were later dropped, according to law-enforcement sources. 
Meanwhile, Figueroa was arraigned on a felony charge of criminal possession of a loaded firearm in Queens Criminal Court on Sunday. 
The security guard who stopped the vehicle told police he asked Figueroa to get out of the car and that as the employee attempted to open the front passenger door, the suspect told the worker, “I am not ready to get out yet,” a criminal complaint states. 
The guard then allegedly witnessed Figueroa got into the left side of his waistband, pull out an object and then reach toward his feet, the court record states. 
When Figueroa got out of the car and the guard was able to search the vehicle, he found the gun underneath the front passenger floor mat, the criminal complaint says. 
A law-enforcement source said the charges against Moore and Collins were dropped because Figueroa allegedly had the firearm in his possession and then hid it under the seat. 
A rep for the Queens District Attorney’s Office declined to comment on the case other than to say there were no public records available for Moore and Collins and that Figueroa is being prosecuted for firearm charges. 
Figueroa was held Sunday night after his arraignment on a $10,000 bail. It’s not clear if he’s still behind bars.
Ricch won a Grammy for Best Rap Performance in 2020 and has been nominated for a top music award 10 times.
He rose to fame with his 2018 single “Die Young,” which landed the rapper on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for the first time. He released his first album “Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial” — which debuted atop the Billboard 200 — a year later. His second studio album, “Live Life Fast,” was released in December 2021.
Representatives for the rapper, his record label, Atlantic Records, and Founders Entertainment, the organizer of Governors Ball, did not respond to requests for comment from The Post. 
Additional reporting by Allie Griffin and Gabrielle Fonrouge
Share Selection
