Advertisement
Supported by
letters
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
To the Editor:
Re “Why Are Boomers Still Governing?,” by Yuval Levin (Opinion guest essay, Sunday Review, June 5):
There’s no easy formula to magically resolve the complicated problems that are tearing our country apart and threatening our democracy. But Mr. Levin lays out a road map.
As an 81-year-old with 50-something children and 20-something grandchildren, I find his take on the generational divide on target. It’s time to pass the torch to the next generation and hope that it can untangle some of the national crises we were unable to correct.
Judith BishopMiami Beach
To the Editor:
As a 74-year-old who hardly shares “a unifying narrative” with her fellow “early boomer” Donald Trump, I think the question “Why Are Boomers Still Governing?” invites further questions.
Why is ageism still flourishing? Why can’t Yuval Levin see that every generation is far too diverse to be summed up by simplistic stereotypes, even with the qualification that “generational analyses are unavoidably sweeping and crude, and no one is simply a product of a birth cohort”?
Rather than categorically dismissing old politicians as incapable of being “grounded, levelheaded, future-oriented leaders,” why doesn’t he judge them not by the year of their birth but by the content of their character?
Felicia Nimue AckermanProvidence, R.I.
To the Editor:
Yuval Levin should look at a calendar. The youngest boomers, born in 1964, are only 57 or 58. There are a lot more of them coming down the pike. It looks as if they’ll be in leadership positions for another 25 years or so, given the age of today’s leaders.
James D. StapletonCincinnati
To the Editor:
Those of us who were born into the postwar of the late 1940s and into the ’50s were the first generation to grow up entirely under the threat of nuclear war.
We were the “mutual assured destruction” and “On the Beach” generation, ducking under our desks, watching our neighbors build bomb shelters and preparing to defend them, knowing that a force existed that could end our world entirely, and that two great powers were building nuclear weapons as fast as they could.
That fear, to those of us whose imaginations tried to conceive it, was perhaps greater than any caused by pandemics and mass shooters. How that has affected us is uncertain, but to suggest that our youth was lived in some kind of lost paradise is absurd.
James QuinnLilburn, Ga.
To the Editor:
Re “Questions for the Court,” by Linda Greenhouse (Opinion guest essay, Sunday Review, May 29):
Ms. Greenhouse approvingly refers to a recent column by Maureen Dowd in which the Supreme Court’s conservative majority having been raised Catholic is given as a likely reason for their expected overturning of Roe v. Wade.
I had hoped that the fear of Catholic judges and politicians feeling compelled to vote in line with Catholic doctrine was put to rest with J.F.K.’s 1960 election, but I guess not. Given that an original backer of the Roe decision was William Brennan, a Catholic, and a current defender is another Catholic, Sonia Sotomayor, it’s clear that Catholic judges are not monolithic in being anti-choice.
I believe that it is also clear that the Catholic majority is not making its decision to please the pope or the church, but rather they act in support of the two organizations that are directly responsible for installing them in their current positions, the Federalist Society and the Republican Party.
To ascribe these justices’ right-wing activism to their church rather than their political backers does the church and many Catholics a great disservice.
Rick O’ConnellLittle Neck, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Linda Greenhouse is correct when she says the Constitution appears to have become irrelevant to the six conservative Supreme Court justices who seem geared to overturn Roe v. Wade, apparently in no small part because of their religious beliefs.
It calls to mind Gov. Mario Cuomo’s 1984 address at the University of Notre Dame in which he differentiated his responsibilities as a civil servant and his obligations as a Catholic. He said: “I protect my right to be a Catholic by preserving your right to believe as a Jew, a Protestant or nonbeliever, or as anything else you choose. We know that the price of seeking to force our beliefs on others is that they might someday force theirs on us.”
Would that those we’ve elected and those they’ve appointed learn to understand this.
Hedy GrantNew Milford, N.J.
To the Editor:
There must be a cease-fire in Ukraine to allow access to mountains of food that starving nations desperately need.
The U.N. World Food Program relies on wheat from Ukraine for many of its relief operations. But the war is preventing the World Food Program and others from reaching this precious food, which is enough to feed 400 million people.
Should the war in Ukraine continue it will likely cause famine in Yemen and many other countries already on the brink. Tens of millions could starve to death. There will be chaos across the globe if food shortages persist.
Food prices are skyrocketing since the war began. These price increases affect everyone but are hardest on the poor. Humanitarian agencies cannot afford to obtain enough food for relief operations.
It’s vital that the food tied up in Ukraine’s ports get released to the world. A cease-fire would allow access to get some of this food moving to those in need worldwide and could save lives from starvation and encourage peace between Russia and Ukraine.
William LambersCincinnatiThe writer partnered with the U.N. World Food Program on the book “Ending World Hunger.”
Advertisement
