By Veronica ChambersJune 18, 2020
Friday, June 19, 2020
Juneteenth

	Is


	In


	The Claiming


	Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York signed an executive order on Wednesday making Juneteenth a holiday for state employees; the same goes for tech companies like Twitter, and even where I work, at The New York Times. This year, Juneteenth, a holiday that celebrates the arrival of the news of emancipation from slavery, seems to be a bigger deal across the nation.


	But there’s a conversation I’ve been having with my friends: Is celebrating this holiday enough to begin to fix all that’s so very broken? And, one tick further, is the national embrace of what has been known as the African-American Independence Day a dangerous idea? Some people wonder — if we sip on our traditional red drinks as we socially distance on screens and porches — will we be lulled into feeling more free than we really are?


	Saidiya Hartman, the author of “Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments” and a 2019 MacArthur “genius” grant winner whose work explores the “afterlife of slavery in modern American society,” said: “How to live a free life, how one can live, is the pressing question for black folks in the wake of slavery’s formal end.” Ms. Hartman said that imagining a freer life and a more just society has been the purpose of generations of black people since the days of Reconstruction.


	“Recently, I heard Angela Davis talk about the radical imagination,” Ms. Hartman said. “And a fundamental requirement is believing that the world you want to come into existence can happen. I think that that is how black folks have engaged with and invested in and articulated freedom, as an ideal and as an everyday practice.”


	I couldn’t agree more. As someone who has celebrated Juneteenth for a long time, I think we need it now — not in lieu of the freedom, justice and equality we are still fighting for — but in addition, because we have been fighting for so very long.


	The elemental sermon embedded into the history and lore of Juneteenth has always been one of hope. The gifts of the holiday are the moments of connection, renewal and joy for a people who have had to endure so much, for so long.


	To me, Juneteenth matters because it says: Keep going, the future you want is coming. — Veronica Chambers


	“Words of Emancipation didn’t arrive until the middle of June so they called it Juneteenth. So that was it, the night of Juneteenth celebration, his mind went on. The celebration of a gaudy illusion.”  — Ralph Ellison, “Juneteenth”


	Is


	a


	Celebration


	How We Juneteenth


	Gina Cherelus

Read Story

	Is


	in


	Our Names


	Ida, Maya, Rosa, Harriet: The Power in Our Names


	Martha S. Jones

Read Story

	The Stuff of Astounding: A Poem for Juneteenth  By PATRICIA SMITH


	Unless you spring from a history that is smug and reckless, unless


	you’ve vowed yourself blind to a ceaseless light, you see us. We


	are a shea-shined toddler writhing through Sunday sermon, we are


	the grizzled elder gingerly unfolding his last body. And we are intent


	and insistent upon the human in ourselves. We are the doctor on


	another day at the edge of reason, coaxing a wrong hope, ripping


	open a gasping body to find air. We are five men dripping from the


	burly branches of young trees, which is to say that we dare a world


	that is both predictable and impossible. What else can we learn from


	suicides of the cuffed, the soft targets black backs be? Stuck in its


	rhythmic unreel, time keeps including us, even as our aged root


	is doggedly plucked and trampled, cursed by ham-fisted spitters in


	the throes of a particular fever. See how we push on as enigma, the


	free out loud, the audaciously unleashed, how slyly we scan the sky—


	all that wet voltage and scatters of furious star—to realize that we


	are the recipients of an ancient grace. No, we didn’t begin to live


	when, on the 19th June day of that awkward, ordinary spring—with


	no joy, in a monotone still flecked with deceit—Seems you and these


others are free. That moment did not begin our breath. Our truths—


	the ones we’d been birthed with—had already met reckoning in the


	fields as we muttered tangled nouns of home. We reveled in black


	from there to now, our rampant hue and nap, the unbridled breath


	that resides in the rafters, from then to here, everything we are is


	the stuff of astounding. We are a mother who hums snippets of gospel


	into the silk curls of her newborn, we are the harried sister on the


	elevator to the weekly paycheck mama dreamed for her. We are black


	in every way there is—perm and kink, upstart and elder, wide voice,


	fervent whisper. We heft our clumsy homemade placards, we will


	curl small in the gloom weeping to old blues ballads. We swear not


	to be anybody else’s idea of free, lining up precisely, waiting to be


	freed again and again. We are breach and bellow, resisting a silent


	consent as we claim our much of America, its burden and snarl, the


	stink and hallelujah of it, its sicknesses and safe words, all its black


	and otherwise. Only those feigning blindness fail to see the body


	of work we are, and the work of body we have done. Everything is


	what it is because of us. It is misunderstanding to believe that free


	fell upon us like a blessing, that it was granted by a signature and


	an abruptly opened door. Listen to the thousand ways to say black


	out loud. Hear a whole people celebrate their free and fragile lives,


	then find your own place inside that song. Make the singing matter.


	Is a Gift


	How The Women of the Jemima Code Freed Me


	Toni Tipton-Martin

Read Story

	Is


	Still


	Overdue


	How Reparations for Slavery Became a 2020 Campaign Issue


	Emma Goldberg

Read Story

	“Like a lot of Black women, I have always had to invent the power my freedom requires.”  — June Jordan, from “On Call”


	“All you need in the world is love and laughter. That’s all anybody needs. To have love in one hand and laughter in the other.”  — August Wilson, “Joe Turner's Come and Gone”


	“The function of freedom is to free someone else.”  — Toni Morrison, commencement address at Barnard College


	“The world is before you and you need not take it or leave it as it was when you came in.”  — James Baldwin, “Nobody Knows My Name”


	Is Education


	‘Dear White Women’: The Public Classroom of Rachel Cargle


	Siraad Dirshe

Read Story

	Is


	Self-Care


	Rest as Reparations


	Sandra E. Garcia

Read Story

A project by Veronica Chambers, with Tracy Ma, Joanna Nikas, Choire Sicha and friends. Photo editing by Beth Bristow, Anika Burgess, Nakyung Han, Eve Lyons, JuliAnna Patino and James Pomerantz

Advertisement
