Advertisement
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Hosted by Sabrina Tavernise
Produced by Lynsea Garrison, Diana Nguyen and Rob Szypko
Edited by Marc Georges and Mike Benoist
Original music by Marion Lozano, Elisheba Ittoop and Dan Powell
Engineered by Chris Wood
This episode contains strong language and mentions sexual assault.
The Supreme Court decision on Friday to overturn Roe v. Wade sent abortion clinics into a tailspin.
That day Rosenda, a receptionist at a family planning clinic in Arizona, spent eight hours on the phone telling women the clinic could no longer help them.
“I wanted to hug her, I wanted to help her, but I know I can’t,” she said of one patient she called. “I wanted to scream.”
In the hours after the decision, we spoke to clinic doctors and staff members trying to make sense of the news.
The overturning of Roe set off waves of triumph and of despair, from the protesters on either side massing in front of the Supreme Court, to abortion clinics and crisis pregnancy centers.
Over the weekend, anti-abortion forces vowed to push for near-total bans in every state in the nation, and abortion rights groups insisted they would harness rage over the decision to fight back in the courts. See our updates from Sunday.
There are a lot of ways to listen to The Daily. Here’s how.
Transcripts of each episode are available by the next workday. You can find them at the top of the page.
The Daily is made by Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, M.J. Davis Lin, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoist, Liz O. Baylen, Asthaa Chaturvedi, Kaitlin Roberts, Rachelle Bonja, Diana Nguyen, Marion Lozano, Corey Schreppel, Anita Badejo, Rob Szypko, Elisheba Ittoop, Chelsea Daniel, Mooj Zadie, Patricia Willens, Rowan Niemisto, Jody Becker, Rikki Novetsky and John Ketchum.
Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Paula Szuchman, Cliff Levy, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani, Sofia Milan, Desiree Ibekwe, Wendy Dorr, Elizabeth Davis-Moorer, Jeffrey Miranda, Renan Borelli and Maddy Masiello.
Advertisement
