The Biden administration has warned for months that without congressional action, it could have to unwind or sacrifice key pieces of the pandemic response.
By Noah Weiland
WASHINGTON — White House officials said on Wednesday that they would have to repurpose federal Covid-19 funds meant for coronavirus tests and protective equipment in order to supply more antiviral pills and vaccines, after so far failing to persuade Congress to pass a new pandemic relief package.
Roughly $10 billion from Department of Health and Human Services funds will be rerouted, around half of it to purchase vaccines for Americans ahead of a possible fall or winter wave of virus cases, when an updated shot may be needed, according to one White House official. The other half will go mostly to purchasing 10 million courses of Paxlovid, the antiviral treatment made by Pfizer that has been shown to substantially reduce the severity of Covid-19 in high-risk people, the official said. Around $300 million will be spent on another kind of treatment, monoclonal antibodies.
The total amount needed for a new vaccination campaign later this year is still unknown because contract negotiations are ongoing, the official added. Officials have suggested they need at least initial funds just to cover a limited vaccination program later this year for older Americans and people with immune deficiencies.
Some experts worry about vaccine modifications keeping pace with the speed of the virus’s evolution. Moderna released preliminary results on Wednesday on a vaccine targeting the Omicron variant, saying it was the company’s “lead candidate” to serve as a fall booster shot. But Omicron itself has generated subvariants that have added to uncertainty about the trajectory of the pandemic.
The Biden administration has warned for months that without congressional action, it could have to unwind or sacrifice key pieces of the pandemic response, even as the United States has been averaging about 100,000 new confirmed cases a day and some federal officials predict another crushing wave later this year.
The Washington Post reported on Wednesday morning the plan to repurpose the funds.
Dr. Ashish K. Jha, the White House’s Covid-19 response coordinator, who has met with lawmakers about the funding requests, told reporters last week that new purchases of vaccines and treatments could not wait until the fall.
“If you want to ask what keeps me awake at night, it is that we are going to run out of vaccines,” he said at a White House briefing. “We’re not going to be able to have enough of the next generation of vaccines. We’re going to run out of treatments. And we’re going to run out of diagnostic tests, probably in the late fall into winter, if we end up having a significant surge of infections.”
Federal officials have suggested that such a surge could begin this summer in the South, at a time when hot weather forces people indoors, where they can spread the virus more easily. Then, in the fall, outbreaks could spread to other parts of the country.
The amount of money White House officials said on Wednesday would be diverted is roughly what lawmakers had discussed in recent Senate negotiations. The White House asked Congress for $22.5 billion in emergency pandemic aid, but Republicans insisted on less than half that figure — $10 billion — and stripped $5 billion in global aid from the request.
“There are all these, I think, other issues right now that have just kind of eclipsed it in terms of their need to be dealt with,” Senator John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 2 Republican, said on Wednesday. “So I mean, obviously, at some point, vaccines and therapeutics, it’s something we’re probably going to have to deal with one way or another.”
The White House on Wednesday circulated a list of compromises it said the federal government would have to make because of the need to repurpose money. The Health and Human Services Department will not be able to buy as many at-home virus tests or support test manufacturing, leaving the United States dependent on tests from foreign countries, it said. Hundreds of jobs will be lost at companies that produce tests and protective equipment.
The department will also not be able to maintain adequate stockpiles of protective gear for frontline health workers, expand domestic vaccine manufacturing capacity or invest in research for and development of newer vaccines, including so-called pancoronavirus vaccines, which could work even against variants that have yet to emerge, the White House added.
Emily Cochrane contributed reporting.
By Sharon LaFraniere
Moderna released preliminary results on Wednesday on an updated coronavirus vaccine that targets the Omicron variant, calling it “our lead candidate” to serve as a U.S. booster shot in the fall.
The firm’s researchers tested a booster dose combining the original vaccine with one that specifically targeted Omicron, the variant that became dominant last winter. They found that among those with no evidence of prior coronavirus infection, the combination produced 1.75 times the level of neutralizing antibodies against Omicron as the existing Moderna vaccine did alone.
While those results may seem encouraging on their face, many experts worry that the virus is evolving so quickly that it is outpacing the ability to modify vaccines, at least as long as the United States relies on human clinical trials for results.
Moderna’s new findings, from a clinical trial involving 814 volunteers, indicate that the updated vaccine produced a significantly stronger immune response against Omicron than the existing vaccine a month after the booster shot was given. The booster shots followed three earlier doses of Moderna’s vaccine.
But Omicron has been spawning subvariants for months, and some vaccine experts say that what matters now is how well a new booster formulation would protect against the latest subvariants, BA.4 and BA.5, not Omicron itself. First detected in South Africa early this year, those two subvariants now account for 13 percent of new cases in the United States, and are spreading fast. By some estimates, within a month they could outcompete two other Omicron subvariants, BA.2 and BA.2.12.1, which are dominant at present.
Moderna did not release any data on how the updated vaccine worked against BA.4 or BA.5. In a presentation Wednesday morning, Dr. Stephen Hoge, the firm’s president, said that researchers were still gathering data on those and other subvariants.
But he said that a very small sample, together with isolated other studies, suggested that the levels of neutralizing antibodies triggered by the updated vaccine were two to threefold lower against the BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants, compared to those triggered against Omicron. But he said those levels were “still a very comfortable place,” a view echoed by at least one federal health official who has reviewed the data.
Moderna officials said they could not say yet whether the reconfigured vaccine will offer more lasting protection than the existing one, but they were hopeful it would, based on earlier findings from a study of a vaccine reconfigured against a different variant, released in April.
The newest subvariants seem to spread even more quickly than earlier versions of Omicron, and may be better at dodging the immune system’s defenses. It is unclear whether they cause more severe disease. Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the chief medical adviser to the White House, said in an interview on Tuesday that South Africa, where BA.4 and BA.5 have been widespread, had “seen a slight uptick in hospitalizations, but I.C.U. utilization and deaths are really staying stably low.”
In any case, given how fast the virus is mutating, some vaccine experts say it makes more sense to target its most recent versions, rather than forms of the virus that have already been overtaken, or soon will be.
The problem is that Moderna and Pfizer — the maker of the other main coronavirus vaccine in the United States — do not have enough time now to run more human clinical trials and still manufacture shots before the fall, when the Biden administration is hoping to be able to offer an updated vaccine to counter what public health experts predict will be a winter surge.
That might force regulators to choose updated vaccines based on data from laboratory tests and trials involving mice or other animals, rather than robust human trials. It is also possible that another new variant or subvariant of concern will appear by the fall, further complicating the picture.
Outside advisers to the Food and Drug Administration are scheduled to meet June 28 to discuss which vaccine formulation would work best as a fall booster; vaccine manufacturers have said they would need to start production soon.
“Of course, the final decision is always left to the F.D.A.,” Dr. Fauci said. “But what the F.D.A. will likely do is keep as many irons on the fire as they possibly can. And they may need to revert to alternative pathways of decision, which are laboratory data and possible animal data.”
Asked if Americans would accept a booster formulation without lengthy human trials, he said, “People who really are very concerned about protecting themselves will.”
John Moore, a virologist at Weill Cornell Medicine in New York, said many health care professionals would be comfortable at this point in the pandemic switching to a different model for coronavirus vaccine development, more like the one used to modify the flu vaccine every year. Federal health officials said that the composition of the annual flu vaccine is changed to meet new variants with minimal new human tests.
Moderna’s trial of the vaccine targeting Omicron began in late February. The average age of the participants was 57. All volunteers had received three shots of Moderna’s existing vaccine — two shots, followed by a booster dose given an average of eight months after the second shot.
About four and a half months after that first booster, 377 volunteers received a second booster with the existing vaccine, while 437 received the booster designed to work against Omicron. The updated booster produced a stronger immune response among both those who had previously been infected with the virus and those who had not.
Overall, those who got the updated booster had a 59 percent higher level of neutralizing antibodies than those who got the existing booster, according to data released by Moderna.
Antibodies are the body’s first line of defense in warding off infection from the coronavirus. Other immune responses that also defend against Covid-19 were not measured; those tests are far more complex and time-consuming to conduct.
Dr. Paul Burton, Moderna’s chief medical officer, described the results as highly encouraging. “We really feel like this is a sort of fundamental turning point in our fight against this virus — that we can adapt to a variant,” he said.
But Dr. Moore said that a less than twofold increase in neutralizing antibodies over the existing vaccine is “only a modest benefit.”
“Does that justify switching vaccine composition, given the cost and the logistics and everything else that’s involved?” he asked. “That’s what the argument is going to be about.”
Pfizer and BioNTech, its German partner, are also testing an Omicron-specific vaccine and are expected to release their results soon.
In April, Moderna released preliminary results on a vaccine retooled to attack the Beta variant, which was first detected in late 2020. That version of the vaccine, the firm said, triggered a stronger immune response than the initial formulation not only against Beta, but also against the Delta and Omicron variants. Although Moderna officials said the added protection against Omicron persisted for six months, they said that they expected an Omicron-specific vaccine would be a better candidate.
By Emily Anthes
The Omicron subvariants known as BA.4 and BA.5 now represent 13 percent of new coronavirus cases in the United States, up from 7.5 percent a week ago and 1 percent in early May, according to new estimates from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The spread of the subvariants adds more uncertainty to the trajectory of the pandemic in the United States, where current case counts are likely to be a significant underestimate. But whether it leads to a major new wave of infections, or spikes in hospitalizations and deaths, remains unclear, scientists cautioned.
The new figures, which were released on Tuesday, are based on modeling, and the C.D.C.’s estimates have missed the mark before. But the overall trend suggests that BA.4 and BA.5 could outcompete the two other Omicron subvariants, BA.2 and BA.2.12.1, which together account for most U.S. cases, said Denis Nash, an epidemiologist at the CUNY Graduate School of Public Health & Health Policy.
“This could happen very quickly,” Dr. Nash said.
Data on BA.4 and BA.5, which were first detected in South Africa in early 2022, remain limited. But these variants seem to spread more quickly than earlier versions of Omicron, such as BA.2, and may be better at dodging the immune system’s defenses. So far, there is not much evidence that they cause more severe disease, although more studies are needed.
In April and May, the BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants fueled a surge of cases in South Africa, despite widespread pre-existing immunity to the virus. But the wave was not as large as the nation’s previous waves, and deaths did not rise as sharply, said Jeffrey Shaman, an infectious disease epidemiologist at Columbia University.
“How analogous is that for us?” he said. “I think it’s possible that we could see another wave” fueled by BA.4 and BA.5. But, if the United States follows South Africa’s example — which is not a guarantee — the wave might be more modest than previous surges and cause less pronounced increases in hospitalizations and deaths, he said.
Over the last few weeks, the United States has been averaging roughly 100,000 new cases a day, according to a New York Times database, up from less than 30,000 in late March.
And while hospitalizations have begun to decline in the Northeast, they are rising elsewhere. Trends in the number of new deaths, which have fluctuated between about 250 and 400 a day over the last month, are less clear, though the metric is averaging much lower than during the winter Omicron surge. (Data reporting delays around the Memorial Day holiday make recent statistics less reliable.)
Globally, the most recent data suggest that BA.4 and BA.5 still represent a relatively small share of cases, but that could change in the weeks ahead. In a recent report, the U.K. Health Security Agency noted that in many countries, the two subvariants were replacing BA.2 about as quickly as BA.2 replaced the original version of Omicron.
In the United States, the new subvariants have been gaining ground. During the week ending on June 4, BA.5 accounted for an estimated 7.6 percent of cases and BA.4 accounted for 5.4 percent of cases, up from 4.2 percent and 3.3 percent, respectively, the previous week.
The subvariants have become especially common in parts of the southern United States. In the region comprising Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas, BA.4 and BA.5 account for more than one in five infections, according to the new figures.
Wastewater data also highlight the spread of the subvariants. In Missouri in early May, for instance, BA.4 and BA.5 showed up in a small number of the state’s sewersheds, or geographic areas in which the wastewater feeds into a single treatment plant or other collection point. The subvariants are now detectable in more than half of them, said Marc Johnson, a virologist at the University of Missouri who has been analyzing the state’s wastewater.
Preliminary evidence from laboratory research suggests that unvaccinated people who were infected with the original version of Omicron, known as BA.1, might be easily reinfected by BA.4 or BA.5. (Vaccinated people are likely to fare somewhat better, the study suggests.)
This immune evasiveness, in addition to the natural waning of protection against infection over time, could explain why the newest subvariants have been able to spread so quickly.
Sarah Cahalan contributed.
By Michael Paulson
“Come From Away,” the inspirational musical about a remote Canadian community that rallied to support thousands of stranded air travelers after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, will end its run on Broadway in October.
The musical, which has been a hit on Broadway and has been successfully staged around the world, is the third show to announce a plan to close in the last two days, as it becomes clear that with New York City still attracting fewer tourists than it did before the pandemic, there are not enough patrons to support all the productions now running.
On Tuesday “Dear Evan Hansen” and “Tina,” two musicals that had been selling strongly before the pandemic, both announced that they would close late this summer.
“Come From Away” will close on Oct. 2. It began performances Feb. 18, 2017, and opened March 12, 2017; at the time of its closing it will have had 25 preview performances and 1,670 regular performances at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater.
The musical continues to tour in North America and Australia and to run in London. A filmed version of the stage production is streaming on Apple TV+.
The show was an unlikely hit — before it arrived in New York, the conventional wisdom was that locals would never embrace a musical about Sept. 11 because the subject was too potentially upsetting. The producers, seeking to build word-of-mouth first, took a roundabout path to Broadway, staging it in San Diego, Seattle, Washington, D.C., and Toronto before coming to New York.
But the show, arriving early in the Trump administration, quickly became a success, seen as a parable about welcoming strangers and building community.
The musical, which won a Tony Award for Christopher Ashley’s direction, is based on true events that took place in Gander, Newfoundland, where 38 commercial planes were diverted. The musical’s writers, a married couple named Irene Sankoff and David Hein, went to Gander a decade after Sept. 11 to interview locals, and created the musical based on those interviews; the show was first staged at Sheridan College in Ontario, where a school dean, Michael Rubinoff, had been trying to persuade someone that the subject would make a good musical.
The show’s original star, Jenn Colella, who portrayed an airline pilot, will rejoin the cast from June 21 to Aug. 7.
“Come From Away” is produced by Junkyard Dog Productions, which is led by Randy Adams, Marleen and Kenny Alhadeff, and Sue Frost, who spotted an early workshop of the show at a festival held by the National Alliance for Musical Theater.
The show’s grosses have dropped significantly since the pandemic shutdown of theaters. Last week it grossed $461,760; during a comparable early June week in 2019 it grossed $897,186.
On Tuesday, “Tina” said it would close Aug. 14, and “Dear Evan Hansen” said it would close Sept. 18.
By Roni Caryn Rabin
Despite additional federal funding, U.S. schools reported that they were most likely to rely on low-cost strategies to improve ventilation to slow the spread of the coronavirus, according to a study published Tuesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The measures include holding activities outside, opening doors and windows, and inspecting existing heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems, the study said.
Only about one-third of public schools reported taking costlier steps such as replacing or upgrading their HVAC systems. Fewer than one in three said they used high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration systems in classrooms and cafeterias.
Schools that serve children in the poorest American communities were slightly more likely to have replaced or upgraded HVAC systems than those serving communities with medium levels of poverty, the study found. Almost half of schools serving the poorest communities — and close to half of schools serving the wealthiest communities — had replaced or upgraded their HVAC systems, compared with only one-third of schools with medium levels of poverty. The poorest schools were also more likely to have inspected and validated their HVAC systems than schools with medium levels of poverty.
The authors of the C.D.C. report suggested that while schools in wealthier areas may have already had resources to upgrade their systems, schools in high-poverty areas might have more experience accessing and using federal funds for such purposes.
Thirty-five percent to 44 percent of the schools in the poorest communities reported using HEPA filtration systems in spaces where children eat and in classrooms and high-risk areas, and 36 percent to 50 percent of schools serving communities with low poverty levels reported using HEPA filters in those areas.
By contrast, only one in four or five schools serving communities with medium levels of poverty reported using HEPA filters in those places.
The study was based on the findings of a nationally representative sample of 420 K-12 public schools, using data gathered between Feb. 14 and March 27 from the National School Covid-19 Prevention Study. The sampling framework consists of public schools from all 50 states and the District of Columbia; it is a web-based survey distributed to school administrators.
Only 26 percent of schools that received the survey in February and March responded, however. The percentage of students eligible for free or discounted meals was used to determine the community poverty level of each school.
Location also was correlated with measures taken to improve ventilation: Rural schools were less likely to use portable HEPA filtration systems than schools in cities and suburbs.
Schools in cities, on the other hand, were less likely to open windows than rural, suburban or town schools, possibly because of concerns about noise and air pollution (some may also have windows that do not open). City schools were also less likely to use fans to increase the movement of air when they did open windows.
“Additional efforts might be needed to ensure that all schools successfully access and use resources for ventilation improvements,” particularly schools in rural areas and those with medium levels of poverty, the authors wrote.
