Advertisement
Supported by
Nonfiction
Lyndsie Bourgon’s “Tree Thieves” casts the American environmental movement in all its complexity.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By David Enrich
TREE THIEVES: Crime and Survival in North America’s Woods, by Lyndsie Bourgon
Until recently, I’d thought of trees as tall, attractive sources of shade and occasional power outages. Then I read “The Overstory,” the novel by Richard Powers, and I began to see them as wondrously complex organisms that protect the planet and even communicate with one another. Trees, it turns out, are amazing!
So when I picked up “Tree Thieves: Crime and Survival in North America’s Woods,” about illegal timber poaching, I expected to be triggered by tales of greedy, chainsaw-wielding loggers denuding majestic forests.
That is not what happened.
First, though: What is timber poaching? Inside federal and state parks and forests, the removal of wood and animals is often regulated or banned. The goal is to manage scarce resources and protect vulnerable species. Poachers flout those rules, sneaking into forests and hacking up ancient trees — some living, others dead — that they can sell to be made into furniture, musical instruments, floorboards and the like. Their crimes contribute, at least on the margins, to deforestation.
This sounds simple. In the journalist Lyndsie Bourgon’s telling, however, the poachers are not quite villains. Instead, they are responding — if not justifiably then at least predictably — to a lack of economic opportunities and the perception that the rules governing forests are arbitrary and heavy-handed.
Bourgon puts herself in the poacher’s shoes, and the result is a refreshing and compassionate warning about the perils of well-intentioned but overzealous environmentalism.
Bourgon, who received financial backing from the National Geographic Society, is clearly an environmentalist. She treats us to reverential romps through the forests of the American Northwest. She writes mournfully of the damage that poaching can inflict on centuries-old redwoods and other irreplaceable trees.
But she regards the history of the American conservation movement with something approaching scorn. It was hatched, she writes, to serve the whims of wealthy urban vacationers who wanted access to lands unspoiled by their longtime inhabitants. National parks were conceived as vehicles to resist “any attempt to turn to utilitarian purposes the resources represented by the forest,” as one booster put it.
At times, the motives were even less pure. Bourgon describes how ultrarich environmentalists in the early 1900s saw conservation — and in particular the protection of California’s redwoods — “as part of a mission to enshrine a white, masculine dominance over the wilderness.” Some conservationists, she notes, were “eugenicists who saw parallels between environmental destruction and the decline of Nordic supremacy.”
As parks were established, the government compensated corporations that owned forestland for the confiscation of their acreage. Not so the workers and communities whose livelihoods were suddenly stripped away.
This was the beginning of a decades-long process in which federal and state governments sought to protect forests from the communities that surrounded them. In Orick, Calif., a focal point for Bourgon, locals are prohibited from collecting redwood branches that wash up on a nearby beach — depriving people of firewood that they have traditionally used to heat their homes (and causing piles of driftwood to obstruct groundwater drainage). Bourgon captures residents’ acute frustration with faraway bureaucrats imposing what feel like unnecessary and destructive rules.
The result was a hyped-up and counterproductive feedback loop. Loggers and their unions painted environmentalists as radicals hellbent on destroying decent jobs. The reality was that the loss of jobs in the logging industry had less to do with environmentalists than with giant companies mechanizing what had been manual jobs and outsourcing wood-processing work to Asia.
Environmental groups like the Sierra Club demonized loggers as maniacal tree-destroyers and, at times, racist in-breeders. (I didn’t notice it at the time, but Powers, in “The Overstory,” is at times guilty of similar stereotyping.) This, Bourgon reckons, was a wasted opportunity. Like environmental activists, logging communities worshiped their forests — after all, once the trees were gone, so were the jobs — and there were alliances to be forged.
This is the backdrop for Bourgon’s depiction of “tree thieves” as misunderstood outcasts. “I have begun to see the act of timber poaching as not simply a dramatic environmental crime, but something deeper — an act to reclaim one’s place in a rapidly changing world,” she writes, tracing that desire back to 16th-century England, where poachers in royal forests were celebrated as folk heroes.
Bourgon immersed herself with a small handful of these men in the Northwest, and a picture emerges of a fractious band of down-on-their-luck crooks. A number abuse drugs. The poachers acknowledge that what they’re doing is illegal, but they frame it as principled, akin to stealing a loaf of bread to feed their families. One character scans the forest for valuable pieces of wood, keeping track of the locations, and when he needs money he comes back to collect his prizes. “We have bills to pay,” another explains. “We’re just like anyone else except we live in the middle of nowhere, there’s no jobs, and they don’t want to hire us to prevent wood poaching.”
On the other side are National Park Service rangers, who deploy cutting-edge technology to pursue poachers. There are hidden cameras, stashed in trees. There’s a radarlike gizmo that allows the government to keep tabs on vulnerable trees from above. There are magnetic sensor plates — $10,000 apiece — on the forest floor to detect the sound of chain saws.
When they swoop in for the occasional arrest, rangers are sometimes armed with semiautomatic weapons. They find meth and occasionally tree parts or tree-chopping paraphernalia. The rangers are just doing their jobs, but the totality of the government crackdown feels completely disproportionate to the crime.
Bourgon paints both sides in sympathetic hues, and she takes a largely neutral stance on who’s right and who’s wrong in the cat-and-mouse game she details. She sees — and does her best to convey — the poachers and their pursuers in an evenhanded manner.
The problem is that the stakes are far from even. On the one hand, unemployed loggers and others who are suffering economically because of stringent enforcement of conservation laws are facing poverty. On the other hand, the damage that poachers are inflicting on forests appears to be, in the grand scheme of things, modest.
As Bourgon notes, the logging industry does far more damage to America’s forests than all the poachers put together (though it is often poachers who target precious old-growth redwoods). And from the perspective of climate change, poaching — or deforestation for that matter — in the United States is minor compared with what’s happening in other parts of the world. In Peru, for example, where Bourgon spends time with poachers and law enforcement, organized crime has gotten into illegal tree-harvesting, secreting forbidden timber out of the country in shipping containers.
Even in the Amazon, though, poachers aren’t the primary problem. Companies are hacking down something like a soccer field’s worth of trees every minute. It would take even the most industrious poachers a very long time to do that kind of damage. Yet militarized ranger forces are deployed to hunt down even small-time poaching operations.
I came away from “The Overstory” with a new appreciation for trees and for those who are trying to protect them. I came away from “Tree Thieves” recognizing that those efforts sometimes exact too high a price.
David Enrich is The Times’s business investigations editor. His latest book, “Servants of the Damned: Giant Law Firms, Donald Trump, and the Corruption of Justice,” will be published in September.
TREE THIEVES: Crime and Survival in North America’s Woods, by Lyndsie Bourgon | 288 pp. | Little, Brown Spark | $28
Advertisement
