Advertisement
Supported by
Its sister network, the lower-rated Fox Business, will carry live coverage, while star prime-time hosts like Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity will proceed as usual.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Jeremy W. Peters and John Koblin
Follow live updates on the House committee hearing on the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol.
The group of lawmakers investigating the Jan. 6 Capitol riot would like as many Americans as possible to learn jarring and unknown details about the attack. So they decided to hold a public hearing on Thursday during prime time, when many people are sitting in front of their TVs.
Fox News, the nation’s top cable news channel, has other plans.
When the hearing begins at 8 p.m. Eastern, NBC will go into special report mode. CBS will air a special called “Capitol Assault Hearings,” while ABC will run “Attack on the Capitol: The Investigation — An ABC News Special.” MSNBC and CNN will have wall-to-wall coverage all night.
But Fox News will not carry the hearing. Instead, the network will stick with its prime-time lineup of opinionated conservative hosts: Tucker Carlson, Sean Hannity and Laura Ingraham, who have repeatedly downplayed the assault as a mere “footnote” to American history and tried to discredit the congressional inquiry as a ruse to “purge” former President Donald J. Trump and his supporters from the Republican Party.
The network said on Monday that its prime-time hosts would cover the event “as news warrants.” Live news coverage will be left to Fox Business, a sister network with much smaller viewership. Last month, Fox News averaged 1.5 million viewers at any given time during the day; Fox Business averaged 136,000. Mr. Carlson regularly draws more than three million viewers for his show at 8 p.m.
Republicans in Washington and conservative commentators across right-wing media have attacked the committee’s hearings — the one on Thursday is one of at least six that are planned — as partisan political theater, produced by Democrats to enhance their chances in the midterm elections.
That is the view among many inside Fox News, including its top-rated talent. They have watched their ratings soar as the network abandoned the more straightforward tone it took immediately after the 2020 election and then leaned hard into the grievances and misleading claims propagated by Republicans who want to rewrite the history of Mr. Trump’s loss and its aftermath.
Not broadcasting the hearing sends a message to loyal Fox viewers, media observers said: The network won’t help legitimize a process that many conservatives see as a kangaroo court.
“To walk away from what is surely going to be on every cable station and the networks, it’s impossible to believe it’s anything other than trying to make a statement by not showing up,” said Carl Cameron, the former chief political correspondent at Fox News, who left in 2017 and has since been critical of the network.
Fox News, like the Republican Party, has changed over the past few years. It is less tolerant of dissenting voices and more willing to air unsupported claims. It has let go or sidelined on-air personalities critical of Mr. Trump. Others have quit in protest, including two conservative writers who said they were appalled by a documentary, starring Mr. Carlson, that promoted the unfounded idea that the Jan. 6 riot was a so-called false flag operation meant to persecute conservatives.
Nicole Hemmer, a historian at Columbia University and the author of “Messengers of the Right: Conservative Media and the Transformation of American Politics,” said the Fox News decision to put the Jan. 6 committee hearing on its smaller platforms fit into a larger conservative argument that the insurrection was “not that big of a deal.”
Making a case against Trump. The House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack is laying out evidence that could allow prosecutors to indict former President Donald J. Trump, though the path to a criminal trial is uncertain. Here are the main themes that have emerged so far:
An unsettling narrative. During the first hearing, the committee described in vivid detail what it characterized as an attempted coup orchestrated by the former president that culminated in the assault on the Capitol. At the heart of the gripping story were three main players: Mr. Trump, the Proud Boys and a Capitol Police officer.
Creating election lies. In its second hearing, the panel showed how Mr. Trump ignored aides and advisers as he declared victory prematurely and relentlessly pressed claims of fraud he was told were wrong. “He’s become detached from reality if he really believes this stuff,” William P. Barr, the former attorney general, said of Mr. Trump during a videotaped interview.
Pressuring Pence. Mr. Trump continued pressuring Vice President Mike Pence to go along with a plan to overturn his loss even after he was told it was illegal, according to testimony laid out by the panel during the third hearing. The committee showed how Mr. Trump’s actions led his supporters to storm the Capitol, sending Mr. Pence fleeing for his life.
Fake elector plan. The committee used its fourth hearing to detail how Mr. Trump was personally involved in a scheme to put forward fake electors. The panel also presented fresh details on how the former president leaned on state officials to invalidate his defeat, opening them up to violent threats when they refused.
Strong arming the Justice Department. During the fifth hearing, the panel explored Mr. Trump’s wide-ranging and relentless scheme to misuse the Justice Department to keep himself in power. The panel also presented evidence that at least half a dozen Republican members of Congress sought pre-emptive pardons.
The surprise hearing. Cassidy Hutchinson, ​​a former White House aide, delivered explosive testimony during the panel’s sixth session, saying that the president knew the crowd on Jan. 6 was armed, but wanted to loosen security. She also painted Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff in the Trump administration, as disengaged and unwilling to act as rioters approached the Capitol.
“To air it on their tiny sister network, they are reinforcing that argument: This isn’t important,” she said.
Fox News disputed that claim on Tuesday, saying the hearing will be available to its audience in several ways. The coverage on Fox Business will be led by Bret Baier, Fox News’s most prominent host who is not overtly partisan, along with Martha MacCallum. That programming will also run on the Fox News website as well as on Fox’s streaming service, Fox Nation. Mr. Baier and Ms. MacCallum will appear on Fox News after prime time with an 11 p.m. posthearing special.
The network also pointed to its past coverage, in full, of other sessions from Capitol Hill, such as Supreme Court confirmation hearings. Those were daytime events.
By not carrying the hearings live in prime time, Fox News is potentially sparing itself an awkward on-screen moment. Private communications between several Fox anchors and the Trump administration were unearthed during the Jan. 6 committee investigation. Multiple messages show how the hosts were deeply concerned about the rioters and Mr. Trump’s refusal to rebuke them on the day of the attack.
In text messages, Mr. Hannity, Ms. Ingraham and Brian Kilmeade, a host of the morning show “Fox & Friends,” expressed growing alarm to Mark Meadows, Mr. Trump’s chief of staff, as the attack played out. “He is destroying his legacy,” Ms. Ingraham wrote in one message obtained by the committee.
The other major TV networks plan to cover the hearing with their highest-profile journalists. The broadcast networks will call in their evening news anchors — David Muir, Lester Holt and Norah O’Donnell — to lead two hours of coverage. CNN will turn to Jake Tapper and Anderson Cooper, along with a small army of reporters and correspondents. Rachel Maddow, Nicolle Wallace and Joy Reid will anchor the coverage on MSNBC.
Separately, in a decision that could affect more viewers, the Fox broadcast network will not direct its affiliates, which reach many millions more homes than Fox News, to show the hearing. They “will be offered” coverage of the hearing, Fox News Media said, but not mandated to take it, as is often the case with major events like a presidential address.
Given the highly polarized view that Americans have taken of the select committee’s work, it is unclear that Fox News’s usual viewers would tune in at all. They have punished the network in the past for coverage that did not toe the line. Its ratings fell sharply after Fox News became the first network in 2020 to call Arizona for President Biden, effectively declaring him the winner of the election, and then declined to promote the wildest claims of voter fraud. Newsmax, a conservative cable news channel that was more willing to broadcast questionable stories about fraud at the polls, saw its ratings surge temporarily.
Only after Mr. Biden was inaugurated, and Fox News anchors like Mr. Carlson began to cast events like Jan. 6 as a partisan smoke screen exploited by Democrats, did the network’s ratings rebound.
“The base isn’t clamoring to tune in, because they agree that Jan. 6 hearings are just a political stage show and that Jan. 6 has been blown out of proportion,” Ms. Hemmer of Columbia said.
During the Trump presidency and his two campaigns, Fox News was often caught between its audience and its notion of itself as an independent, conservative voice in media.
Egged on by Mr. Trump, conservatives pounced when they thought a Fox host like Megyn Kelly was unfairly critical of him. To this day, he complains that Fox treats him poorly because it doesn’t air his political rallies live and in full. He has gloated about the network’s ratings crash after the 2020 election, noting of Fox’s audience, “They don’t want to hear negativity toward me.”
With the decision to limit coverage of the Jan. 6 hearing this week, Fox News is sending a clear signal that it is siding with this audience.
Mr. Carlson called the committee “grotesque” on his program Monday night. Mr. Hannity has called the group of five Democrats and two Republicans “fake” on his 9 p.m. show.
“You will not hear the real story of Jan. 6 anywhere, I don’t think, except here,” Mr. Hannity said on Monday night.
Advertisement
