As states report less frequently, changes in the trajectory of the virus are slower to reveal themselves.
Follow the latest updates on the coronavirus, the BA.5 subvariant of Omicron and mask mandates.
By Adeel Hassan and Sarah Cahalan
At a glance, the pandemic picture in the United States may seem remarkably stable. The average number of new confirmed coronavirus cases per day has hardly budged for weeks, hovering between 95,000 and 115,000 a day each day in June.
A closer look shows that as public testing sites run by state and local governments have winnowed, more states have also stopped giving daily data updates, creating a foggier look at the state of virus across the country.
That comes as new federal estimates on Tuesday showed that the rapidly spreading Omicron subvariant known as BA.5 has become dominant among new coronavirus cases. As of the week ending Saturday, BA.5 made up about 54 percent of new cases in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Just a week ago, the agency’s estimates had put BA.5 and BA.4, another Omicron subvariant, together as dominant, a trend experts had predicted. The new statistics, released Tuesday morning, are based on modeling and can be revised as more data comes in.
BA.4 and BA.5 are able to evade some of the antibodies produced after coronavirus vaccinations and infections, including infections caused by some other versions of Omicron. But researchers in South Africa recently reported that a spring surge driven by BA.4 and BA.5 did not appear to cause significantly more severe disease than the nation’s first Omicron wave.
The reduction in U.S. public testing means that lab-based P.C.R. testing capacity in July will be only half of what it was in March, according to a recent estimate by Health Catalysts Group, a research and consulting firm. Even a few testing companies announced layoffs and closures last week.
The vast majority of the positive results from popular home test kits are not included in official data, and not everyone who gets infected knows or gets tested. Many Americans appear to be moving even further away from focusing on daily case counting — which, to be sure, have always been an undercount of total infections — as a measure of the nation’s pandemic health. But other Americans with risk factors have said that they feel ignored and abandoned as their governments and neighbors have sought a return to normal.
And some scientists estimate that the current wave of cases is the second largest of the pandemic.
“One of my favorite lines from somebody at the C.D.C. was ‘You don’t need to count the raindrops to know how hard it’s raining,’” Dr. Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said in late June at a conference in Aspen, Colo. “So we can tell by the half a million to a million P.C.R.s we’re doing every day how we’re doing in areas around the country.”
The C.D.C.’s monitoring of community risk levels shows that in its latest update, 33 percent of the American population lived in a high-risk county, in most regions outside the Northeast. In May, the map had been flipped, with the Northeast comprising most of the high-risk counties. The C.D.C. recommends wearing a mask indoors in public under such a designation.
In most of the Northeast, cases have decreased continuously throughout June, according to a New York Times database. In the South, many states have seen cases double or triple over the same time. As of Sunday, more than 113,000 new coronavirus cases are being reported each day in the United States.
“That’s not really a reflection of the total amount of virus circulating in the communities,” said Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security at the Bloomberg School of Public Health. He said that his “back of the envelope” estimate was about one million cases per day.
As states report less frequently, changes in the trajectory of the virus are slower to reveal themselves. Nearly every state reported the number of new coronavirus cases, hospitalizations and deaths for five days a week or more in 2020 and 2021, but 23 states now release new data only once a week, according to Times tracking.
California, which once updated its cumulative case and death figures every weekday, now does so only twice weekly. In Florida, case and death data are released just once every two weeks. Just last week, many more public testing sites closed in Alaska, Colorado and Rhode Island.
Recent virus figures have hiccuped around holidays like Memorial Day and Juneteenth, during which many states often pause reporting and then restart tracking afterward, a trend that is sure to continue this week, after the Fourth of July holiday weekend.
“Following the daily test count is less instructive than it was,” Dr. Adalja said, citing the close link between cases and hospitalizations in the past. Today’s numbers should not be treated like checking a sports team’s daily standings or scores, he added.
“I think testing is taking a different role,” he said. “Even when testing was at a different point, it has always been an underestimate.”
To get a localized look at how the virus is faring, Dr. Adalja said that he has come to rely on hospitalizations as a percentage of its capacity. He also checks the C.D.C.’s community levels tracker, which includes new hospital admissions and how many beds are used. He urges a shifting focus to severe disease, rather than tracking the “booms and busts of cases.”
Hospitalizations have increased modestly throughout June, though they remain low. Just over 33,000 people are in American hospitals with the coronavirus on an average day, and fewer than 4,000 are in intensive care. Reports of new deaths remain below 400 a day, down from the country’s daily death toll peak of more than 3,300 deaths in January 2021.
Lisa Waananen, Christine Chung, Emily Anthes and Alain Delaquérière contributed reporting.
An earlier version of this item referred incorrectly to state testing sites in Iowa. The state shut down its drive-through and clinic testing sites in July 2021; they are not being closed now.
By Zixu Wang
As China gradually emerges from a Covid-19 surge that shut down Shanghai for two months, an outbreak in eastern Anhui Province is posing a new challenge to efforts to balance economic growth with the government’s “zero Covid” policy.
There were more than 200 reported cases in Anhui’s Suzhou city on Monday. Since the outbreak was detected on June 26, the province has reported more than 1,000 cases, according to the Suzhou municipal government.
China had only recently begun to recover from outbreaks in dozens of cities that began in March. In addition to the financial capital of Shanghai, which in June emerged from a two-month citywide lockdown, the tech hub of Shenzhen, and Beijing, China’s capital, were also affected by outbreaks. Shanghai’s Communist Party leader declared last month that the city had defended itself against Covid, and said that this proved that the zero-Covid strategy was correct.
With Covid-control measures taking a toll on the economy, the authorities have recently issued policies aimed at helping business and increasing consumption. The information ministry stopped indicating in travel codes that someone had traveled from a city reporting coronavirus cases, and the National Health Commission cut in half the quarantine period for inbound international travelers to seven days.
But Anhui’s government issued strict orders to stamp out the province’s cases. The Communist Party secretary promised to eliminate transmission outside quarantine centers within a week, and told local government officials that there could be no coronavirus-related deaths or cases among medical workers.
Local governments quickly doubled down on restrictions.
Most of Anhui’s cases were identified in Suzhou’s Si County, where on Wednesday the authorities ordered its 760,000 residents to refrain from going out unless it was necessary. The order came three days after the first cases were detected, and nearly everyone in the county has been tested seven times in the past 10 days, according to the authorities. The municipal government of Suzhou said the county had taken 22,000 people who were deemed close contacts of people who have tested positive to government isolation centers, and residents in dozens of neighborhoods where cases were found were barred from leaving their homes.
Still, cases appear to be spreading beyond Anhui. Suzhou borders Jiangsu, Henan and Shandong Provinces. According to the health authorities in those provinces, more than 300 cases reported in at least a dozen cities in neighboring provinces were linked to the outbreak in Suzhou.
Elsewhere in the country, the government of Xi’an, a city of 13 million people, said Tuesday that it would impose tight restrictions after reporting 18 cases since Saturday. For a week, public facilities, entertainment businesses and schools will be shut down, and dining in restaurants will be banned.
By Stephen Castle
LONDON — Prime Minister Boris Johnson moved quickly to plug the holes in his cabinet caused by Tuesday’s resignations of two senior ministers, including the critical job of chancellor of the Exchequer, which went to Nadhim Zahawi, who had been the education secretary.
In moving quickly to replace the two cabinet ministers who resigned, Mr. Johnson sought to stabilize his government at a moment of acute crisis by naming replacements seen as having solid track records.
The appointment of Mr. Zahawi is a significant promotion. He was only brought into the cabinet last year, having previously overseen the successful rollout of the coronavirus vaccine. He now assumes the arduous task of leading economic policy just as inflation soars into double figures and Britain faces the possibility of a recession.
Mr. Zahawi was replaced as education secretary by Michelle Donelan.
The job of health secretary went to Steve Barclay, who had been a minister in the Cabinet Office, which plays a coordinating role in government, and was recently made Mr. Johnson’s chief of staff.
But the stunning departures of Rishi Sunak, the former chancellor of the Exchequer, and Sajid Javid, the former health secretary, forced an emergency reshuffle on a prime minister who has lurched from crisis to crisis. He still has not replaced Oliver Dowden, who quit last month as co-chair of the Conservative Party.
Mr. Barclay had only been made Downing Street chief of staff in February, in a move designed to improve the running of Mr. Johnson’s office following the “partygate” scandal involving illicit gatherings during coronavirus lockdowns. That will leave yet another gap to plug.
By Hurubie Meko and Corey Kilgannon
After a reprieve of more than two years, full alternate-side parking is back in New York City, requiring some drivers who park on the street to play musical chairs twice a week instead of just once.
At least some car owners have been vocal about their dismay, with over 1,700 people signing a petition as of Tuesday to maintain the once-a-week schedule.
The change back to twice a week, effective on Tuesday, was announced in April by Mayor Eric Adams during his early efforts to push the city toward a return to the prepandemic normal. He also said the city was investing $9 million in year-round cleaning, including the use of small mechanical sweepers on protected bike lanes.
At the time, Sanitation Department officials said that relaxed enforcement of street-cleaning rules had gone on for too long and that halving the number of days that cars needed to be moved led to some streets barely being swept at all.
The former mayor, Bill de Blasio, stopped the cleanings in March 2020 when New Yorkers complained about having to move their cars regularly during the pandemic’s early lockdowns. That June, he restored them, but only mandated once-a-week cleanings.
But too many New Yorkers were failing to move their cars at all, willing to risk the possibility of a $65 once-a-week ticket and “blocking the ability of our mechanical brooms to clean streets,” Vincent Gragnani, a spokesman for the Sanitation Department, wrote in an email Tuesday.
The city issued 378,552 street-cleaning violations in 2019, the last year of full alternate-side parking enforcement, according to Mr. Gragnani, for a total of about $18.5 million in revenue.
The return to prepandemic rules means that street cleaning will be fully enforced during the entire block of time listed on signs throughout the city — either once or twice a week, depending on the neighborhood.
The frequency of street cleanings may differ from neighborhood to neighborhood, or even from street to street, making the change on Tuesday feel more acute in some areas than others. While twice-a-week street cleanings are standard throughout Manhattan and the Bronx, other boroughs still have some areas with once-a-week cleaning.
Some drivers were left unaware of the change on Tuesday — when 222 mechanical brooms were dispatched across the city.
“A lot of people didn’t get the memo,” said Michael Bergelson, who was walking past a row of parked cars with fresh parking tickets on their windshields on a stretch of Riverside Drive in Morningside Heights.
But Mr. Bergelson, a computer technician for NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, follows the city’s daily alternate-side regulations religiously. So he was out by 9:30 a.m. on Tuesday to move his 2008 Yaris from its Riverside Drive spot.
“If you live in New York and own a car, your life revolves around alternate-side parking,” he said.
The return of the car-shuffling routine is harder on some New Yorkers than on others, said Katie Rader, a Gramercy Park resident who started the petition against the return to a twice-a-week schedule.
She noted on the petition’s website that the fines would mostly affect middle-class New Yorkers who can’t afford garages and that having to move the car more frequently was particularly hard for those with disabilities or parents of small children.
“The reinstated rules are a complete money grab,” Ms. Rader, 30, said in an interview. The answer to the city’s sanitation problem isn’t fining drivers, she added.
“If the city wants money, fine the landlords who refuse to take care of trash in their sidewalks,” she said.
Joe Goddu, an art dealer who also lives in Morningside Heights and who wanted to make sure he had a parking spot after street cleaning wrapped up, worked on his laptop on the hood of his Subaru on Tuesday, while waiting for the parking zone to become legal again at 11 a.m.
“It’s a pain in the neck to have to do this twice as often, but on the other hand, all the people without cars have been putting up with dirtier streets all this time,” he said. “So having cleaner streets is more important than the inconvenience of us having to move our cars more often.”
The need for clean streets is a point the Sanitation Department drove home in a TikTok video it released on Tuesday — parodying a charity ad, sanitation workers plead with New Yorkers to move their cars as Sarah McLachlan’s “Angel” plays in the background.
“Every day, litter gets on the streets of our city, and it’s crying out to be cleaned up,” Jessica Tisch, the city’s sanitation commissioner, says in the video while sitting in a street sweeper. “A single mechanical broom sucks 1,500 pounds of street litter off of New York City streets. But they don’t work if you don’t move your car for alternate-side parking.”
Of course, after the fuss about the twice-a-week street cleaning regulations returning, the street sweeper never even showed up to clean the stretch of Riverside Drive on Tuesday morning where Mr. Bergelson had diligently moved his car — even if the ticket agent did.
“The dirty little secret,” Mr. Bergelson said with a laugh, “is that it’s more about revenue than street cleaning.”
By Benjamin Mueller
Roseann Renouf, 77, has grown tired of the current generation of coronavirus shots. Having “never been one for a lot of vaccination,” she decided to forgo the latest round of boosters after watching vaccinated friends contract Covid-19, even though the doses offer a critical extra layer of protection.
“It’s just taking another same booster,” Ms. Renouf, a retired nurse anesthetist from Fort Worth, said. “They haven’t done anything different with them to cover new variants.”
But her gripe about the Covid vaccines may soon be settled. American regulators committed last week to updating the 2020 vaccine recipes for this fall’s booster campaign with new formulas meant to defend against the ultra-contagious Omicron subvariants, offering Ms. Renouf and other holdouts a fresh reason to change their minds.
The Biden administration is betting that the new cocktails, the centerpiece of an effort to drastically speed up vaccine development, might appeal to the half of inoculated Americans who have so far spurned booster shots, a key constituency in the fight against future Covid waves.
Vaccine updates are becoming more urgent by the day, many scientists said. The most evasive forms of Omicron yet, known as BA.4 and BA.5, appear to be driving a fresh surge of cases across much of the United States. The same subvariants have sent hospital admissions climbing in Britain, France, Portugal, Belgium and Israel.
Covid deaths in the United States, which had been hovering for months near their lowest levels of the pandemic, are rising again. In the worst case, epidemiologists have predicted some 200,000 Covid deaths in the United States within the next year.
“We’re hoping that we can convince people to go get that booster,” said Dr. Peter Marks, who oversees the vaccines office at the Food and Drug Administration, “and help mature their immune response and help prevent another wave.”
Many scientists believe that updated boosters will be critical for diversifying people’s immune defenses as subvariants eat away at the protection offered by vaccines. Catching up with a virus that has been so rapidly mutating may be impossible, they said. But it was far better to be only a few months, rather than a couple of years, behind the pathogen.
“Omicron is so different that, to me, it seems pretty clear we’re starting to run out of ground in terms of how well these vaccines protect against symptomatic infections,” said Deepta Bhattacharya, an immunologist at the University of Arizona. “It’s very important that we update the shots.”
Now, the question is whether those modified boosters will arrive in time. In a bid to match the latest forms of the virus, the F.D.A. asked vaccine manufacturers to tailor their new shots to the BA.4 and BA.5 subvariants, rather than to the original version of Omicron from last winter.
Virologists said that a subvariant vaccine would generate not only the strongest immune defenses against current versions of the virus, but also the type of broad antibody response that will help protect against whatever form of the virus emerges in the months ahead.
But building a fall booster campaign around vaccines at the forefront of the virus’s evolution could also come at a cost. Pfizer and Moderna said that they could deliver subvariant vaccine doses no earlier than October. Some F.D.A. advisers warned in a public meeting last week that the timeline could be slowed even further by any number of routine delays.
In contrast, a vaccine targeting the original version of Omicron is closer at hand: Moderna and Pfizer have already started making doses tailored to the original form of Omicron, and Moderna said that it could start supplying them this summer. Whether the benefits of a newer subvariant vaccine outweigh the drawbacks of having to wait longer depends on when exactly it arrives and how much havoc the virus wreaks before then, scientists said.
They said that having some form of an updated vaccine by the fall was crucial.
“I would lean toward thinking BA.4, BA.5 is a good choice unless it dramatically extends the timeline,” said Jesse Bloom, a virologist at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center in Seattle, voicing support for the subvariant vaccine. “If using BA.4, BA.5 only modestly extends the timeline, I think it’s a good choice.”
The updated shots will test the public’s openness to an accelerated vaccine program that is reminiscent of the way annual flu shots are formulated, but that is entirely new when it comes to the coronavirus.
The original Covid vaccines had to withstand slow and laborious testing: Volunteers took the shots and then went about their lives while researchers tracked who got sick. But there is now ample evidence that the shots are safe. And any tweaks to the recipe could be wasted if scientists were to spend the better part of a year testing them.
Instead, vaccine manufacturers have been studying volunteers’ blood samples in the lab to gauge their immune responses to a booster that is tailored to the first version of Omicron. The subvariant boosters have so far been through lighter testing: Pfizer has studied only how they have affected antibody responses in mice.
The F.D.A. said that it would not require clinical trial data for the subvariant boosters before authorization and would rely instead on studies of boosters targeting the original version of Omicron. Some scientists said that authorizing modified vaccines without time-consuming human studies was essential to keeping up.
“It just seems dangerous to overly bureaucratize the rollout of an updated vaccine,” said Jeremy Kamil, a virologist at Louisiana State University Health Shreveport. Moving too slowly, he said, would risk leaving older and other vulnerable people exposed to a pathogen that looks different than what the original vaccines had prepared them for.
“If a bank robber’s grown a beard and dyed their hair,” he said, “it’s going to help your response to know what they look like today rather than when they were 14 years old.”
Some government vaccine advisers have said that regulators had not yet proven that updated boosters protected substantially better than existing boosters against severe Covid. Others have expressed concern that reformulating vaccines would undercut confidence in the vaccination program.
For some booster-shy Americans, though, the fact that the current offerings had grown dated was the source of their apathy.
“It probably helps a bit, the booster, but not to the extent of going to the trouble of getting it,” said Cherry Alena, a retired medical secretary in her 70s from Northern California, whose last Covid vaccine was 16 months ago. “It’s not specifically formulated for the thing that’s going around.”
A modified shot would appeal to her, she said, because “it gives you specific immunity against the specific thing.”
Gaps in booster coverage have left the United States more exposed to deaths during Omicron waves. More than half of vaccinated Americans have not received a booster. Three-quarters of those eligible for a second booster have not gotten one.
This spring, people age 50 and older who had received a single booster were dying from Covid at four times the rate of those with two booster doses, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
There are no certainties when it comes to forecasting the pathogen’s evolution. Come winter, the virus could take an unexpected turn away from the Omicron branch of the evolutionary tree. And whereas flu viruses typically turn over in the course of years, new coronavirus variants can emerge and then start stampeding across the world within months.
But scientists said it was reassuring that the updated boosters — which would also contain a component of the original formulation — appeared to generate strong immune responses to many different versions of the virus. And for now, signs are pointing toward this winter’s virus being a descendant of Omicron.
“The more time that passes, the more likely it is that anything new is going to emerge from Omicron,” said Trevor Bedford, an evolutionary biologist at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center.
Even though the coronavirus evolves faster than the flu, Dr. Bedford said, mRNA technology enables Covid shots to be modified more quickly, too. Decisions about the composition of an autumn flu vaccine are typically made in February, he noted; this fall’s coronavirus vaccines are not being decided upon until early summer.
And scientists have a wider window into what coronavirus strains are spreading and how quickly. “With SARS-CoV-2, we have 12 million genomes,” Dr. Bedford said of the virus. “For flu, we have collected 250,000 over decades.”
The F.D.A.’s decision to give its blessing to updated vaccines may have ripple effects across the globe, setting Moderna and Pfizer on the path to making those shots. But some countries may choose boosters targeting the earlier version of Omicron because they will be ready sooner.
Some F.D.A. advisers also said that a vaccine made for the original strain by a third company, Novavax, held promise as an Omicron-targeted booster. That shot is not yet authorized for use.
Scientists said they were eager for a clearer picture of how updated vaccine candidates would be chosen in the future and how quickly they could be made. Some also pressed for closer cooperation between American regulators and the World Health Organization, which supports updating the vaccines but with the original version of Omicron, not its latest subvariants, as a different way of broadening immune responses.
The ultimate goal, many scientists said, was to compress the time between when the next immune-dodging variant emerges and when people can be vaccinated against it.
“We’re now seven months out from when we first detected Omicron,” said Dr. Michael Z. Lin, a professor of neurobiology at Stanford who has tracked the regulatory process. “We need a rapid way for strain selection, and it needs to be more rapid than what we’ve done so far.”
Among those likely to line up for a modified vaccine is Randi Plevy, 57, of New York. Having been vaccinated, and then infected twice, she held off on getting a booster shot.
“Why am I getting a booster if it’s not going to protect me against what’s out there?” she said. “If they can demonstrate you’re getting ahead of the curve, and ‘Here is the latest and greatest that is going to protect you from the next strain,’ I think that’d be really attractive to a lot of people.”
By Andrew Jacobs
In the early 1990s, long before P.P.E., N95 and asymptomatic transmission became household terms, federal health officials issued guidelines for how medical workers should protect themselves from tuberculosis during a resurgence of the highly infectious respiratory disease.
Their recommendation, elastomeric respirators, an industrial-grade face mask familiar to car painters and construction workers, would in the decades that followed become the gold standard for infection-control specialists focused on the dangers of airborne pathogens.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention promoted them during the SARS outbreak of 2003 and the swine flu pandemic of 2009. A few studies since then have suggested that reusable elastomeric respirators should be essential gear for frontline medical workers during a respiratory pandemic, which experts predicted would quickly deplete supplies of N95s, the disposable filtration masks largely made in China.
But when the coronavirus swept the globe and China cut off exports of N95s, elastomeric respirators were nowhere to be found in a vast majority of hospitals and health clinics in the United States. Although impossible to know for sure, some experts believe the dire mask shortage early on contributed to the wave of infections that killed more than 3,600 health workers.
The pandemic has generated a bevy of painful lessons about the importance of preparing for public health emergencies. From the Trump administration’s tepid early response to the C.D.C.’s bungled coronavirus testing rollout and its mixed messaging on masking, quarantining and the reopening of schools, the federal government has been roundly criticized for mishandling a health crisis that has left one million Americans dead and dented public faith in a once-hallowed institution.
Three years into the pandemic, elastomeric respirators remain a rarity at American health care facilities. The C.D.C. has done little to promote the masks, and all but a handful of the dozen or so domestic companies that rushed to manufacture them over the past two years have stopped making the masks or have folded because demand never took off.
Most cost between $15 and $40 each, and the filters, which should be replaced at least once a year, run about $5 each. Made of soft silicone, the masks are comfortable to wear, according to health care worker surveys, and they have a shelf life of a decade or more.
“It’s frustrating and frightening because a mask like this can make the difference between life and death, but no one knows about them,” said Claudio Dente, whose company, Dentec Safety, recently stopped making elastomeric respirators that were specifically redesigned at the request of federal regulators for health care workers.
The government’s tentative approach to elastomeric respirators during the pandemic has largely escaped public scrutiny, even as American mask producers, health policy experts and nursing unions have been pressing federal officials to promote them more aggressively. The masks, they note, are an environmentally sustainable and cost-effective alternative to N95s. Worn properly, they offer better protection than N95s, which, as their name suggests, only filter out 95 percent of pathogens. Most elastomerics exceed 99 percent.
The masks have another notable attribute: Most are made in the United States.
Now that hospitals have resumed buying cheap, Chinese-made face coverings and the resurgent American mask industry has imploded, experts warn of the perils of the nation’s continued dependency on foreign-made protective equipment. Many of the U.S. companies calling it quits are start-ups whose founders jumped into the P.P.E. business out of a sense of civic duty.
“It’s sad to see all of this manufacturing capacity come online during a crisis, only to be shut down because hospitals and even our own government would rather save a few pennies buying from China,” said Lloyd Armbrust, president of the American Mask Manufacturers Association. Its membership includes just eight companies that are still producing masks, down from 51 a year ago. He said 17 of the companies have shut down.
Some experts say the C.D.C.’s hands-off approach to elastomeric respirators is unintentionally encouraging a return to the nation’s reliance on disposable masks made overseas. Dr. Eric Feigl-Ding, an epidemiologist who heads the Covid-19 task force at the World Health Network, criticized federal officials for inaction despite compelling evidence that elastomerics provide the highest level of protection against aerosolized viruses. “At a certain point, you need to act on the existing science, and the failure to do otherwise is a dereliction of duty,” he said.
To be clear, federal health experts back the use of elastomerics but say they are awaiting additional study results before offering full-throated support for their widespread adoption by medical personnel. Emily Haas, a scientist at the C.D.C.’s National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, or NIOSH, said researchers were still grappling with the need to regularly disinfect them and complaints about muffled communication, though some newer models make it easier for wearers to be heard.
The bigger challenge, she says, is convincing hospitals and group purchasing organizations to embrace the masks given the abundance of N95s, which offer comparable protection during routine medical care and can be thrown away after each use.
“There’s been so much research in the last 10 years that has really supported elastomerics, so in some ways the issue right now is cultural,” Dr. Haas said. “No one likes change, and introducing a whole new system of respiratory protection can be a heavy lift.”
Experts say such obstacles could be overcome through more muscular federal leadership. Dr. Tom Frieden, who led an unsuccessful effort to fill the Strategic National Stockpile with elastomerics when he was C.D.C. director in 2009, said the advantages of providing them to frontline medical workers were clear, especially given the nation’s ruinous overreliance on single-use masks. He said health authorities could promote elastomerics by highlighting their cost savings for hospitals and the environmental benefits of a reusable mask to help reduce the tsunami of N95s that end up in landfills. “To me, it’s a puzzle why they haven’t become more widespread,” Dr. Frieden said.
Providing an elastomeric respirator to each of the nation’s 18 million health care workers would cost roughly $275 million, according to Nicolas Smit, an expert on elastomerics and executive director of the American Mask Manufacturers Association. By comparison, he noted that the federal government spent $413 million on a disastrous effort to decontaminate N95 masks so they could be safely reused.
James C. Chang, an industrial hygienist, has long been a fan of elastomerics. In 2018, he helped to produce a report on them for the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, and after the short-lived swine flu pandemic of 2009, he persuaded his employer, the University of Maryland Medical Center, to purchase 1,500 masks. The decision was based in part on research that predicted a respiratory pandemic lasting more than a few weeks would lead to catastrophic supply-chain shortages.
“When you ran the numbers, it was pretty clear we’d burn through a six- or seven-digit cache of disposables pretty quickly,” he said. “It’s just not feasible for any hospital to stock that many masks.”
Initially he had a handful of concerns — that their “Darth Vader” look would frighten patients or that disinfecting them would be burdensome. But those fears quickly faded in early 2020 as hospitals across the country scrambled to find N95s, and the C.D.C. issued guidelines saying N95s could be reused up to five times — guidance that evoked widespread skepticism among health professionals.
To deal with the need to disinfect the masks, he set up a system that allowed workers to drop them off after each shift so they could be cleaned before being made available to others.
“It was a real success story on our end because our staff had respirators to wear and they felt more reassured wearing elastomerics than wearing N95s,” Mr. Chang said.
One of the only other hospital systems in the country to adopt the masks on a large scale was Allegheny Health Network of Western Pennsylvania, which early in the pandemic distributed more than 8,000 respirators at its 14 hospitals. The decision to do so stemmed from a coincidence of geography: Allegheny’s headquarters in Pittsburgh was not far from the manufacturing plant of MSA Safety, a century-old company that got its start producing coal miner protective gear with help from Thomas Edison.
Prompted by an appeal from hospital administrators, MSA began sending over the industrial-grade masks but they quickly ran into a problem. The protruding filters only screened inhaled air, which meant that exhaled air from an infected wearer could pose a potential health risk to those nearby, according to Dr. Zane Frund, executive director for materials and chemicals research at MSA Safety.
The solution was not exactly rocket science: Product designers simply removed the masks’ exhalation valve, and NIOSH in late 2020 approved the new models. A subsequent design tweak added a mechanical voice amplifier to help ease communication.
Dr. Sricharan Chalikonda, Allegheny’s chief medical operations officer, said he was surprised by just how popular they became among the 2,000 medical personnel who had been outfitted to wear them — a process aimed at ensuring air would not evade the mask’s tight face seal.
According to a paper he published in the Journal of the American College of Surgeons, none of the employees went back to wearing N95s. The cost benefit of relying almost entirely on elastomerics became irrefutable: Outfitting the workers was one-tenth as expensive than supplying them with disposable N95s. A separate study found that after one year, the filters were still 99 percent effective.
“Elastomerics for us really were a game changer,” Dr. Chalikonda said. “When I think of all the millions of dollars wasted on N95s and then trying to reuse them makes you realize how much elastomerics are a missed opportunity.”
Federal health officials say they are moving as fast as possible to produce stronger guidance on elastomerics. Maryann D’Alessandro, director of the National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory, said scientists were reviewing feedback from a study that distributed nearly 100,000 respirators to hospitals, nursing homes and first-responders across the country. “If we can get a tool kit together to serve as a guide for organizations and educate the users, we hope it can help move the needle,” she said.
Many mask entrepreneurs are not likely to last that long. Max Bock-Aronson, the co-founder of Breathe99, which makes an elastomeric respirator that Time magazine included on its 2020 list of best inventions, has been winding down operations at the company’s Minnesota plant.
He blamed the slump in sales on Covid fatigue and waning public interest in protective gear. The company’s fortunes, he added, were doomed early on by the C.D.C.’s mask guidance, which prompted Amazon, Google and Facebook to limit or bar the sale of medical-grade masks to consumers, even as P.P.E. imports once again began flooding the United States.
“The whole industry has been gutted,” said Mr. Bock-Aronson. “Every time there’s a new variant, we get a small bump in sales, but I haven’t taken a nickel out of the company since last May.”
For now, he is focused on finding a buyer for his company while selling off his inventory online. The masks cost $59 and can be sheathed in washable covers that come in eight colors, among them crimson, linen and royal blue.
All sales, the website points out apologetically, are final.
By Motoko Rich and Ben Dooley
TOKYO — To understand how Japan has fared better than most of the world in containing the dire consequences of the coronavirus pandemic, consider Mika Yanagihara, who went shopping for flowers this past week in central Tokyo. Even when walking outside in temperatures in the mid-90s, she kept the lower half of her face fully covered.
“People will stare at you,” Ms. Yanagihara, 33, said, explaining why she didn’t dare take off her mask. “There is that pressure.”
Japan’s Covid death rate, just one-twelfth of that in the United States, is the lowest among the world’s wealthiest nations. With the world’s third-largest economy and 11th-largest populace, Japan also tops global rankings in vaccination and has consistently had one of the globe’s lowest infection rates.
Although no government authority has ever mandated masks or vaccinations or instituted lockdowns or mass surveillance, Japan’s residents have largely evaded the worst ravages of the virus. Instead, in many ways, Japan let peer pressure do a lot of the work.
Even now, as average daily cases have fallen to just 12 per 100,000 residents — about a third of the average in the United States — a government survey in May found that close to 80 percent of people working in offices or enrolled in school wear masks and about 90 percent do so when using public transit. Movie theaters, sports stadiums and shopping malls continue to request that visitors wear masks, and for the most part, people comply. The term “face pants” has become a buzzword, implying that dropping a mask would be as embarrassing as taking off one’s underwear in public.
Many factors have undoubtedly contributed to Japan’s coronavirus outcomes, including a nationalized health care system and severe border controls that have outlasted those in many other countries.
But social conformity — and a fear of public shaming that is instilled from the youngest ages — has been a key ingredient in Japan’s relative success in Covid prevention, experts say. Unlike in many other countries, Japanese law does not permit the government to order lockdowns or vaccinations. The majority of the population followed each other in heeding guidance from scientific experts who encouraged people to wear masks and avoid situations where they would be in enclosed, unventilated areas with large crowds.
After a slow start, once Japan ramped up the distribution of vaccines, most people followed advisories to get them. Even without mandates, close to 90 percent of all people over 65, the most vulnerable population, have received booster shots, compared with 70 percent of seniors in the United States.
In Japan, “if you tell people to look right, they will all look right,” said Kazunari Onishi, an associate professor of public health at St. Luke’s International University in Tokyo. 
“Generally, I think that being influenced by others and not thinking for yourself is a bad thing,” Dr. Onishi added. But during the pandemic, he said, “it was a good thing.”
Unlike in the United States, wearing a mask or getting a vaccine never became ideological litmus tests. Although trust in government has fallen during the pandemic, in a country where the same party has governed for all but four years since 1955, the public put pragmatism over politics in the approach to Covid.
Often, people policed each other or businesses seen to be violating municipal requests to close early or stop serving alcohol during periods designated as states of emergency.
“We got so many reports about shops being open that we started joking about the ‘self restraint police,’” said Yuko Hirai, who works in the emergency response department in Osaka, Japan’s third-largest prefecture. “People were definitely aware that society’s eyes were on them.”
The practice of keeping in line with peers is inculcated in schoolchildren, who wear uniforms in most public schools and are shamed into following institutional expectations. “Just being removed from the group is such a big deal for Japanese kids,” said Naomi Aoki, associate professor of public management at the University of Tokyo. “They always want to belong to a social group and don’t want to feel isolated.”
Children are taught to act for the collective benefit. Students clean classroom floors and school grounds and take turns serving lunch in cafeterias.
Japanese culture also depends on an ethic of public self-restraint that can be marshaled into group action. When Emperor Hirohito was dying in 1988, pop singers postponed weddings and schools canceled festivals.
After the 2011 nuclear disaster in Fukushima led to serious power shortages, the public cut back on electricity use voluntarily. (With temperatures rising in Tokyo this past week, residents are being asked to do so again.)
During the pandemic, politicians tapped “into this collective idea of self-restraint for the public good,” said James Wright, an anthropologist at the Alan Turing Institute in London who has studied Japan’s coronavirus response.
When the coronavirus emerged from China in early 2020, Japan was among the first countries where it showed up, spreading in small clusters and aboard the Diamond Princess, a cruise ship that docked in Yokohama and suffered a large outbreak. Japanese experts quickly realized the virus was airborne and that the best way to reduce its spread was to keep people from gathering in small, unventilated spaces or having close contact with others.
With few legal options for enforcing the guidance, authorities hoped the population would voluntarily comply with pleas to stay home, said Hitoshi Oshitani, a professor of virology at Tohoku University in northeastern Japan and a government adviser.
Despite Japan’s culture of collectivism, Dr. Oshitani was surprised when businesses quickly closed and people refrained from going out. Companies that had never allowed telecommuting sent employees home with laptops. Families canceled visits to older relatives. Close to 200 industry groups representing theaters, professional sports teams, and venues that hosted weddings and funerals issued lengthy protocols for preventing infections.
The public embraced the guidelines, and the overall death rate actually fell below that of the year immediately preceding the coronavirus outbreak.
Those who tried to buck the guidance were subjected to public condemnation. Toshio Date, who operates a venue in Osaka devoted to the board games Go and shogi, initially tried to stay open when the city requested that restaurants, bars and other entertainment businesses shut down.
When local television stations started asking to film the club as an outlier, Mr. Date, 58, got the message and quickly closed. Even after infections settled down in Osaka, which recorded the highest death rate in Japan, and businesses reopened, he said strangers frequently scolded him for hosting too many customers.
Although the public has provided most of the sticks, the government has offered carrots in the form of economic subsidies for businesses.
In 2020, the country paid out over $40.5 billion to more than 4.2 million small- to medium-size companies and individual business owners, according to statistics from the Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry.
Larger businesses received “cooperation money” based on their pre-pandemic revenue, as much as 200,000 yen — just under $1,500 — a day.
The incentives were not universally effective. In the first summer of the pandemic, clusters of infections began appearing in nightlife districts in central Tokyo, as visitors to bars and cabarets ignored the experts’ advice.
When businesses flouted guidance on ventilation, masking and alcohol sanitizing, city officials were dispatched to convince them to fall in line. Only as a last resort were businesses fined or cut off from economic subsidies. In Tokyo, according to the city’s Bureau of Industrial and Labor Affairs, between 96 and 98 percent of businesses ultimately agreed to follow the rules.
Experts warn that voluntary compliance is no guarantee of indefinite success.
“The response is like an Othello game,” said Dr. Oshitani, comparing Japan’s coronavirus results to the board game where one move can change a winning outcome to a losing one. “All of a sudden, the most successful countries can become the worst country in the world,” he said.
For now, residents continue to bow to peer pressure.
Kae Kobe, 40, a receptionist at an office in Shibuya, said that because her job is client facing, she always wears her mask at work.
“Everyone around is still wearing it,” she said. “So it’s hard to get rid of it.”
Hisako Ueno and Hikari Hida contributed reporting.
By Talya Minsberg
In March 2020, Dr. Niall Elliott was planning for the Summer Olympics with his colleagues at the British Olympic Association. Plans were drawn for what to do if an athlete suffered a catastrophic injury or a mental health crisis in the final lead-up to the Games. There were meetings on how to move some of the world’s finest athletes across the globe and how to address logistical snafus.
They had plans in place for nearly everything, except a global pandemic, he said.
Overnight, Dr. Elliott began providing support and care for athletes who were locked out of training facilities and fearful of how this new virus could affect their athletic careers. The questions were endless and the answers scarce.
“We were very cautious at the start because it was a new virus,” Dr. Elliott said. “We just didn’t know what the impact would be on the body.”
The urgent question for athletes: How long would Covid-19 knock you out and when could you get back to training?
Olympians and weekend warriors have been asking that question ever since. And the answer continues to shift as doctors learn more about the coronavirus and as its variants wreak havoc on training schedules.
The key is resetting expectations and rethinking a timeline for a full return to play or a return to running.
“Compared to most viral illnesses, the expectation that athletes should have is that it takes on average twice as long to get back to where you were,” Dr. Tod Olin, the director of the Exercise and Performance Breathing Center at National Jewish Health in Denver, said. “So if someone usually returns to their activity within a week of having a seasonal flu, it may take two weeks to come back after having Covid-19. But it’s also taken some three to four weeks for a lot of people, and a fraction of people take considerably longer.”
That’s a hard pill to swallow for athletes looking to return to their previous selves as soon as symptoms subside. And it’s not easy to tell runners to slow down when many of their goals are to speed up.
In June 2020, Dr. Elliott published a protocol that has evolved and been adopted by other physicians as more data has become available on the virus and how it affects athletes. The initial protocol pointed to a six-stage gradual return to play, starting with a minimum rest period of 10 days and working up to increased frequency, duration and intensity of training sessions.
In the two years since, doctors have distinguished how to direct athletes based on above-neck symptoms and below-neck symptoms. Patients who have above-neck symptoms tend to recover more quickly and are able to return to athletics faster than those with below-neck symptoms who may suffer from fatigue, aches, pains and lung or heart issues.
That distinction — along with patients who test positive but remain asymptomatic — helped Dr. Elliott adjust his guidance to a five-stage protocol, one that better serves athletes looking to return to training. Patients now can skip ahead to different stages of the protocol depending on their symptoms and their severity.
And in the year of post-vaccine data, doctors have found that pushing the pace or intensity in training sessions can dramatically backfire.
“They are used to solving all problems by trying harder,” Dr. Olin, who has worked extensively with Olympic athletes, said. “And Covid-19 is seemingly unique if you push too hard — if you train through this — there’s this phenomenon of the setback, one that’s analogous to a hamstring injury, where if you were getting a little bit better and then you try to drop the hammer for a workout and you are three months back.”
I should know, it happened to me. I tested positive for Covid-19 in early May and started getting back to my running routine, albeit at a slower pace, without any true workouts, shortly thereafter. To my great surprise, I tested positive for Covid-19 again four and a half weeks later. (Yes, really, it’s very possible.) If I were antsy to return to running the first time, I was bouncing off the walls the second. This week, I thought I had recovered enough to do a short speed workout. But when I hit that first interval, it’s like my body laughed at me: “Nope.”
I learned that getting to the start line of a race, or to the field of play, should not be a race at all.
But athletes, and arguably runners in particular, have a special brand of impatience when it comes to lacing up their shoes again. When we asked readers of the Running Newsletter to share their stories of returning to running after Covid-19, hundreds shared their ongoing frustration and small victories. Many shared a sense of gratitude for returning to a race, and countless expressed dismay that their recovery is still ongoing.
Aquene Kimmel, a 26-year-old runner, said her first run after testing positive for Covid-19 last December was “a slow jog that felt tougher than it had in years.” Hills are still harder for her than she remembers, and her pace isn’t quite back to where it was, she said.
Dave Madigan, 52, had Covid in March, and despite going back to running slowly, he said he found the effort harder than it should be. “My VO2 max isn’t much different to what I would expect, but I feel really exhausted,” Madigan wrote, referring to oxygen uptake, a way of measuring aerobic fitness. “I tried some short intervals, but they were way harder than normal.”
It took Jenna Ciongoli, 38, a few months to not feel so winded. “Even now, seven months later, while I’m back to running as much as before, I still don’t feel as fast as I was,” she wrote.
As a pulmonologist in the ever-active city of Denver, Dr. Vamsi Guntur of National Jewish Health is accustomed to these responses and has started talking to athletes about readjusting their expectations.
“What we consider recovery compared to what athletes consider recovery is different,” Dr. Guntur said.
“One Olympic athlete very early on, pre-vaccine, said, ‘I’m just used to pushing myself. I want to push myself,’” she recalled. “I said, ‘I know you can, but I don’t want you to.’”
It’s a sentiment doctors and experts are sharing even more widely post-vaccines, warning of regression if athletes return to high intensity training or racing before their body is ready.
“You will always have another competition, another race, another training session,” Dr. Elliott echoed.
“But you only have one body,” he added. “You’ve got to look after it.”
