Advertisement
Supported by
The helicopter that crashed in Logan County was used during the Vietnam War and was being flown this week by enthusiasts.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Livia Albeck-Ripka and Jason M. Bailey
Six people were killed when a helicopter being flown during a reunion for enthusiasts of historical aircraft crashed on Wednesday evening in Logan County, W.Va., the authorities said.
Just before 5 p.m., the 911 call center in the county, which is in the southwestern part of West Virginia near the border of Kentucky, received a call about a helicopter that had crashed, said Sonya Porter, the deputy director of the Logan County Office of Emergency Management. The crash occurred in a mountainous area near Route 17, at Blair Mountain. That area is known as Kelly Hollow.
Ms. Porter said she was not sure what might have caused the crash. “At the time the crash occurred, I think the weather was clear,” she said.
The aircraft was a Bell UH-1B helicopter manufactured in 1962, according to the Federal Aviation Administration. Ray Bryant, who was at the scene of the crash and is the chief of operations for the Logan Emergency Ambulance Service Authority, said its tail number was N98F.
There were two events taking place in Logan County at the time of the crash, Ms. Porter said on Thursday: a festival in Logan and the seventh annual “Huey” reunion, meant to celebrate the Bell UH-1B helicopters, nicknamed “Hueys.” Ms. Porter said she did not know if the victims were participating in any of those events.
The helicopter that crashed is owned by Marpat Aviation, which was holding the “Huey” events. Its website said people could make a reservation to fly the helicopter without being a pilot.
Flying the helicopter for 30 minutes required a $250 donation to pay for fuel, according to the website, while others could ride along if they made a small donation. The helicopter that crashed had been used during the Vietnam War and appeared in movies including “Die Hard,” “The Rock” and “Baywatch,” according to the Marpat website.
Mike Holbrook, the owner and operator of Marpat Aviation, did not return a call requesting comment. Two people who answered phone numbers connected with the company hung up on a reporter.
The helicopter, which had taken off from Logan County Airport, crashed into the roadway and guardrail of a rural two-lane road, Mr. Bryant said. He said that the helicopter was still on fire when he arrived, and that in his 35 years with the county’s emergency services, he had seen “no crashes of this magnitude.”
One woman said she ran as quickly as possible to the scene after the crash, ducking under the guardrail. “I went up to the helicopter, but the fire was just so hot, so intense,” the woman, Bobbi Childs, told WSAZ-3, a television station in Huntington.
Troopers with the West Virginia State Police were also on the scene to assist in the investigation, Ms. Porter said.
The F.A.A. and the National Transportation Safety Board are set to investigate the crash, with the N.T.S.B. leading the inquiry, Ms. Porter said.
A spokesman for the N.T.S.B. said that investigators would arrive at the scene on Thursday afternoon.
The victims’ names have not been released to the public.
Gov. Jim Justice of West Virginia said on Twitter on Wednesday that he and his wife were “praying for the families of those killed in this tragic helicopter crash.”
Johnny Diaz contributed reporting.
Advertisement
