Mayor Adams and City Council leaders reached a deal Friday on an annual budget of $101.1 billion — making it the largest municipal spending plan in Big Apple history.
The mayor, Council Speaker Adrienne Adams and other key Council members made the agreement official at a noon press conference in City Hall’s rotunda.
Mayor Adams cast the handshake deal between himself and Speaker Adams as a common-sense plan attempting to strike a balance between the city’s needs and a desire to spend more responsibly.
He also suggested it should serve as a touchstone for New Yorkers who share the same sort of humble beginnings as he and the speaker, both of whom grew up attending public schools in Queens.
“This is a moment for them,” the mayor said. “As we deal with putting things in our budget that is going to give them an opportunity to excel, it’s also stating that you can look at the leadership of this city and see what the possibilities are.”
After two months of negotiations between the Adams administration and the City Council, the massive budget grew by $1.4 billion as compared to the $99.7 billion executive spending plan the mayor unveiled in April.
The finalized fiscal blueprint includes additional funding for housing vouchers, nearly $80 million to expand the city’s summer youth employment program and a property tax rebate for small homeowners worth approximately $90 million.
The rebate will translate into $150 for homeowners earning less than $250,000 annually.
The city’s executive and legislative branches also put $8.3 billion into city reserves, another record. Adams attributed that to higher-than-expected tax revenues flowing into city coffers and pointed to upcoming labor negotiations as a window into his rationale.
The agreement comes three weeks ahead of the July 1 deadline by which the Council must pass the budget. That milestone marked a contrast between the city and the state, whose budget was finalized a week late in early April.
“There wasn’t too much to argue about because my colleagues know their districts,” Speaker Adams said. “As far as the state is concerned, um, they can take notes.”
New York City Mayor Eric Adams (left) and New York City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams (right) 
The $98.7 billion budget adopted last year by the Council with former Mayor Bill de Blasio’s blessing was at the time the largest in history.
Adams and the Council came to Friday’s deal after months of negotiations that at times turned heated.
A handshake ceremony on the budget was initially expected Thursday, but concerns from the Council over the mayor’s proposal to cut $215 million in funding for schools that have lost enrollment during the pandemic threw a wrench into those plans and resulted in more talks. A Council source said the concerns were assuaged by Education Chancellor David Banks’ promise late Thursday to ensure “every school” in the city is kept at 100% of the Fair Student Funding formula.
“We’re not cutting it,” the mayor said Friday. “We’re adjusting the amount based on the student population.”
Funding for housing emerged as another contentious point of debate during budget talks.
Council members pressed Adams to earmark at least $4 billion per year for developing and maintaining affordable and public housing — noting that he made a promise to do so on last year’s campaign trail.
But the mayor only set aside $2.5 billion for the annual capital housing budget in his executive proposal. That $2.5 billion figure remains in the final budget, and will come in addition to other outlays like $237 million to increase housing vouchers and the $90 million property tax rebate.
Other areas where the Council and Adams clashed include funding for the NYPD and the Department of Correction.
In his executive budget plan, Adams floated hiring 578 new Department of Correction officers to staff Rikers Island and other city jails.
That ask didn’t make it into the final budget after the suggestion drew ire from Democratic Council members.
Rikers is suffering from severe staffing shortages, but Council members argued that’s not the case because of a lack of guards. Rather, they said, the staffing crisis is the result of hundreds of guards abusing the department’s lax sick leave system.
“Work with the staff you have,” Councilwoman Carlina Rivera (D-Manhattan) told Correction Commissioner Louis Molina during a hearing on April 29.
By Friday, the mayor appeared to have arrived at the same conclusion.
“I’m telling city agencies every agency must do more with their budget,” he said. “That was the message the Council gave us and we agreed on it.”
On the NYPD front, Adams promised at the start of the year to keep NYPD spending flat.
Still, in April’s executive blueprint, he proposed adding nearly $182 million in police spending for a total operational NYPD budget of $5.6 billion. He said the spending bump was needed to bankroll expanded detective contracts, overtime and some of his signature police initiatives, including new modified plainclothes units.
Ultimately, though, the NYPD’s budget remained flat, aside from pay bumps pre-ordained through collective bargaining.
“Typically, the NYPD budget has gone up. We want to see the NYPD managed more appropriately because the money is there,” Speaker Adams said. “We want to see the NYPD manage that funding a lot better than it has been in the past.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
