(Shutterstock)
Within a few short weeks, families around the city will breathe a sigh of relief as another school year draws to a close. For many, the most recent school year was a welcome return to something more normal, as masks began to come off and families began to feel safer.
As challenging as virtual classrooms and distanced learning have been for so many households, the last few years also taught educators and parents a lot. The burden on schoolchildren was significant, but we watched them adapt to unprecedented circumstances.
Likewise, the way schools conduct business has had to adapt — not just for education in a virtual age, but to a new reality where students cannot afford for educators to do business as usual. Now, more than ever, educators are focused on closing inequities that have been exacerbated by the pandemic and providing individualized support that best encourages a student to succeed.
Recently, New York City Schools Chancellor David Banks told a reporter that he would not shy away from speaking out about one of the most controversial topics in education: testing.
“There’s a reason why so many of our kids disengage and drop out because we’ve just made our schools like testing mills,” the chancellor noted, being clear that testing remains an important tool but only when paired with a fully comprehensive learning experience.
This is the right approach, where we avoid the pitfalls and distractions that standardized tests have created across the educational experience. Testing is a complicated subject, but we should agree that it ought to focus on supporting student growth rather than serving as a potentially punitive measure. Both teachers and students feel the tremendous pressure of testing in a system where scores are linked with performance evaluations and access to resources.
Across the country, educators spend far too many hours training students to master standardized tests that do very little to measure a student’s academic progress. When schools fall into that trap, they lose sight of the larger goal of creating a holistic learning environment that meets each student’s individual needs.
Seven years ago, Catholic educators across the Archdiocese of New York embraced a new approach. Our schools adopted NWEA MAP Growth testing, a smarter-designed exam that produces a less stressful experience for students and allows us to adapt to methods that best support our students.
When assessments are planned and executed thoughtfully, students have the opportunity to explore other subjects and grow essential skills instead of spending countless hours focusing only on tested subjects.
MAP Growth testing was invaluable during the pandemic. At the peak of virtual learning in 2020, New York’s Catholic educators already had a thorough understanding of their students’ strengths and areas for growth thanks to this approach to testing, which we conduct three times a year. Each test allows us to collect highly specific data on a student’s growth and what they may need more support on, giving teachers and parents a better sense of how they can work together for the child’s success.
Families across New York’s Catholic schools have come to rely on this approach to their child’s academic success, which continues to allow us to help them recover from any of the ongoing impacts of the last two years. It’s an invaluable part of what helps ensure our students grow up to thrive as well-rounded individuals.
The chancellor’s approach to testing will be a welcome breath of fresh air to all families in New York, regardless of their school. As educators, this holistic approach to education is what all students and parents deserve.
Like countless parents across New York, I remain hopeful that the days of “testing mills” for students will soon be over.
Deegan is the superintendent of schools in the Archdiocese of New York.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
