The author, who wrote about a world biased against women, is back with answers in a new podcast. She talks about not fitting in, compassion for her younger self and finding her feminism
It’s one of those things that once seen, can’t be unseen. But sometimes Caroline Criado Perez wonders if she would rather not realise that the world is designed for men. “That might be nice,” she says. From every day irritants such as her phone being too big to hold as it was designed for male hands, to the lethal – ill-fitting PPE, lack of research for medical conditions that predominantly affect women knowing that women are more likely to die or be injured in car crashes, because crash-test dummies are built like men – it is exhausting. But the alternative to not knowing that the world was never designed for you in the first place – apart from if you can’t see it, you can’t change it – is going through life feeling as if you just don’t fit, that there’s something wrong with you. 
This was the experience of many readers of Criado Perez’s award-winning 2019 book Invisible Women, and it will almost certainly be the same for listeners of her new podcast, Visible Women, in which she explores how we fix the gender data gap. That was the question that came up every time she did a talk about her book, she says. “It would often be a woman standing up and saying: ‘I had no idea this was going on, I’m so angry, what can I do?’ And I didn’t have a lot of answers. The book had some solutions in it, but people wanted more.”
Criado Perez is nothing if not practical, spotting a problem then fixing it with energy and efficiency. One of her first projects was setting up The Women’s Room, a database of female experts who could speak to a media that often had all-male panels. Then she campaigned to have a woman on a banknote once she realised the removal of Elizabeth Fry from the £5 note would have meant only men were commemorated; the new £10 note, featuring Jane Austen, was launched in 2017. The following year, a statue of Millicent Fawcett was installed in Parliament Square, after Criado Perez noted all the statues there were of men.
The first episode of Visible Women, her weekly 12-part series, focuses on PPE, something that Criado Perez wrote about in her book – including for women in construction and the emergency services – but which took on huge significance during the pandemic. Masks, particularly the respirator-type worn in hospitals, “are not designed for female faces”. The “default-male” position that either treats women as mini-men or ignores them altogether in almost every area, even when they make up the majority – as in the healthcare workforce – is, says Criado Perez wearily, “ludicrous”.
At the beginning of the pandemic, healthcare workers were contacting her, she says, as they were “going in to Covid wards knowing their masks weren’t protecting them and feeling incredibly scared, but doing it anyway”. She encouraged readers of her newsletter to write to their MPs, or raise it with Matt Hancock, the then health secretary, “and we just kept getting knocked back with: ‘PPE is unisex.’” In the case of masks, like so much else, it is about collecting data, then redesign. But the first battle, she says, is to get an acknowledgment that there is a problem.
Why the reluctance? “People don’t want to admit that the things they are producing aren’t currently good enough,” she says. “It’s similar with cars: car manufacturers do not want to admit that women are less safe in their cars, even though the data is glaringly obvious. There was a new study showing that women are twice as likely to become trapped in a car after a crash and that their injury patterns are different. Who wants to admit that the things they produce are not as good for half of the world?” She laughs at the ridiculousness of it. “It just sounds really bad. If they did admit it, they would have to invest money and effort to fix it.” Criado Perez’s work has become about exposing this disparity. “The lack of transparency and information is what allows this kind of thing to continue.”
As a teenager, Criado Perez wasn’t just uninterested in feminism, but found it “embarrassing. I was a misogynist. I was very much ‘not like other girls’,” she says of the “cool girl” she was. “I look back at that girl with compassion, because when isn’t it tough to grow up female? But the 90s was tough.” At Oxford University in her mid-20s, she was introduced to feminist analysis; reading Deborah Cameron’s Feminism and Linguistic Theory “was my first introduction to the ‘default male’. That was my route into feminism and it’s very clear the link between that and the work I have ended up doing. One of the things I wanted to do with Invisible Women was give people that same perspective-switch I had, back in the library at university going: ‘Holy shit.’”
Her work has brought extreme online abuse, resulting in two people who tweeted threats to her receiving jail sentences in 2014. That is just a fraction of the abuse, including death and rape threats, she still gets. Twitter, she says, has “definitely got worse. When I joined in 2012, you could still have a discussion where you might not agree but you were listening to each other, whereas now there’s no space for that. It’s a waste of time.” She uses it as little as she can. Does she feel angry that it has become a no-go area for many women? “Yes, because it was an important space. Without Twitter, I would never have been able to do the banknote campaign because who was I? No one. Twitter enabled that. So yes, we’ve lost an important space for women. I’m in a much more privileged position now – I’ve got my newsletter, I’ve written books, I could write a newspaper article. For women who don’t have other avenues, it’s a tragedy that it has become the space that it has.”
She has spoken before about the deep impact the abuse has had on her mental health. How does she keep going? “The fact that I know that I’m right,” she says. “But I find the abuse frightening.” Still, she says, “I just believe very strongly in what I’m doing.” It helps when she sees tangible change – from big things such as EU legislation that will require new car models to include frontal-impact protection that doesn’t “disadvantage women and older people”, to individual victories. One woman told her she managed to get her company to procure PPE that fits their female workforce; another told her that after years of misdiagnoses, she demanded doctors take her seriously and is now getting the treatment she needs. “When you ask me what keeps me going, it’s that kind of stuff.”
One of the unexpected joys of making the podcast is that she is working as part of a team. Her campaigns have involved others, of course, but she has been the most visible and the most targeted. Writing her books was even more isolating, dealing with “this sometimes really harrowing and enraging research. I spent so much time feeling angry and sad and frustrated.” Now, when she comes across something infuriating, she can share the rage, WhatsApp-ing it to the team “to say: ‘Look at this!’” It’s the same with the community who have grown around her work, she says. “They are this engaged audience who really want to fix it. That is what it is going to take.”
 Visible Women is available weekly from 15 June.
