Scientists had high hopes for a new coronavirus vaccine that combines the existing formulation with one targeting Omicron, but many are not impressed by the results.
Follow the latest updates on the coronavirus, the BA.2 subvariant of Omicron and mask mandates.
By Sharon LaFraniere
WASHINGTON — A panel of independent experts advising the Food and Drug Administration is set to recommend on Tuesday whether to update existing Covid-19 vaccines to target a newer version of the coronavirus in a booster shot that Americans could get in the fall.
The federal government is hoping to improve the vaccine to better boost people’s immunity before a likely resurgence of the virus this winter. But to move that quickly, it may need to abandon the lengthy human trials that have been used to test coronavirus vaccines over the past two years in favor of a faster process that relies more on laboratory tests and animal trials.
The most recent trials with human volunteers have taken five months, even using relatively small groups. But the virus is evolving so quickly that new vaccine formulations are out of date before such trials are even finished.
Pfizer and Moderna, the two major vaccine manufacturers, have both been studying an updated vaccine that targets the Omicron variant, which became dominant last winter. Both companies took a financial risk and started manufacturing doses, betting that the government would pick it to be the fall booster.
But Omicron itself was overtaken by a succession of subvariants starting nearly three months ago, and many scientists argue that it is a bygone threat.
“Omicron is clearly in the rearview mirror,” said Dr. Peter J. Hotez, a vaccine expert with Baylor College of Medicine. A booster that targets Omicron makes no sense, he said, unless it also works against the latest subvariants, adding, “I haven’t seen evidence of that.”
At a meeting on Tuesday, the F.D.A. will ask the advisory panel whether a retooled vaccine should aim at a version of the virus in the Omicron family. That would leave it to federal regulators to decide exactly which formulation to use in the fall.
Scientists initially had high hopes for a so-called bivalent vaccine that would combine the existing formulation with one that targeted Omicron itself. Clinical trial results released this month by Moderna and Pfizer, with its partner BioNTech, found that it induced higher levels of antibodies against Omicron than existing vaccines do.
But while the companies heralded the findings, outside scientists were not impressed by the less-than-twofold increase. Dr. Dan H. Barouch, a virologist at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston who collaborated with Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer on some coronavirus vaccine studies, described it as “relatively modest.” And the F.D.A., in a new briefing document for the advisory committee, said that a bivalent targeting Omicron is “already somewhat outdated.”
Federal health officials may instead push for a bivalent vaccine that would target BA.4 and BA.5, two subvariants of Omicron. They now account for more than one-third of the infections in the United States, and might be more akin to whatever incarnation of the virus is circulating in the fall.
But a bivalent that targets those subvariants would also be problematic. Neither Pfizer nor Moderna has concentrated on developing one, and no one knows for sure how well it would work. At this late point in the year, using human trials to test such a vaccine, followed by the two months that would be required to manufacture doses, could push the release of any new vaccine well into the next wave of the virus.
That suggests that officials would have to base their judgments largely on animal trials and laboratory tests.
Dr. Kelly L. Moore, president of Immunize.org, a nonprofit group that works to increase immunization rates, said such an accelerated process was already used to update the flu vaccine each year.
While this is the nation’s first stab at the next generation of Covid vaccines, she said, the existing ones have been safely given to hundreds of millions of people. Updating them might call for “very well-educated guesswork,” she said, but such deductions are “appropriate for the circumstances.”
If the government ends up going for a booster shot that targets BA.4 and BA.5, it will still be a race to produce the doses by fall, even with accelerated testing. Pfizer may be able to meet an October deadline, according to two people familiar with the company’s operations.
But Dr. Paul Burton, Moderna’s medical director, said in an interview last week that it’s unlikely that the company could deliver doses until very late this year, or even early next year. “I don’t think we would be in a position to be prepared to support the fall booster campaign,” he said.
There is also the chance that the virus will evolve yet again and render the updated vaccine ineffective.
“Do we target BA.4 and 5? They will probably peak somewhere in the next month or two,” said Dr. John Beigel, a clinical research director at the National Institutes of Health who has conducted multiple coronavirus vaccine studies. “They may be old news by the time the fall comes.”
Dr. Beigel said one option was to simply stick with the existing vaccines, which continued to provide robust protection against severe disease, but very little against infection.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has estimated that as of February, 60 percent of Americans had already been infected with the virus, providing them with at least some temporary immunity. While breakthrough infections among vaccinated individuals are now common, many of the cases are mild.
Still, the World Health Organization said this month that updated versions of the vaccines should be studied because of the rapid deterioration in protection against symptomatic illness.
Dr. Beigel and other public health officials say the virus is ever more agile at evading the antibodies that provide the first line of defense against infection. Studies show the existing booster shots generate a significantly lower level of neutralizing antibodies against BA.4 and BA.5 than they do against Omicron.
On average, 290 Americans are dying of Covid daily, and nearly 4,400 are admitted to a hospital a day, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The F.D.A. briefing document said the risk of another major Covid outbreak would rise later this year “due to the combination of waning immunity, further evolution of variants and increased indoor activity.”
The advisory panel will likely split between those who believe a fall booster will be broadly necessary and those who would limit additional shots to high-risk individuals. Dr. Arnold Monto, a public health professor at the University of Michigan who is the chairman of the panel, predicted that a broad swath of the population would be offered booster shots.
“We know there’s waning,” he said in an interview. “We have to boost, and it’s better to boost with something more relevant” than the existing vaccines.
On the other side is Dr. Paul A. Offit, a vaccine expert at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. “Hospitalizations are down. Deaths are way down because we are protected against serious illness,” he said. “That’s what matters.”
He said only people over 70 and those over 50 with serious underlying conditions would likely need a fall booster shot, because Covid infections in those groups could have serious consequences.
In the end, just how much the government has available to spend could determine the scale of a new booster campaign. Congress rebuffed a White House request for $22.5 billion in emergency coronavirus funds, and a compromise plan to spend $10 billion has been stalled since April. The government has shifted $5 billion in funds for coronavirus tests and protective equipment to buy new vaccines.
“With the resources that we’ve been able to pull together, cull together for vaccines for the fall, it’s very clear we’re not going to have enough vaccines for every adult who wants one,” Dr. Ashish K. Jha, the White House coordinator for the pandemic response, said at a briefing last week.
By Alexandra E. Petri and Adeel Hassan
Less than a month after instituting a mask mandate for most indoor settings, health officials for Alameda County, the San Francisco Bay Area’s second-most populous county, lifted the order, citing improving conditions in a news release.
Mask requirements were reinstated earlier this month for restaurants, bars and offices and other places, in response to increased hospitalizations and new coronavirus cases across the county, which had exceeded last summer’s Delta variant wave.
The order was lifted Saturday after Alameda County, home to Oakland and 1.6 million people in the eastern Bay Area, moved from high risk to moderate risk for community transmission on Thursday, as defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance.
Daily case rates are falling, and, while the number of residents hospitalized with the virus remains high, daily new admissions have stabilized, county health officials said in a statement. Wastewater data mirrored these trends, they said. People who contract the coronavirus shed it in their stool, and the virus level in local wastewater is a reliable, independent signal of how much coronavirus is circulating in a given community.
As of Sunday, an average of 955 virus cases per day were reported in Alameda County, about the same as the average two weeks ago, and the number of patients hospitalized with the virus has risen about 5 percent over the last two weeks, according to a New York Times database.
“While we expect continued impacts from Covid-19 in the coming weeks, and masks remain strongly recommended, it is appropriate to step down from the health officer masking order at this time,” Dr. Nicholas Moss, the county health officer, said in a statement.
Officials still strongly recommend masks indoors for those who are older or have underlying health conditions, they said in the news release. They remain required in health care settings, long-term care facilities, jails, prisons and homeless shelters. The virus, they said, “continues to circulate, disrupt people’s lives and disproportionately impact communities of color, older adults, and those with underlying health conditions.”
This chart shows how three key metrics compare to the corresponding peak per capita level reached nationwide in January 2021.
More than 100,000 new coronavirus cases are being reported each day in the United States, according to a New York Times database, a figure that captures only a portion of the true number. Many infections go uncounted in official reports, and recent figures are further depressed by reporting delays caused by the Juneteenth holiday. Some scientists estimate that the current wave of cases is the second largest of the pandemic.
As of Sunday, hospitalizations in the United States are up six percent in the past two weeks, to an average of more than 31,000 each day, according to federal health data. New deaths have stayed below 400 per day on average, data from state and local health agencies show.
Alameda was the first county in California, and the largest jurisdiction in the United States, to issue a universal indoor mask order since the end of the winter Omicron surge. There has not been a widespread return to mask mandates in California, although some schools and universities reinstated them in the spring.
In Los Angeles County, the nation’s most populous county with about 10 million people, public health officials said last week that mask rules could return if C.D.C. data showed that it recorded high coronavirus community levels for two straight weeks. But the county remains at a “medium” level, making a mandate unlikely through mid-July.
Philadelphia also briefly reinstated indoor masking this spring, only to drop it days later. In April, a federal judge struck down a mask requirement on airplanes, trains, buses and other public transportation.
More recently, the requirement to test for the coronavirus before flying to the United States was dropped, and Broadway theaters, save for one, are retiring their mask requirements beginning Friday.
By Ana Lankes
A pair of studies from United Nations agencies and other development groups paint a grim picture for a generation of Latin American students, who have lost almost half their school days since the pandemic started and whose reading and math skills are falling drastically behind.
Four-fifths of children at the end of primary school are now unable to understand a simple written text, up from half before the pandemic, according to the reports. Only sub-Saharan Africa has worse educational outcomes.
School closures in Latin America lasted longer than anywhere else except South Asia — an average of 225 days, compared to 141 days for schools around the world overall. Lack of access to computers and the internet means that many children dropped out or received poor instruction. Average scores in reading and math for third and sixth graders may be worse today than they were 10 years ago, wiping out a decade of modest advances, according to one report — and the effects could be permanent. Today’s students can expect to have 12 percent lower incomes throughout their lifetime, meaning a loss of $1,565 in average annual earnings, the studies found.
“My biggest concern now is that this will really break the progress we were making slowly toward improving opportunities and reducing inequality, which is the biggest problem we have in Latin America,” Carlos Felipe Jaramillo, the World Bank’s vice president for Latin America and the Caribbean, said in an interview.
Latin America was already one of the world’s most unequal regions before the pandemic, and learning losses hit vulnerable groups particularly hard. In Brazil, for example, the World Bank report noted that only about a third of students of African descent have access to a computer at home, compared to more than half of white students.
Paola Ramírez, who teaches English at a public school in Suba, a low-income neighborhood in Bogotá, Colombia, said that fewer than 15 of her 40 students could regularly tune into class online. “Some families had to share one phone between five kids,” their only internet-connected device, she said.
In rural areas, connectivity is even worse. Across Latin America, only a quarter of households have access to the internet, though the rate varies by country. Girls, who were often expected to do household chores or care for sick relatives during the pandemic, suffered the most. In 2020, the dropout rate for Paraguayan girls in lower middle school was 23 percent higher than for boys, one report notes.
The report suggests returning to in-person classes, providing teachers support and training, and focusing on assessments to evaluate learning losses and create tailored programs for schools. Above all, the report says, reversing the damage from lost learning needs to become a priority for governments.
“This is going to have major long-term impact, it’s a generational crisis,” said Mr. Jaramillo, adding that governments “need to act now, they can’t wait two or three years.”
By Christine Chung and Carly Olson
U.S. children as young as 6 months are now eligible for coronavirus vaccines, and many parents are breathing a sigh of relief. But the pharmacy that offered easy access to immunization to you or an older child might not accommodate the under-5 group.
That is not necessarily a surprise. Many pharmacies do not normally give shots to very young children. But parents should know that age requirements may vary among chains.
Under the federal Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness (PREP) Act, pharmacists can give Covid vaccines to all children ages 3 and older during the public health emergency. This effectively gets around the patchwork of widely varying state-level laws around vaccination against diseases, some of which limit pharmacists to administering vaccines to adults and others that set minimum ages that can range from 3 to 17.
While the majority of big pharmacy chains are giving Covid vaccines starting at age 3, some are not. Publix and Kroger, for example, are offering shots starting at age 5.
CVS is offering Covid shots to children as young as 18 months at stores that house its MinuteClinic locations, but set the age minimum at 5 for other stores.
It was not clear on Thursday why some pharmacies set their age limits where they had. Erin Rolfes, a spokeswoman for Kroger, declined to comment on reasons its pharmacies had 5 set as the lower limit. Publix did not respond to messages seeking comment. A CVS spokeswoman, Amy Thibault, said only that the chain was using pharmacists, pharmacy interns and pharmacy technicians to administer shots to children 5 and older.
Mitchel Rothholz, who leads immunization advocacy at the American Pharmacists Association, said all pharmacists are trained to administer vaccines to those ages 3 and older, but some may prefer to go through additional training before working with children younger than that.
“Whether the practice does it or not is based on their comfort level and resource availabilities,” he said.
Even if your pharmacy of choice is not offering shots to your eligible child, the pharmacist there can point you in the right direction. “I always encourage parents and caregivers to have a discussions with the pharmacy or reach out to their pediatrician,” Mr. Rothholz said.
Asked about many pharmacies’ policies to vaccinate children 3 and older on Thursday, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said “much of this may be related to the PREP Act, but also ability of pharmacies to handle younger kids.”
She also pointed to what she described as “the willingness of parents to potentially want to take their younger kids to where they routinely get vaccinated, whether it’s their local community health center or their local pediatrician.”
Some parents have already encountered roadblocks.
Kelly Jensen, of Woodstock, Ill., said she placed at least 10 phone calls early this week to locate a vaccine for her 14-month-old daughter. Many larger pharmacies are not administering the shot to children that young, and Ms. Jensen said her pediatrician was not offering the vaccine to young children, either, citing waning interest.
“The thing that is so frustrating is that I could find no information,” Ms. Jensen, 37, said. “I felt like I was losing my mind trying to find anything.”
Other kinds of clinics could be a better option for many parents but some parents have turned to social media groups and grass-roots networks to find pharmacies that can accommodate their children.
A group of volunteers called Vaccinate Under 5 created a national database of pharmacies and providers administering the vaccine to young children. The map, populated by online submissions from parents and doctors, was up and running with appointments for children under 5, the group said.
“We didn’t want more hurdles to access when parents have already been through so much,” the group said in a statement. “As parents ourselves, we were waiting months for the choice to vaccinate and provide them with the same baseline immunity that other ages have been able to access for months.”
On Tuesday, Ms. Jensen drove to a doctor’s office 30 minutes from her home, where she was then told the vaccine was not available as she had been notified. A day later, the office called her to notify her that the vaccine was in stock. She rushed over.
“I had my child during a pandemic,” Ms. Jensen said. “She’s now over a year old in a pandemic, and to finally have some kind of help for her poor little system is just like, now it feels like maybe we can sort of have a normal, normal-ish childhood for her.”
Here are the policies for some major pharmacy chains:
Costco: 3 years and older
CVS: 18 months and older at MinuteClinic locations, 5 and older at others
Harris Teeter: 5 years and older
H-E-B: 3 and older
Hy-Vee: 3 and older
Kroger: 5 and older
Rite Aid: 3 and older
Safeway: 5 and older
Stop & Shop: 3 and older
Walgreens: 3 and older
Wegmans: 3 and older
Walmart/Sam’s Club: 3 and older

By Michael Paulson
Three days after the Broadway League announced that all 41 theaters would make masks optional starting July 1, one of those theaters has decided to stick with mandatory face coverings.
The producers of a starry revival of “American Buffalo,” which is a 1975 drama by David Mamet about three schemers in a junk shop, announced Friday that they would continue to require masks through the scheduled end of the show’s run at Circle in the Square Theater on July 10.
That’s only 10 days beyond when Broadway plans to drop its industrywide masking requirement, and it’s just one show, but it suggests that the unanimity among producers and theater owners may not be rock solid.
There are several factors that make the “American Buffalo” situation unusual.
The play, starring Sam Rockwell, Laurence Fishburne and Darren Criss, is being staged at Broadway’s only theater-in-the-round (it’s actually almost-in-the-round, because the seating doesn’t entirely encircle the stage), which means there are more patrons seated within spitting distance of actors than at other theaters.
Also, Circle in the Square, with 751 seats as it is currently configured, is the only remaining Broadway theater that is not operated by a large company or a nonprofit organization, so its decisions are not tied to those of a bigger entity.
Rockwell expressed concerns about the end of the masking policy in an interview this week with the New York Times columnist Ginia Bellafante.
The show announced the change in policy in a news release, saying that it was “due to the close proximity of the audience to the actors as a result of the intimate size of the theater and the staging in the round.” The production and theater owner did not immediately respond to requests for further comment.
Charlotte St. Martin, the president of the Broadway League, said of the “American Buffalo” decision, “As the optional mask policy takes effect in July, there may be unique situations which would require the audience, or some of the audience, to be masked.”
It is not clear whether the decision will affect other Broadway shows. The vast majority take place in theaters operated by a handful of big landlords who endorsed the mask-optional decision. Broadway’s four nonprofit theater operators, who have been more Covid-cautious, do not have any shows this summer. And summer fare on Broadway is dominated by big musicals, where the audience tends to skew toward tourists, many of whom come from places where masks are long gone; older New York playgoers are scarcer at this time of year (and the volume of shows is lower, too: there are only 27 shows now running on Broadway).
After “American Buffalo” closes next month, Circle in the Square is scheduled to be vacant until October, when a new musical called “KPOP” begins previews.
Actors’ Equity, the union representing performers and stage managers, has declined to comment on the audience safety protocols, but this week sent an email to its members, previously reported by Deadline, saying, “This decision was made unilaterally, without input from your union or any other, and the unions were only given advance notice a couple of hours before the announcement.”
Although the decision was announced by the Broadway League, it was made by theater owners and operators, and they plan to reconsider the protocols monthly.
