Advertisement
Supported by
With nearly 500 reports of sickness, and viral posts from influencers, the company and experts are now trying to figure out what happened.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Dani Blum
The vegan food delivery service Daily Harvest recalled a lentil-based product after customers claimed on social media that they’d become severely sick after eating it. The company said that it had received approximately 470 reports of illness or adverse reactions, including gastrointestinal issues and potential liver damage, according to a press release issued Thursday.
Consumers have been using a Reddit forum to share stories about becoming sick after eating the company’s French Lentil and Leek crumbles. One customer described “debilitating” stomach pain that landed the person in the emergency room. Others said they’d experienced fever, jaundice and full-body itching.
More stories from consumers surfaced and spread on TikTok after online influencers received the Daily Harvest product as part of a public relations package from the company. In a video posted on TikTok, Abigail Silverman said she’d wound up in the hospital with severe gastrointestinal pain a day after eating the product. “They couldn’t figure out what was wrong with me,” said Ms. Silverman, a creative director. She said in an interview that after consuming the crumbles, she had gone to the emergency room with “excruciating pain” and a 101.8-degree fever. Tests showed that her liver enzyme levels were elevated and that bacteria was present in her urine.
Jenna Dargenzio, a content creator and a jewelry designer who also said she’d received the crumbles in a P.R. package, said in a TikTok video that she had spent five days on bed rest after consuming the company’s products and that her gut was “severely inflamed.”
Daily Harvest was founded in 2015 and rose to popularity partly because of its celebrity endorsements — Gwyneth Paltrow and Serena Williams are among its investors — and its slick, health-conscious branding. The vegan meal delivery service touts its “organic, nourishing, clean” flatbreads, bowls and soups filled with “sustainably sourced fruits + veggies” and “no artificial anything.”
The lentil product in question, the crumble, is part of the company’s new plant-based protein line, which was introduced at the end of April. It is meant to be a substitute for ground meat.
On Wednesday, the company posted details of its voluntary recall on its website and urged customers to throw away the crumbles. “The last thing we’d want is for anyone else to be impacted,” the statement read. The company said it was working with the Food and Drug Administration to investigate the causes of the “adverse reactions” to the crumbles. An F.D.A. spokesman wrote in an email that the agency could not confirm or deny if an investigation was planned or in progress, but said that it “takes seriously reports of possible adulteration of a food that may also cause illnesses or injury.”
“We are doing everything we can, as quickly as we can, to identify the root cause,” a representative from Daily Harvest wrote in an email to The Times.
The wave of reported illnesses has provoked outrage among consumers, but also has flummoxed nutritionists and health experts, since liver damage from food is rare. As Daily Harvest tries to figure out what has caused such severe symptoms, it’s unclear which ingredient could have triggered them. “I can’t figure out what’s going on with this,” said Marion Nestle, a professor of nutrition, food studies and public health at New York University who is not affiliated with the investigation. “It looks like they don’t have a clue.”
Higher levels of enzymes indicate that your liver is injured and can point to a wide range of issues, said Dr. Laura Kulik, a hepatologist at Northwestern Memorial Hospital. Up to 30 percent of tests showing elevated liver enzymes are related to dietary supplements, she said, including unregulated vitamins and herbal medications. Antibiotics can also cause liver enzymes to rise, as can excessive alcohol consumption, hepatitis and viral infections. 
It’s rare that eating food would cause damage to the liver, Dr. Nestle said. Toxins that are found in wild mushrooms can cause acute liver poisoning, but beyond that, foods typically don’t raise enzyme levels. “This is very unusual, which is why it’s so important to figure out what’s going on,” she said.
This past spring, organic strawberries were linked to an outbreak of hepatitis A, a virus that may cause liver disease.
“Any time you’re in the emergency room and someone’s complaining of nausea, they get a liver test,” Dr. Kulik said. Abdominal pain, fatigue, fevers and itching — particularly when it’s accompanied by a rash — can point to liver damage, she said. Jaundice, a condition that causes the skin or eyes to turn yellow, is also one of the main symptoms.
Other signs of liver injury that doctors said to watch for include darker urine and stool that becomes pale in color. People experiencing these symptoms and the above should seek medical attention.
It’s unlikely that eating lentils would cause the kind of liver damage people are reporting after eating the Daily Harvest product, Dr. Kulik said. “I’d look at what else they were stored in, what else was used to make up that concoction.”
If lectin, the protein found in raw lentils, is not cooked properly, it can induce nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, said Dana Ellis Hunnes, a dietitian at the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center. Lectin typically binds to carbohydrates and can affect the digestive system and liver.
According to the product description on Daily Harvest’s website, consumers should cook their crumbles until they reach an internal temperature of 165 degrees.
Dr. Hunnes noted that the Daily Harvest product that was recalled also includes quinoa, which can make you sick if you do not wash or cook it properly. Quinoa naturally contains saponin, a bitter, soapy substance that can lead to aggravating gastrointestinal symptoms, irritate your skin and cause you to urinate more frequently. Chickpeas, soybeans and legumes also include saponins.
It’s critical to always follow the cooking instructions on any kind of packaged food, especially if it comes frozen, Dr. Nestle said, adding, “You would never eat this stuff raw.”
And while it’s nearly impossible to predict which foods will get recalled, those that use unprocessed, plant-based ingredients are less likely to harm your health than highly processed foods, Dr. Hunnes said. Daily Harvest advertises just these types of ingredients, making the recall particularly surprising. But “almost anything, at some point, can have a recall,” she said. “Nothing is without risk anymore.”
Advertisement
