Advertisement
Supported by
Guest Essay
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Lola Akinmade Åkerström
Ms. Åkerström, a travel writer and photographer, is the author of “Lagom: The Swedish Secret of Living Well” and the novel “In Every Mirror She’s Black,” set in Stockholm.
STOCKHOLM, Sweden — On a warm day in late May, life was humming along, punctuated by fika breaks, with pastries, coffee and conversation, when Sweden found itself thrust into the center of a global Twitter storm. Usually known for its generous social safety nets, latte papas and midsummer frolics, the Scandinavian nation was trending — and not in a good way.
The critical gaze of social media users around the world was suddenly trained on the curious Swedish tradition of not automatically offering food to guests — including children invited over for play dates — while the host family sits down to eat. It started with a Reddit user who described a memory of being left in a friend’s bedroom while the family ate dinner, and it escalated into Swedengate, a hashtag and multilayered takedown of a nation more accustomed to praise than mockery.
At first, people were humorously outraged that the basic hospitality of asking “Would you like to join us?” isn’t always expected in Swedish culture. Some indulged in mild schadenfreude over the social media dunking of a country so often idealized. Many tweeted about how much their cultures insist on overfeeding guests. Swedes joined the conversation to challenge or corroborate the tradition, based on their childhood experiences.
The next wave of the storm began to draw parallels between this seemingly inhospitable tradition and how Swedish society functions in general. The Gambian Swedish author Lovette Jallow used the #Swedengate hashtag to facilitate raw discussions about what it’s like growing up and living as a Black person in Sweden, with all its unspoken rules and structural racism. Others pointed to the nation’s treatment of the indigenous Sami people.
The final cresting wave brought claims of ingratitude — tweets arguing that foreigners in Sweden should be thankful that they were allowed into the country, with its generous social welfare policies, in the first place. In the backlash, I heard a familiar defensive cry: How dare you criticize me after all I’ve done for you?
Thus, a moment of lighthearted cultural banter created an opening for a bitter, xenophobic backlash. I watched this unfold in real time with a feeling of inevitability. I had seen this squall coming from a mile away.
The disconnect between Sweden’s global image of perfection and its internal problems caused Swedengate to escalate. The metaphor was irresistible: Swedes dining in minimalist rooms of glass while others look on, invited into the house but not given a seat at the table. The episode of unwanted social media virality exposed the xenophobia that lurks in some quarters of Swedish culture, as well as the country’s somewhat surprising cultural fragility.
Sweden has invested enormously in its global image and public relations machine. I know this because I’ve written for the country’s official website about all the wonderful virtues that make it a global leader. As a travel writer and photographer, I document my country’s sweeping vistas, iconic cultural traditions, sustainability mind-set and reverent relationship with nature. I even wrote a book about lagom, Sweden’s much-vaunted ethos of moderation and avoidance of indebtedness.
But the past few years have been tough on Sweden’s international reputation: its widely criticized approach to Covid, its immigration backlash and nativist rhetoric fomented by far-right groups, its internal rifts over the country’s decision to join NATO.
The term “swedesplaining” is commonly used in the country by those of us who have observed residents’ tendency to explain in condescending detail how Swedish society works to foreigners who have lived in Sweden for decades. But now the country seems to have lost control of its narrative.
As with any loving relationship, mine with Sweden is multidimensional and complex. I’m Nigerian American, and I’m a naturalized Swede based in Stockholm. I speak the language, and I’m raising its next generation. I was not surprised that some valid criticism of the country’s history was quickly dismissed by Swedes. At the same time, I understand the Swedish defensiveness.
I know what it feels like to have your narrative crafted on your behalf by strangers. To have people make assumptions about who you are based on stereotypes. To have people paint you as stingy and selfish, despite how open and generous you feel you are.
It is infuriating. I get it. I’m a Black woman in Sweden.
Here, my narrative continues to be crafted by others without my input, based on predefined notions and harmful stereotypes. There’s the insulting “angry Black woman” trope, the reductive “strong Black woman” label and the constant overlooking of the fact that we also need to be taken care of emotionally, mentally and physically.
Sweden has a history of remarkably progressive public policy. But two things can be true at once.
The country, like many others, also has deep integration and inclusion issues that it must address. I often say that it is the most open society, run by the most private people. The cultural tropes it is praised for play a part in this: Lagom stipulates that we must take care of our individual needs first, without aggravating others in the process. This creates a society of interiority in which people are open-minded enough to allow their neighbors to do whatever they want, yet keep very close bubbles around their own lives to avoid stress, discomfort, and the unfamiliar. This is a part of why we have a segregated society where ethnic minorities congregate in subcommunities in order to feel accepted and listened to.
So I view Swedengate as a blessing in disguise.
It’s an opportunity for a country I love to finally exhale, shed the self-imposed burden of perfection, take itself less seriously and acknowledge its weaknesses. That doesn’t mean it can’t proudly celebrate its strengths — but it means admitting to not knowing everything, and projecting to the world that there’s a lot that can be learned from others, as well.
No one, and no country, is above criticism. By seeing a culture’s imperfections and vulnerabilities, we begin to truly see one another. We recognize pains, sorrows, joys and wants across national boundaries. That is how, over time, Sweden can shed the unfair stereotype of a cold and distant nation — and show the world that its heart beats warmly, too.
Lola Akinmade Åkerström (@LolaAkinmade), a travel writer and photographer who lives in Sweden, is the author of “Lagom: The Swedish Secret of Living Well” and the novel “In Every Mirror She’s Black,” set in Stockholm.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.
Advertisement
