By Maya SalamJune 2, 2022
I’m an editor on The Times’s Culture desk. I’ll soon be attending my first pandemic-era live concert — Tash Sultana at Red Rocks Amphitheater in Colorado. I can barely contain myself.
In the meantime, here are five things I’ve been watching, reading and listening to → 
Music: Tiny Desk Concerts
I’m one of many longtime fans of this NPR video series, in which artists and groups play at the desk of the radio host Bob Boilen. I was bowled over recently by performances from the Linda Lindas and the Off Broadway cast of “Little Shop of Horrors.”
TV: ‘Heartstopper’
This teenage love story on Netflix, based on a popular graphic novel by Alice Oseman, is here to thaw our very cores and remind us of the purity and vulnerability of young love. Kit Connor and Joe Locke deliver inspired performances as the central couple.
Instagram/TikTok: Enbiggen
I briefly believed that the Rube Goldberg-esque creations by David Scott — a self-proclaimed “maker of silly things” who goes by Enbiggen on social media — were real and not computer-generated. 
But discovering that these zany videos, in which a musical chain reaction is set off by marbles bouncing along xylophone-like bars, are animated in part with 3-D modeling didn’t dull my delight.
See some of the videos.
Podcast: ‘Sweet Bobby’
Because I’ve watched every episode of MTV’s “Catfish,” I thought that this podcast from Tortoise Media about catfishing — tricking others, often into a romantic relationship, using fake digital profiles — wouldn’t shock me. But the true story it focuses on managed to test my tolerance for how little legal recourse the deceived have.
Book: Allie Brosh’s ‘Hyperbole and a Half’
I’ve long gravitated toward comics that use simple line drawings to create expressive characters and poignant tales. To me, this darkly funny 2013 book is the pinnacle of this technique. And Brosh’s ability to capture childhood experiences and struggles with mental illness has stuck with me.
Here are some more recent favorites:
Advertisement
