Clinical trials found the vaccine to work well, but the company has long struggled with manufacturing.
By Carl Zimmer and Rebecca Robbins
A federal advisory committee on Tuesday voted to recommend that regulators authorize a Covid-19 vaccine made by Novavax, an early beneficiary of the government’s Operation Warp Speed program.
If the Food and Drug Administration accepts the panel’s recommendation on the Novavax two-dose vaccine, it would become the fourth shot to win clearance for adults in the United States. But before the agency could authorize the shots, the F.D.A. would need to sign off on Novavax’s manufacturing process, which has stumbled again and again over the course of two years.
Those ongoing issues are likely to mean the vaccine would not be available for weeks, in contrast to the already cleared Covid vaccines that became available just days after the same committee endorsed those shots. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention must also recommend use of the shots before they could become available.
The federal government is coordinating with Novavax to receive “a limited quantity of vaccine” if it is authorized and recommended in the United States, Jorge Silva, a spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services, said in an email. “We remain committed to ensuring that any American who wants a vaccine can get one.”
The government would most likely buy several million doses, according to two people familiar with the plan. As part of its initial support for Novavax’s research in 2020, the United States had agreed to buy 110 million doses of the vaccine if it won authorization. But two years later, with the country already flush with effective vaccines, the government has little need for more.
Shots from Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna and Johnson & Johnson have been authorized for well over a year. And in a number of countries where Novavax has already earned authorization, uptake has been low.
The Novavax vaccine contains nanoparticles made up of proteins from the surface of the coronavirus, a fundamentally different design than the three shots available in the United States. Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna’s shots are made with mRNA, while the shot from Johnson & Johnson, the use of which has been limited in the United States, uses a non-mRNA approach.
At Tuesday’s meeting, the advisory committee’s 22 voting members nearly unanimously endorsed Novavax’s shot, with 21 votes in favor of authorization and one abstention.
Dr. Peter Marks, who oversees vaccine regulation for the F.D.A., said there was a need for alternative vaccine options. “We do have a problem with vaccine uptake that is very serious in the United States, and anything we can do to get people more comfortable to be able to accept these potentially lifesaving medical products is something that we feel we are compelled to do,” he said.
Addressing the committee, Martha Dawson, the president of the National Black Nurses Association, said that some patients will feel more comfortable using protein-based vaccines, a technology that has been in use for decades. “I encourage the F.D.A. to give us another, more traditional medical intervention in this fight,” she said.
In clinical trials, the Novavax vaccine was found to have an efficacy of 90.4 percent at preventing mild, moderate or severe infection with older variants of the virus. None of the volunteers who got the vaccine experienced moderate or severe infection, translating to an efficacy of 100 percent.
The trial took place before the rise of the Delta and Omicron variants, which have evaded some of the immunity from other vaccines.
In briefing documents released on Friday, F.D.A. scientists identified six cases of myocarditis and pericarditis, forms of heart inflammation, in about 40,000 trial volunteers. The F.D.A. documents said that the cases raised concern that the vaccine was the cause and that the rates of the problems could turn out to be higher than with mRNA vaccines.
Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech did not find any cases of myocarditis or pericarditis in their initial clinical trials. But after authorization, once the vaccines were given to millions of people, they were both found to create a small extra risk of myocarditis in boys and young men.
In their presentation on Tuesday, Novavax officials defended their vaccine against those concerns. Their analysis found that myocarditis and pericarditis cases were balanced across the group of volunteers that received the vaccine and the group that received a placebo. In the real world, there were reports of one case of likely myocarditis and eight cases of likely pericarditis out of 744,000 doses given in rich countries that have authorized the vaccine, the company said.
“We believe that the totality of the clinical evidence here is not enough to establish an overall causal relationship with the vaccine,” said Dr. Denny Kim, Novavax’s chief safety officer.
The Novavax vaccine has been authorized in dozens of countries, including India, South Africa and Britain, and has also received clearance from the European Union and World Health Organization.
But the vaccine is falling far short of initial hopes, both in terms of the number of vaccines distributed around the world and the number of people who are receiving them.
In February 2021, Novavax pledged 1.1 billion doses to Covax, the United Nations program supplying shots to developing countries. But because of the delays, Covax has not yet ordered any doses from Novavax. The company said it has shipped 42 million doses through the first quarter of this year, to 41 countries.
Novavax had planned for factories around the world to manufacture its vaccine, but the company had trouble scaling up production and was slow to demonstrate that its process met F.D.A. standards. The Serum Institute of India, the world’s largest vaccine producer, is now manufacturing Novavax’s vaccine and would be the supplier of any doses initially sold in the United States.
The F.D.A. said in its briefing documents that Novavax must demonstrate that the product that Serum would bring to the U.S. market is of the same quality as the vaccine the company used in the large-scale clinical trial at the center of its application. The agency said that testing and submission of manufacturing data on the vaccine “were still in process” at the time of its review.
Novavax has said that Serum’s plant has successfully completed an F.D.A. inspection and that it submitted updated manufacturing data to the agency last week.
F.D.A. reviewers also said in the briefing documents that they could not evaluate certain data from three of Novavax’s overseas trials because the company used a different manufacturing process for those studies than it did for its main trial in the U.S. and Mexico.
Dr. Marks of the F.D.A. said that the agency takes manufacturing “very seriously,” adding: “We don’t benchmark ourselves against other countries.”
While the committee’s recommendation only applied to primary immunizations for adults, Novavax plans to also seek authorization for adolescents and children. The vaccine is authorized for adolescents in India and Thailand.
The company also plans to seek authorization for its vaccine as a Covid booster. The company has run trials showing that a booster produces a large increase in antibodies. Last week, the company also began a trial in Australia to test a booster tailored specifically for the Omicron variant, which has become dominant worldwide.
The F.D.A. panel will meet later this month to consider whether the existing vaccines should be updated to more effectively target newer virus variants.
Sharon LaFraniere and Noah Weiland contributed reporting.
By Roni Caryn Rabin
Despite additional federal funding, U.S. schools reported that they were most likely to rely on low-cost strategies to improve ventilation to slow the spread of the coronavirus, according to a study published Tuesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The measures include holding activities outside, opening doors and windows, and inspecting existing heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems, the study said.
Only about one-third of public schools reported taking costlier steps such as replacing or upgrading their HVAC systems. Fewer than one in three said they used high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration systems in classrooms and cafeterias.
Schools that serve children in the poorest American communities were slightly more likely to have replaced or upgraded HVAC systems than those serving communities with medium levels of poverty, the study found. Almost half of schools serving the poorest communities — and close to half of schools serving the wealthiest communities — had replaced or upgraded their HVAC systems, compared with only one-third of schools with medium levels of poverty. The poorest schools were also more likely to have inspected and validated their HVAC systems than schools with medium levels of poverty.
The authors of the C.D.C. report suggested that while schools in wealthier areas may have already had resources to upgrade their systems, schools in high-poverty areas might have more experience accessing and using federal funds for such purposes.
Thirty-five percent to 44 percent of the schools in the poorest communities reported using HEPA filtration systems in spaces where children eat and in classrooms and high-risk areas, and 36 percent to 50 percent of schools serving communities with low poverty levels reported using HEPA filters in those areas.
By contrast, only one in four or five schools serving communities with medium levels of poverty reported using HEPA filters in those places.
The study was based on the findings of a nationally representative sample of 420 K-12 public schools, using data gathered between Feb. 14 and March 27 from the National School Covid-19 Prevention Study. The sampling framework consists of public schools from all 50 states and the District of Columbia; it is a web-based survey distributed to school administrators.
Only 26 percent of schools that received the survey in February and March responded, however. The percentage of students eligible for free or discounted meals was used to determine the community poverty level of each school.
Location also was correlated with measures taken to improve ventilation: Rural schools were less likely to use portable HEPA filtration systems than schools in cities and suburbs.
Schools in cities, on the other hand, were less likely to open windows than rural, suburban or town schools, possibly because of concerns about noise and air pollution (some may also have windows that do not open). City schools were also less likely to use fans to increase the movement of air when they did open windows.
“Additional efforts might be needed to ensure that all schools successfully access and use resources for ventilation improvements,” particularly schools in rural areas and those with medium levels of poverty, the authors wrote.
By John Liu
For Chinese students, years of intense studying come down to two or three nine-hour days of testing that will determine where they go to college. Covid-19 has added complications like escaping lockdown or testing in an isolation room.
Temperature checks, masks and negative P.C.R. test results are the basic prerequisites for the record 11.9 million students who registered to take the exam that started on Tuesday. Some test takers are discouraged from leaving their homes for two weeks before the exam. Others must travel to testing sites in specially arranged vehicles from their homes in locked-down areas.
For those who have tested positive for the coronavirus or are a close contact of someone with the virus, isolation or hospital rooms are prepared.
After recently suffering an Omicron outbreak that put tens of millions of people under lockdown, China is trying to keep the exam, known as the gaokao, Covid-free.
The grueling test determines the less than 2 percent of candidates who will be able to enroll in the country’s top universities and is a hot topic in Chinese news media and social media every June. During the pandemic, photos of dreary isolation rooms where some students are required to take exams have been widely shared each year. One image posted by a local government this year showed an ultraviolet lamp being used to disinfect exam papers.
In Shanghai, where residents were under strict lockdown for nearly two months, the gaokao was postponed altogether until July. In Beijing, where Covid restrictions were relaxed this week, health officials reminded residential compounds to mute the speakers that blare out pandemic warnings in the days leading up to the exam, to help students concentrate.
On Tuesday, the Communist Party tabloid Global Times published an editorial cheering on the “online course generation” that spent most of their three years in high school life under the shadow of the coronavirus.
“We sincerely wish the best for every candidate and salute the eternal spirit of struggle,” it read.
By Michael Paulson
“Dear Evan Hansen” and “Tina,” two Broadway musicals that had been selling strongly before the coronavirus pandemic but never recovered following the lengthy theater closure, both announced Tuesday that they would close late this summer.
“Dear Evan Hansen,” a heart-tugging musical about an awkward adolescent who tells a terrible lie, will end its run on Broadway on Sept. 18, five years after winning the Tony Award for best new musical.
The show opened to enormous acclaim and has been a significant hit, but it suffered a double blow from the coronavirus pandemic and a poorly received film adaptation, and has in recent months been soft at the box office.
“Tina,” a jukebox musical about the life and career of seminal rocker Tina Turner, will end its run on Aug. 14.
Both shows will continue to play outside New York. “Dear Evan Hansen” is closing its London production in October, but a North American tour has been selling well and is continuing. “Tina” will begin a North American tour in September, and is also running in Britain, Germany, Spain and the Netherlands.
“Dear Evan Hansen” began its Broadway run on Nov. 14, 2016, and opened Dec. 4, 2016. At the time that it closes, it will have played 21 preview performances and 1,678 regular performances.
The musical, produced by Stacey Mindich and directed by Michael Greif, began its life at Arena Stage in Washington, and then had an Off Broadway run at Second Stage before transferring to Broadway. It won six Tony Awards, including for the score by Benj Pasek and Justin Paul, the book by Steven Levenson, and two of its performers: Ben Platt, who played the title character, and Rachel Bay Jones, who played his mother.
Not only did the show win the best musical Tony, but the London production won the Olivier Award for best new musical, and the cast album won a Grammy.
The show, which long ago recouped its capitalization costs and became profitable, was regularly grossing over $1 million a week before Broadway shut down in 2020 because of the coronavirus pandemic. In 2021, a film adaptation was released and was the subject of significant online derision; it’s not clear how that affected the stage version, but grosses have been unsteady and slipping since the show resumed performances last December. The show grossed $508,455 during the week that ended June 5.
“Tina,” with music from the singer’s catalog and a book by Katori Hall, began its life in London and then transferred to Broadway, starting previews on Oct. 12, 2019, and opening on Nov. 7, 2019. The musical, produced by Stage Entertainment, which is a large European production company, is directed by Phyllida Lloyd; it won one Tony Award, for its lead actress, Adrienne Warren.
“Tina,” which has a much larger cast and a more elaborate physical production than “Dear Evan Hansen,” which means it costs more to run each week, was generally grossing over $1.5 million a week before the pandemic; it was again selling strongly after resuming performances last fall, but its box office grosses plummeted with the arrival of the Omicron variant and never fully rebounded. The show grossed $747,931 during the week ending June 5. At the time of its closing, “Tina” will have played 27 preview performances and 482 regular performances.
By Knvul Sheikh
So, you got a positive result on your home test for Covid-19. What do you do next? In addition to everything else on your plate — isolating and notifying close contacts, taking time off work and rescheduling appointments — it’s good practice to report your test results.
And while home tests have made it easier and faster to screen yourself and get treatment, it is not always easy to report an illness. This confusion has meant that many cases are left out of official counts.
If you test positive at a clinic or another community testing site, those results must be reported to public health departments under the CARES Act. Some home tests taken under the supervision of a trained telehealth provider are also reported to government health officials. But if your rapid test doesn’t fall into one of these categories, it can be unclear what to do.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention “strongly encourages” everyone who self-tests to report their positive results to a health care provider, who may order a P.C.R. test or otherwise report the data to state authorities. But only a few state health departments, including those in Colorado and Washington, collect data from home tests. Others, like in Massachusetts and New York, allow individual county health departments to decide whether they want to collect home test results.
The result is that official case counts are becoming an increasingly unreliable measure of the virus’s true toll. In New York City, for example, at the height of the Omicron wave, officials logged more than 538,000 new cases from January to mid-March. But a survey of New York City adults indicated that there could have been more than 1.3 million additional cases that were never detected or never reported during that time.
Health experts are concerned that public reporting of home testing is too sporadic and unpredictable.
“We do need a better sense of the amount of Covid in the community as people and organizations try to plan their behavior,” said Dr. Robert Wachter, the chair of the medicine department at the University of California, San Francisco. “When I’m deciding whether to eat indoors, for example, I don’t care about hospitalization numbers. I want to know the chance that my waiter or table-mate has Covid.”
But reporting relies on people being able to access home tests in the first place, which may put people in already underserved communities at a disadvantage. Data published by the C.D.C. in April suggested that home testing was most common among people who were young, white, highly educated and wealthy.
Even among people who have access to home tests, some may be nervous about volunteering personal information to local health authorities, said John Brownstein, an epidemiologist and chief innovation officer at Boston Children’s Hospital who led the recent C.D.C. research on home test use. Others may be too sick or overwhelmed to deal with the administrative burden of calling, emailing or otherwise figuring out how and when to report their test results.
Developing standardized, easy reporting systems for home tests could help solve part of the problem, Dr. Brownstein said. And information gleaned from home tests could allow researchers to calculate a better Covid index even if there isn’t uniform participation from the public.
“You don’t need every single person reporting their home test in order for the data to be valuable,” Dr. Brownstein said. “You have to understand how representative the sample is and make appropriate adjustments.” By combining test positivity data with other indicators, such as imputed case rates, wastewater information and community demographics, scientists can better understand how virus transmission is changing and assist with continued prevention efforts, he said.
Given how important it is to track case counts, here are four easy ways you can report a positive home test result.
Some rapid test kits, like the BinaxNOW, iHealth and Lucira kits, include a way to report your results through a mobile app, which usually also has instructional videos for using the tests.
Last year, a pilot program run by the C.D.C. and the National Institutes of Health distributed more than 1.4 million home tests to households in Tennessee and Michigan and found that, while overall test reporting was low and fewer than 10,000 test results were recorded in companion apps, those who used the apps were more likely to report their test results to public health authorities in both states. About 75 percent of the app users in Tennessee reported results and 84 percent in Michigan reported theirs.
If you test positive at home, another way to report your result is to contact your primary care provider, which is what the C.D.C. recommends you do.
When calling or emailing your doctor, make sure you’re ready to share a few key details: the kind of test you took, the time you took it, the date you started experiencing symptoms and your vaccination status.
Your doctor may recommend taking a P.C.R. test for confirmation, and can provide a medical report to help you take time off from work or school. Your doctor can also help you track new or concerning symptoms, give advice about antiviral treatments and clear you to return to work once you have fully recovered.
Many local public health departments have ways for people to report their results online, though their methods for obtaining test data often vary from region to region. You can find your health department’s website and information through the National Association of County and City Health Officials directory.
Some reporting methods are straightforward, like the one in Marin County, Calif., which has a simple online form for reporting results. Residents of St. Louis County, Mo., can call in, email or submit their results online. In Washington, D.C., you can use an iPhone or Android app, in addition to the Department of Health’s self-reporting web portal.
Other health department websites are notoriously confusing to navigate or even understand. New York State’s Covid-19 resource page, for example, says that residents are not required to report their test results. A representative for the Department of Health said that this was because New York had used only results from laboratories or official testing providers “to analyze trends and report consistent data to the public” since the beginning of the pandemic. But some counties in New York, like Albany County and Tompkins County, allow reporting of home test results, which is separate from the data the state collects.
Although a national home test surveillance website does not exist, researchers from Dr. Brownstein’s group have developed a platform for crowdsourcing home test results called OutbreaksNearMe.org that is fairly intuitive to use.
Originally designed to track flu outbreaks, the site has expanded to help create maps and analyze Covid-19 case data submitted by volunteers. The site shares information with the C.D.C. and local public health agencies and makes it available to the public, Dr. Brownstein said.
“Home tests represent a huge change in how quickly people can identify an infection, how quickly they can get care and access therapeutics,” Dr. Brownstein said. “They are going to be a core way that health care is delivered in the future, so we need to make sure that we in public health keep up with testing data.”
