
Sign In

President Biden, in a call with Japan Prime Minister Fumio Kishida on Friday, expressed “outrage, sadness and deep condolences” over the death of former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.
President Biden on Friday reassured the sister of Paul Whelan that he is committed to bringing him home the former Marine who has been detained in Russia on spy charges since 2018.
The Treasury Department has been accused of stonewalling lawmakers’ requests into the business dealings of President Biden’s son Hunter Biden.
The White House on Thursday declined to say whether President Biden maintains confidence in Internal Revenue Service Commissioner Charles Rettig amid allegations that the Trump appointee subjected top FBI officials to tax audits.
A State Department grant of $500,000 to fund the promotion of the rights of atheists and other nonbelievers in the Near East and South-Central Asia has drawn fire from more than a dozen members of Congress who claim the goal is to push atheism, which they assert is a component of "radical, progressive orthodoxy" worldwide.
President Biden will take executive action Friday to protect access to abortion, according to three people familiar with the matter, as he faces mounting pressure from fellow Democrats to be more forceful on the subject after the Supreme Court ended a constitutional right to the procedure two weeks ago.
A coalition of parents-rights groups has sued the Education Department over its newly formed family advisory council, calling it a "fake" panel aimed at propping up the administration's agenda in violation of federal law.
U.S. Secret Service Director James Murray will retire later this month from the agency he has led since May 2019, the White House and the Service announced Thursday.
President Biden has repeatedly insisted that he is running for reelection, but ambitious Democrats are positioning themselves anyway because the 79-year-old incumbent might bow out in 2024.
U.S. basketball star Brittney Griner pleaded guilty in a Russian court Thursday to drug charges but said she did not intend to break the law.
Newly revealed Justice Department records show the Obama administration's hidden censorship tactics to silence writer Jim Bovard's criticism of then-Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.
The sister of a U.S. Marine who has been detained in Russia since 2018 accused President Biden of ignoring her family after he called the wife of Brittney Griner, who is also jailed in Russia.
President Biden on Wednesday insisted that his administration has made "incredible progress" on the economy and said the blame for inflation rests squarely with Russian President Vladimir Putin, as he made a pitch to workers in a longtime bellwether state.
President Biden took aim at the opposing party Wednesday by falsely claiming that Republicans -- rather than members of his own party -- are preventing Congress from implementing his proposed federal gas tax holiday to blunt fuel costs.
President Joe Biden spoke Wednesday with the wife of detained WNBA player Brittney Griner, who is on trial in Russia, to reassure her that he is working to win Griner's freedom as soon as possible, the White House said.
Manage Newsletters
High winds send F-18 fighter jet overboard from aircraft carrier
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Army suspends retired general for tweet aimed at first lady Jill Biden
'Temporary' migrants who entered illegally get new path to permanent status under Biden policy
Kamala Harris ducks question on impeaching conservative justices for overturning Roe v Wade
Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Reparations: The left’s new segregation
Democrats offer word salad in response to unspeakable tragedy
If abortion politics helped Democrats, there would be no need to lie about it
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
