
Sign In

Manage Newsletters
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Kavanaugh’s Democratic assassins
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Jim Crow
OPINION:
What is diversity? The short answer is, that it’s the inclusivity of all in society.
“I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character” MLK Jr. so wisely proclaimed in 1963. I can only imagine how horrified he would be if he knew how those pushing the radical liberal agenda purposely misinterpreted his message.
In the Biden administration making certain hiring quotas based on physical appearance has become more important than hiring who has the correct qualifications. Radical liberals have successfully duped our culture into believing it is unfashionable to hire too many white, straight, males anymore. (Even if a candidate matching that physical description happens to be the most qualified for a position.)
Allow me to be clear, I am not saying that only white, straight, males are the only competent hires. What I am saying is that it has always been and still is wrong to hire someone based on their race, sexual orientation or sex. The most competent people are being rejected because of their outer appearance thanks to the radical liberals’ definition of diversity. It is 2022, why is anyone selecting employees based on physical traits rather than certificates, degrees and work experience? Is anyone concerned about how our taxpayer money is being spent? The person who is the best steward of the tax dollars will always have my vote no matter race, sexual orientation or sex. 
Unfortunately, just like the term “woke”, “diversity” has been hijacked by the left to mean the opposite of what its true definition is. Instead of collectively learning from our past and striving to not repeat the same mistakes, the radical woke agenda has retroactively made different physical traits desirable. (How “woke” of them.) Clearly, their plan has backfired, because putting an unqualified person in any job will breed contempt, a hostile work environment and ultimately result in failure. 
The left loves to claim they see past what’s on the surface. But they sure do want to make sure everyone sees they have minorities, LBGTQ and blue-haired people on their team. I do not believe that is how to build a proper team. I want to know what is in their hearts? What is their work ethic? How’s their integrity? How do they treat other people? As an employer aren’t these the questions you really care about?
The Biden Administration is attempting to trick our society into overlooking their true intentions and political ideologies. Their cheap tricks include using popular flamboyant influencers with bright colors, sparkle and dance routines. A real “look over here and not over there” tactic in this ongoing warfare of your mind. 
True cultural reconciliation is about coming together peacefully with strength, compassion and understanding. Not attempting to remedy a wrong with another wrong.
The question becomes, how do we as a forward-thinking society make sure everyone has a chance to succeed? The answer is a common-sense solution, but as per usual common sense gets pushed down because of all the noise. The answer begins in childhood and with parents who want better for their children and generations to come. 
We as a society must create opportunities for people of all cultures and backgrounds. Our culture needs to start to care about their communities. More opportunity, mentorship and exposure to different groups of people. Those who want to put in the effort to work hard should be given better resources and guidance to succeed.
The National Diversity Coalition for Trump was a very important organization that came together, united by one idea. That united we stand and divided we fall. This authentic diversity was inspired by one of Jesus’ many missions. He was the one to unite the different tribes, for he is the King of reconciliation after all.
Diversity is not the radical liberal trans agenda that mainstream media and influencers want you to believe. The National Diversity Coalition for Trump doesn’t ask about personal sexual preference and we aren’t worried about what you do in your private time. We have created an environment of true diversity. Doors are open to anyone, not just people who look a certain way. Diversity means including all cultures and generating communication between them. There we find that we are not so different after all. We are one blood and one Nation under God.
Through all this darkness there is a light we need to hold, as the great MLK Jr. also proclaimed “the time is always right to do what is right.”
If we choose to do what is right today, we win a new tomorrow. 
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
                          Click
                            here for reprint permission.
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
