The supreme court has started to release its next round of decisions, and the first case is Kennedy v Bremerton School District.
The case focuses on Joseph Kennedy, a former football coach at a public high school who clashed with his employer over his practice of praying with some of his players after games.
In a 6-3 decision, the court’s conservatives ruled that the school district had violated Kennedy’s First Amendment rights by terminating his employment.
“The Free Exercise and Free Speech Clauses of the First Amendment protect an individual engaging in a personal religious observance from government reprisal,” Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote in the opinion.
“The Constitution neither mandates nor permits the government to suppress such religious expression.”
That’s it from us today. Here’s how the day unfolded in Washington:
The US politics live blog will be back tomorrow with coverage of the January 6 committee’s next hearing and the fight to protect abortion rights in a post-Roe America. See you then.
When the Kyiv opera house reopened in late May it was seen by many as the symbol of a return to normality after months of war, with the melodies of Rossini’s The Barber of Seville replacing the din of Russian artillery.
Around the same time local authorities relaxed the curfew hours, anti-tank roadblocks were moved aside and the main thoroughfare of Khreshchatyk Street was once buzzing again with busy cafes, businesses and bars.  Four explosions in the space of a few seconds in the early hours of Sunday morning catapulted the entire city back to a crude reality. 
Columns of smoke rose over buildings next to his apartment, home to a cluster of universities, restaurants and art galleries, as air-launched Russian missiles fired from the Caspian Sea served as a violent reminder that the Ukrainian capital is still in a conflict zone.
Read the Guardian’s full report:
Jim Risch, the Republican ranking member of the Senate foreign relations committee, visited Ukraine over the weekend and met with President Voldymyr Zelenskiy.
“It was an honor to meet with President Zelenskyy this weekend to discuss the ongoing Russian assault against Ukraine,” Risch said. 
“I’ve been in many war zones, but I’ve never been to one where I’ve seen people rebuilding as the war continues. The Ukrainian people are incredibly resilient, endlessly adaptable, and courageously willing to fight. We cannot let them down.”
It was an honor to meet with @ZelenskyyUa this weekend to discuss the ongoing #Russian assault against #Ukraine. I’ve been in many war zones, but I’ve never been to one where I’ve seen people rebuilding as the war continues. More.⬇️https://t.co/45t6YwRa1j pic.twitter.com/83khaizdvq
During his trip to Ukraine, Risch took the opportunity to tour Kyiv, Irpin and Hostomel and witness some of the devastation unleashed by Russia’s attacks on its neighbor.
“Ukraine can win this war, but only if we help get it what it needs, before it needs it. I was taken aback by the atrocities I saw firsthand in Irpin and Hostomel, and we cannot stand by and watch these happen again,” Risch said.
“I will continue to do everything in my power to ensure the Biden Administration uses the authorities Congress has given to provide President Zelenskyy and Ukrainian defense forces exactly what they need to end this conflict. Ukraine must win this fight.”
The leader of the QAnon conspiracy theory, which captivated a wave of Donald Trump supporters and infiltrated the Republican party, began posting again over the weekend, after nearly two years of silence
“Q”, as the figurehead of the movement is known, published three cryptic posts on a message board on Friday night – the account’s first posts since December 2020.
“Shall we play a game once more?” the account posted on the far-right board 8kun. The post was signed: “Q”.
The account had a unique identifier, the New York Times reported, which had been used on previous Q posts.
When a user asked why Q had been absent, the account replied: “It had to be done this way.”
Later, the account posted: “Are you ready to serve your country again? Remember your oath.”
QAnon is an antisemitic internet conspiracy theory that swept the US right wing in 2017. Proponents claim that Trump was waging a secret battle against a cabal of pedophiles and its “deep state” collaborators.
Read the Guardian’s full report:
It is possible that the January 6 committee will share footage from British documentarian Alex Holder at its newly announced hearing tomorrow afternoon.
Holder repeatedly interviewed Donald Trump and his family members in the days leading up to and immediately after the Capitol attack. The committee issued a subpoena to Holder for his footage, and he met with investigators on Thursday morning.
“I have provided the committee with all requested materials and am fully cooperating with the investigation,” Holder said in a statement on Thursday. 
“I have no further comment at this time other than to say that our conversation today was thorough and I appreciated the opportunity to share more context about my project.”
Instead of just presenting the facts from their investigation, the January 6 committee has generated a clear narrative, teasing how each piece will connect to the next at a future hearing. 
They have promised and delivered on new sensational details, making the hearings can’t miss television. The committee, which is getting advice from a former ABC News executive, have put on hearings that felt more like a Hollywood prestige limited series than a congressional inquiry.
“They have put on the Watergate hearings for the streaming era,” said Norman Eisen, who served as special counsel to the House judiciary committee during Trump’s first impeachment.  The committee has done this in a few key ways. They’ve broken up the hearings into several pieces, keeping each hearing to just a few hours (short by Congress’s standards) and focused on a particular topic. 
A single member of the committee, or professional staff, has handled the questioning, without interruptions from the opposing party. And the committee has placed a beating heart at the center of its investigation, featuring testimony from police officers, elected officials, and election workers who have all emotionally laid out the severe consequences of Trump’s pressure campaign.
Read the Guardian’s full report:
The House select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection has announced that it will hold its next public hearing tomorrow afternoon.
The committee said it would reconvene at 1pm ET tomorrow to “present recently obtained evidence and receive witness testimony”.
The Select Committee will convene a hearing tomorrow, June 28 at 1:00pm to present recently obtained evidence and receive witness testimony.https://t.co/6knNdD9UWb
The announcement came as a surprise, given that committee leaders had previously indicated the panel’s hearings would not resume until July.
It’s unclear what evidence the committee plans to share tomorrow, although the panel’s chair, Bennie Thompson, has previously said this month’s hearings sparked a flood of tips with new information about the deadly attack on the Capitol.
“Those hearings have spurred an influx of new information that the committee and our investigators are working to assess,” Thompson said on Thursday. “We are committed to presenting the American people with the most complete information possible.”
A six-page communique from the group of seven industrialised countries of the G7 – the US, UK, Canada, Japan, Germany, France and Italy – said it was “committed to helping Ukraine to end Russia’s war […] to defend itself and to choose its future”. It said it would provide materials, training, logistics, intelligence and economic support.
As G7 leaders gathered in Germany, US officials confirmed they were discussing the idea of placing a cap on the price of Russian oil, adding that the US had managed to extract a commitment that the proposals would be examined in greater depth. Germany is sceptical that the plan is workable, but it would reduce the revenue reached the Russian treasury and cut the price of oil for western consumers.
A senior White House official said the proposal was for a “mechanism that sets a worldwide ceiling for Russian oil”.
In tough language calling for a Russian withdrawal, the G7 communique said: “We reiterate our demand that Russia put an end to this war of choice, and immediately, unconditionally cease all hostilities and withdraw its troops and military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders.”
The missile strike in Kremenchuk comes as Joe Biden and other world leaders have gathered in Schloss Elmau, Germany, for the G7 summit.
Biden attended a summit session on Ukraine this morning, as the US and its allies continue to provide financial and military assistance to Kyiv. 
Ukrainian President Voldymyr Zelenskiy addressed the G7 leaders, pleading with them to help his country end its war with Russia before the winter.
“If Ukraine wins, you all win,” Zelenskiy said.
The Guardian’s Lorenzo Tondo and Pjotr Sauer in Kyiv report on a devastating missile attack in Ukraine:
A Russian missile strike has hit a crowded shopping centre in the central Ukrainian city of Kremenchuk, killing at least two people and wounding 20, senior Ukrainian officials have said.
Footage circulating on social media showed fire raging and smoke billowing from the entirety of the shopping centre, with fire trucks parked nearby.
The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, wrote on Telegram that more than 1,000 civilians were inside the shopping centre in Kremenchuk and that the number of victims was “unimaginable”.
He said: “The occupiers fired missiles at the shopping centre, where there were more than a thousand civilians. The mall is on fire, rescuers are extinguishing the fire, the number of victims is unimaginable.
“Russia continues to take out its impotence on ordinary citizens. It is useless to hope for decency and humanity from Russia.”
Read the Guardian’s full report:
Here’s where the day stands so far:
The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.
The supreme court has indicated that it will announce its next batch of rulings on Wednesday, as the court looks to wrap up its term in the coming days.
The justices still have four decisions left to announce, including major rulings on the Environmental Protection Agency’s regulatory powers and the Trump administration’s Remain in Mexico policy for migrants seeking to enter the US.
The court did not signal that Wednesday would be the final decision day, meaning additional rulings will likely be announced on Thursday or Friday.
This has already been a hugely consequential term for the supreme court, which ruled to overturn Roe v Wade and delivered a major victory for gun rights groups last week.
Conservatives celebrated the supreme court’s decision in Kennedy v Bremerton School District as a victory for the First Amendment.
“Americans of faith do not turn their devotion off and on like a light switch, and we must reject any attempt by the government to control private religious expression—especially those who call on their faith when answering the call to participate in public service,” Mike Pence, former vice-president to Donald Trump, said in a statement released by his political action committee, Advancing American Freedom.
Pence added, “We are pleased with the Supreme Court’s decision today that agrees with Advancing American Freedom’s position and we will continue to stand up to unconstitutional restrictions on personal religious freedom and the free exercise of religion that are the lifeblood of our Republic.”
But critics of the court’s decision warned that the ruling would further chip away at the American principle of separation of church and state.
“Public schools should be open and welcoming to all, regardless of background or belief,” said Katy Joseph, director of policy and advocacy at the group Interfaith Alliance.
“And since 1962, the Supreme Court has consistently recognized that school prayer is coercive, undermining the religious freedom rights of students who feel pressured to participate. Yet today’s decision dismantles decades of progress.”
