This live blog is now closed, you can find our latest coverage of the Russia-Ukraine war here
Ukraine’s army said it had launched airstrikes on Zmiinyi Island, also known as Snake Island, causing “significant losses” to Russian forces.
In a post on Facebook, the military’s southern operational command said it had used “aimed strikes with the use of various forces” on the island. 
The command added:
The military operation continues and requires information silence until it is over.
Thank you for joining us for today’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine.
We will be pausing our live reporting overnight and returning in the morning.
In the meantime, you can read our comprehensive summary of the days’ events in our summary below.
British prime minister Boris Johnson warned of “growing fatigue” around the war and said any concessions to Russian president Vladimir Putin would be a “disaster”.
Johnson promised the UK would be “steadfast” in supporting Ukrainians and vowed to ensure “fresh political, military and financial support from the international community” to the war-torn country, his official spokesman said on Tuesday.
The Prime Minister’s concern is that it may not be at the forefront of everyone’s minds, because of ... some of those wider global challenges we’re facing, not least on inflation around the world,” according to the official.
Johnson told Cabinet that “we must not allow anyone to believe that making concessions to Putin would lead to anything but disaster”, as this could be “perceived to be a reward for their unwarranted aggression” and “would embolden not just Russia but their allies and have an impact on UK security and on our economy,” the spokesperson said.
At the Cabinet meeting, Johnson also said Britain would work to “drain the grain from Ukraine” as “the bombardment of cities and infrastructure and the blockade of ports is crippling Ukraine’s ability to export its produce”.
The United States has called it “appalling” for the Kremlin to suggest that two US citizens captured while fighting for Ukraine against the Russian invasion could face execution.
John Kirby, a White House spokesman, spoke to reporters on Tuesday after the Kremlin spokesman said the two men are not protected by the Geneva Conventions on prisoners of war. 
It’s appalling that a public official in Russia would even suggest the death penalty for two American citizens that were in Ukraine.” 
Kirby said the Kremlin was being at minimum reckless with the comments.
Whether they actually mean what they’re saying here, and that this could be an outcome, that they could levy a death penalty against two Americans that were fighting in Ukraine, or that they just feel that it’s a responsible thing for a major power to do, to talk about doing this... either one of them is equally alarming.”
Amid Russia’s brutal assault on Ukraine’s eastern city of Sievierodonetsk, a few images capture a moment of quiet as Ukrainian service members help a small dog found in a destroyed building in the ruined city. 
Antony Blinken, US secretary of state, will have a virtual conversation tomorrow with the families of both the American hostages and wrongfully detained abroad - that would mean the families of military veterans Alexander Drueke and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, who were volunteering to defend Ukraine against Russian invaders, as well as the family of US basketball star Brittney Griner, who has been detained in Russia since February for allegedly possessing hashish oil. Her wife has accused Russia of holding Griner as a political pawn. 
New: Sec Blinken will have a virtual conversation tomorrow with the families of American hostages and wrongful detainees abroad, according to a Sr State Department official.
Earlier today, Russia captured the frontline village of Toshkivka near the twin cities of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk in the Donbas region. Continuing on, Russian forces captured Pidlisne and Mala Dolyna, located southwest of Sievierodonetsk, and saw success near the Hirske settlement in the Luhansk oblast. 
Worrying news from the Donbas.Russian troops have been able to capture Toshkivka, Pidlisne and Mala Dolyna after successfully crossing the Siversky Donets river southwest of Sievierodonetsk.The Zolote village salient is now in danger of encirclement. pic.twitter.com/F6WGnSgOyf
⚡️ General Staff: Russia captures Pidlisne and Myrna Dolyna southwest of Sievierodonetsk.The Russian military has also had partial success near Hirske settlement in Luhansk Oblast, according to Ukraine’s Armed Forces.
A Russian mine detonated on a beach in the Odesa oblast, damaging one house. Local authorities reissued warnings to not visit beaches or swim during this time. 
Russian mine detonated on beach in Odesa Obl: 1 house damagedReported by Chairman of the Odessa ОMА « I would like to reiterate the ban on visiting beaches and swimming in the sea » he added.https://t.co/lE9P5CgIQG pic.twitter.com/lR8vXzawI6
At least 15 civilians were killed in the Kharkiv region today by Russian shelling, Reuters is reporting. 
Six people have died in and around Kharkiv, and another six in Chuhuiv, located to the southeast, regional governor Oleh Synegubov said. Three have died in Zolochiv, located to the northwest of the city.
Hundreds gathered today in Lviv for the funeral of 27-year-old Artem Dymyd, who was killed defending Ukraine in the Donetsk region on 18 June. He was living in the US when Russian forces first invaded his homeland, and his first instinct was to immediately return and fight. 
Mother of 27-year old Artem Damyd who was killed defending Ukraine from Russian invasion in Donbas sang her last lullaby at her son's funeral in Lviv pic.twitter.com/kGqFtsVlxc
Estonia has summoned the Russian ambassador to protest the violation of its airspace by a Russian helicopter on 18 June. 
NEW - (Reuters) - Estonia summons the Russian ambassador  to protest the violation of its national airspace by a Russian helicopter on June 18"Estonia considers this an extremely serious and regrettable incident that undoubtedly causes additional tensions"-Foreign Ministry
The Kremlin has not provided the US any additional details on the whereabouts of two Americans captured in Ukraine, according to Ned Price, a spokesman for the US state department. 
“We have no additional details beyond what’s been reported in the media,” Price said. “We’ve been in direct contact with Russian authorities. We have not been provided, either by Russian authorities or by Russian proxy forces or any other entity, with additional details on the whereabouts of these Americans. We are pursuing every channel, every opportunity we have, to learn more and support their families in this difficult hour.”
Alexander Drueke and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh were two US military veterans volunteering to defend Ukraine against Russian invaders when they were captured by Russian forces. The Kremlin acknowledged in an interview with MSNBC yesterday that Drueke and Huynh were being held and were under investigation for “crimes”, but would not say more about where they were being held. 
The Interfax news agency today reported that they were in the Russian-backed separatist region of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine, where Britons Shaun Pinner and Aiden Aslin and Morroccan citizen Brahim Saadoun - also volunteer fighters - were sentenced to death earlier this month. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesperson, said Drueke and Huynh could also face the death penalty. 
“We have both publicly as well as privately called on the Russian government and its proxies to live up to their international obligations in their treatment of all individuals including those captured fighting in Ukraine,” Price said. “We expect and, in fact, international law and the law of war expects and requires, all those captured on the battle field be treated humanely and with respect consistent with the laws of war.”
Lysychansk in the eastern Donbas is getting hit hard, with Serhiy Haidai, governor of the Luhansk region, describing it as the city getting shelled “en masse”. 
Here are some images of what life is like in the Lysychansk at the moment: 
The US state department spokesperson Ned Price has responded to the botched phone call between the US basketball star Brittney Griner and her wife by confirming that the call has been rescheduled. 
He reiterated that the state department has classified Griner as “wrongfully detained by Russia and has been wrongfully detained for far too long and whose case we are working on assiduously to see her released as quickly as can be achieved”.
“We deeply regret that Brittney Griner was unable to speak to her wife over the weekend because of a logistical error,” Price said. “It was a mistake. It was a mistake that we have worked to rectify. As we said before, the call has been rescheduled and will take place in relatively short order.”
Griner had dialled into the US embassy in Moscow 11 times – the embassy was then to connect her with her wife in Phoenix – but apparently nobody was working the desk where the phone rang on Saturday. Price attributed this “logistical error” to restrictions put in place on the embassy by the Kremlin. 
“It was a logistical error that was compounded in part by the fact that our embassy in Moscow is under significant restrictions in terms of its staffing,” Price said. “When we have issues with the telephone system there, for example, the technicians are not located on site, in fact they’re not even located in Russia. They have to be located in a third country because of the onerous restrictions that the Russian federation has placed on our embassy and its operations.”
