
		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
A 15-year-old boy who was among several people shot during a chaotic Juneteenth celebration in Washington, DC was “screaming out for his mom” as he lay dying in the street, according to a harrowing eyewitness account.
The teen — whose identity has not been released — yelled out in agony as he was shot dead at the Moechella street festival at 14th and U streets on Sunday evening, the witness told news station WTTG.
“He was screaming out for his mom,” Daniel Dyson told the news outlet. “And it’s hurtful to hear that, man. And no one was able to help him.”
“To see him go. It bothers me. All of this that’s going on here it bothers me. And it needs to come to a stop. It really does.”
Dyson also recalled seeing one of the more than 100 police officers at the scene get shot in front of him.
“I was sitting next to a cop. Next thing you know, shots rang out,” Dyson recounted. “He did not want to stay down. He proceeded on. He was shot in the leg. And he kept moving. He went to the fire. He did not run away.”
DC Police Chief Robert Contee confirmed that one of his officers suffered a gunshot wound to the leg. He was expected to recover.  
Two other adults were also wounded in the melee. Their conditions were listed as stable.
“When you have large gatherings in a dense area, all it takes is one person introducing a gun to the situation that makes it deadly,” Contee said at a press briefing Sunday. “In this case, unfortunately a 15-year-old lost his life.”
Police recovered a firearm off one of the victims, but don’t believe it was used during the shooting. There was no exchange of fire between the gunman and the victim, nor the gunman and police.
The firearm used in the shooting has not been recovered, and the gunman remained at large. 
Washington, DC Mayor Muriel Bowser said the organizers of the Moechella festival should be held accountable for the dangerous situation at the event, which officials said did not have a proper permit.
 
Share Selection
