
Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
Phil Mickelson has emerged from the shadows.
In what is believed to be his first public appearance since making his controversial comments about the Saudis in February, the 51-year-old had a thin beard, slicked-back hair and an all-black outfit during the LIV Golf draft event in London on Tuesday ahead of the Saudi-backed golf league’s first competition, which begins Thursday.
The Post’s Mark Cannizzaro first reported Monday that Greg Norman, who’s leading LIV Golf’s challenge to the PGA Tour, secured Mickelson for the new league. Golf Channel reported Mickelson’s LIV Golf contract is worth about $200 million.
Mickelson acknowledged to biographer Alan Shipnuck in February that the Saudis were “scary motherf–kers to get involved with,” but he still thought about joining LIV Golf because he didn’t like how the PGA Tour was operating.
“We know they killed [Washington Post reporter and US resident Jamal] Khashoggi and have a horrible record on human rights. They execute people over there for being gay,” Mickelson told Shipnuck. “Knowing all of this, why would I even consider it? Because this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to reshape how the PGA Tour operates. They’ve been able to get by with manipulative, coercive, strong-arm tactics because we, the players, had no recourse. As nice a guy as [PGA Tour commissioner Jay Monahan] comes across as, unless you have leverage, he won’t do what’s right. And the Saudi money has finally given us that leverage. I’m not sure I even want [LIV Golf] to succeed, but just the idea of it is allowing us to get things done with the [PGA] Tour.”
On Feb. 22, Mickelson put out a statement saying he was “deeply sorry” for his “reckless” comments. He hasn’t played competitive golf since and lost multiple sponsors, including KPMG.
Mickelson was not at the LIV Golf press conference earlier Tuesday that ended with a confrontation between a reporter and officials. Dustin Johnson, the other big star signed by Norman for a reported $125 million, said he joined LIV Golf and resigned from the PGA Tour because he “chose what’s best for me and my family.”
LIV Golf has a team component, and Mickelson was one of 12 captains to draft a team on Tuesday. His “HyFlyers GC” team includes Justin Harding, Ratchanon Chantananuwat and Chase Koepka, the younger brother of Brooks Koepka.

Share Selection
