A jealous husband who lured his wife’s coworker to a New Hampshire park, murdered him and then forced his wife to behead the victim and bury the body was sentenced Friday to life in prison plus 45 years.
Armando Barron, 32, was convicted Thursday of the first-degree murder of 25-year-old Jonathan Amerault, as well as 12 other charges, including kidnapping, for the September 2020 killing.
“The depravity of your actions and single handedly causing the pain and suffering and death of Jonathan Amerault show an extreme indifference to the value of human life,” Judge Elizabeth Leonard said.
“Your actions were brutal. They were absolutely horrific. They were selfish, and they were completely senseless.”
Armando Barron (New Hampshire State Police)
Britany Barron, 33, testified that she and Amerault had been texting when her husband found out and flew into a rage, assaulting her for hours at their Jaffrey home, including sticking a gun in her mouth. She also confessed that she and Amerault had kissed twice.
“Don’t do anything stupid or the girls are going to walk into something [expletive] gruesome,” Armando told her of their three young children, who had been sent to their grandmother’s house next door, Britany testified.
Armando then used Britany’s phone to text Amerault and lure him out to Annett State Park, where he assaulted the man and ordered Britany to shoot him. When she refused, she testified, Armando forced her to slit Amerault’s wrists, then forced the pair into the car.
Amerault begged her to use a machete on the floor to hit her husband, Britany testified, but she was scared to “test him.” Instead, her husband got in the car and shot Amerault three times.
Armando’s lawyers argued that Britany was the one who actually fired the gun.
Britany Barron (New Hampshire State Police)
Armando then followed in their car while Britany drove Amerault’s car back to their house, then the three traveled 200 miles north to a remote campsite where Armando forced Britany to decapitate Amerault with a saw they brought from home.
“He said that we needed to cut off his head so that there would be no dental records of the body,” she testified.
Armando left Britany to wrap and bury the body, which was found the next day in a swamp by New Hampshire Fish and Game officers. Britany was still at the campsite.
She pleaded guilty last year to three counts of falsifying evidence and was released from jail on parole last month.
“My son Jonathan was a thousand times more of a man than this lowlife could ever even dream of being. The loss of Jonathan to this world is incredibly sad,” Justine Amerault said in court Friday.
“But the saddest part of all is that in spite of him being surrounded by so many wonderful people, this evil creature just slithered right through us all and took him from us. And the last hours of Jonathan’s beautiful life were in the company of this ugly, hideous, demented creature.”
With News Wire Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
