The latest “Thor” movie is off to a thunderous start.
“Thor: Love and Thunder” opened with $143 million in North America over the weekend to dominate the box office and set a new high mark for a “Thor” film in its debut.
Only “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness,” which opened with $187 million in May, and “Jurassic World Dominion,” which debuted with $145 million last month, had bigger first weekends in 2022.
Directed by Taika Waititi, “Love and Thunder” depicts a reunion between Chris Hemworth’s Thor and Natalie Portman’s Jane Foster, who obtains superhuman abilities and becomes a new hero known as the Mighty Thor.
The film sees Thor, Mighty Thor and Tessa Thompson’s Valkyrie team up as they try to defeat the villainous Gorr the God Butcher, portrayed by Christian Bale.
The $143 million opening eclipsed the previous record for a “Thor” film that was held by 2017′s “Ragnarok,” which debuted with $122 million.
En esta imagen proporcionada por Marvel Studios, Natalie Portman y Chris Hemsworth en una escena de "Thor: Love and Thunder". (Jasin Boland/Marvel Studios-Disney via AP) (Jasin Boland/AP)
[ Natalie Portman, Tessa Thompson discuss the power of portraying female superheroes in ‘Thor: Love and Thunder’ ]
Waititi, Russell Crowe and Chris Pratt also have roles in “Love and Thunder,” which added another $159 million internationally over the weekend to bring its global gross to $302 million.
Finishing second at the North American box office was the animated “Minions: The Rise of Gru,” which made $45.6 million between Friday and Sunday.
The family film, which provides an origin story for Steve Carell’s “Despicable Me” villain, has now made $210 million domestically and $399 globally since its July 1 release.
“Top Gun: Maverick” also continued to soar, adding $15.5 million in North America over the weekend. Serving as the follow-up to 1986′s “Top Gun,” the high-flying sequel is up to $597 million domestically and nearly $1.2 billion worldwide, making it the highest-grossing movie of 2022.
Tom Cruise returned for the sequel as the hotshot pilot Maverick, who must train a new generation of Navy aviators.
Rounding out the Top 5 over the weekend were Baz Luhrmann’s “Elvis” biopic, which made $11 million domestically in its third weekend in theaters, and the dinosaur epic “Jurassic World Dominion,” which made $8.4 million during its fifth weekend.
Up next for movie theaters are the animated “Paws of Fury” and the mystery thriller “Where the Crawdads Sing,” which both come out Friday, followed by Jordan Peele’s latest horror film, “Nope,” out July 22.
With News Wire Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
