The victim was shot in the head outside the studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. He died at the scene. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
A 21-year-old man was shot dead leaving a Queens recording studio early Monday, police said.
Tyda Darden was shot in the head outside the Rockwell Studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. He died at the scene.
Cops recovered shell casings from three different guns they believe were used during an exchange of gunfire that killed Darden, who was found inside the door of the studio lying in a pool of blood, a police source said.
Tyda Darden was shot in the head outside the studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
There were no immediate arrests, and the motive was not clear.
Chilling video of the ambush from a distance shows a man getting out of a parked white BMW and walking toward the studio while grabbing a gun from his lower pants leg as several others exit the studio. At least two men in the studio crowd then fire toward the BMW, and the approaching gunman opens fire at them. He then heads back to the BMW, appears to drop a gun into the car and runs into the Halsey St. L train station.
It wasn’t clear if Darden was one of the shooters that emerged from the studio.
Sources said Darden, who lived in Brooklyn, was expecting a child with his girlfriend.
He was a member of the Structure Gang and had a 2020 loaded-gun arrest on his record, according to cops. He was out on bail on the gun charge and due back in court later this month, public records show.
Neighbors said the studio Darden was killed outside of has brought trouble to the block since it opened a few years ago. Young men gather late at night to film music videos, according to neighbors.
“They come, they park everywhere, in front of the pump, the crosswalk,” said a neighbor who declined to give his name who’s lived in the area for 45 years. “It’s not surprising what happened. ... Ever since that studio opened there’s always something happening.”
The building where Darden was killed houses other businesses, including a studio where Woodrow Allbright, 50, records a podcast, “Brooklyn General Zone,” that deals with gun violence and other issues facing young New Yorkers.
“My thing is, these kids don’t have no resources,” he said. “The only thing they have is their voices. A lot of them, they’re speaking from anger, or whatever emotional standpoint they’re from or whatever they’re going through and they put it into their music.”
“None of these kids are born bad,” he added. “But with the environment they’re in, they’re conditioned to grow up and be like what they see.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
