IF THE CHEMISTRY ISN'T ON FIRE, THE MOVIE FAILS | “A huge part [of good romantic comedies] is casting and chemistry,” Ross said. “You have to believe that they would find each other attractive, that they would interact with each other in the way that they’re actually doing. That’s why I personally think that the best rom-coms tend to involve good character actors who might not have been leads in other kinds of films.” (svetikd/E+ via Getty Images)
First of all, don’t bash the rom-com 
FIRST OF ALL, DON'T BASH THE ROM-COM | “This is a genre that has been largely dismissed in popular culture even though it’s fairly popular at the box office,” Ross said. “People love to bash on rom-coms and I think it’s because of two reasons: They are often associated with women — and anything like that is shoved to the side and categorized as not serious — and because comedy is not seen as a skillful art form when it’s actually incredibly difficult to do.” (PeopleImages/E+ via Getty Images)
It begins with the characters 
IT BEGINS WITH THE CHARACTERS | “One of the things that distinguishes a rom-com is that it focuses deeply on character development,” Ross said. “It’s almost less about what is happening in the plot and [more about] what is developing between the characters. It tends to be really important in terms of who you cast because of that reason.” (valentinrussanov/E+ via Getty Images)
Like most films, romantic comedies have a formula 
LIKE MOST FILMS, ROMANTIC COMEDIES HAVE A FORMULA | “There’s a meet-cute, a courtship phase, issues between the two people and a resolution,” Schreiber said. (Henrik Sorensen/DigitalVision via Getty Images)
But the best romantic comedies surprise viewers 
BUT THE BEST ROMANTIC COMEDIES SURPRISE VIEWERS | “The sign of a really good rom-com, especially now since people are really familiar with the formula, is an injection of some originality into it,” Schreiber said. “There also has to be a great script. It has to be well written. And the characters have to have some depth. They need to have characteristics that you rely on. There’s something about rom-coms where you want to be simultaneously satisfied. You know what’s going to be there, but you also want to be surprised. Being able to do both of those things well makes those movies stand out.” (chee gin tan/E+ via Getty Images)
Authenticity is an overlooked but key component 
AUTHENTICITY IS AN OVERLOOKED BUT KEY COMPONENT | “When the characters are authentic and, though they may come from different worlds, there is something there that they genuinely connect with, I think that’s the key,” Myers said. “It’s all about the characters and how well they’re drafted, connected and how they become a couple” (franckreporter/E+ via Getty Images)
The dialogue can (and should) take your breath away 
THE DIALOGUE CAN (AND SHOULD) TAKE YOUR BREATH AWAY | “You have to have people that can hopefully do really good dialogue with each other because how they speak to each other and how they treat each other is how you really end up learning about them,” Ross said. (10'000 Hours/DigitalVision via Getty Images)
If the chemistry isn’t on fire, the movie fails 
IF THE CHEMISTRY ISN'T ON FIRE, THE MOVIE FAILS | “A huge part [of good romantic comedies] is casting and chemistry,” Ross said. “You have to believe that they would find each other attractive, that they would interact with each other in the way that they’re actually doing. That’s why I personally think that the best rom-coms tend to involve good character actors who might not have been leads in other kinds of films.” (svetikd/E+ via Getty Images)
Relatable and aspirational? It’s a great rom-com 
RELATABLE AND ASPIRATIONAL? IT'S A GREAT ROM-COM | “Rom-coms are supposed to be relatable and aspirational,” Schreiber said. “[The characters] are living upper-middle-class lives. The decor, food, wine and location are very glamorous. When it becomes intertwined with romantic love, it’s also stuffed with romantic beauty. But for these movies to work, you have to have characters that are written in a way where they have relationships with a silly best friend or a bossy co-worker. They’re stereotypical in some ways, but also relatable. It has to be written in a way where people can see themselves in these characters. If they’re too far removed, it’s not appealing. So the characters have to be both specific to the scenario, but also general. They have to be able to appeal more than to the demographic that’s being represented.” (DaniloAndjus/E+ via Getty Images)
Romantic comedies are best when they evolve with the viewer 
ROMANTIC COMEDIES ARE BEST WHEN THEY EVOLVE WITH THE VIEWER | “One thing about rom-coms that has changed is that we’re not just seeing films with heterosexual couples,” Schreiber said. “Rom-coms also were predominantly white, but we’re seeing a lot more diversity. It’s not as much as we should be seeing, but, hopefully, we’ll see more diversity coming soon, especially with LGBTQ romances. As long as there is originality being used in these films in some ways, diversity is involved, and there is variation in the formula, it will stay for a while.” (10'000 Hours/DigitalVision via Getty Images)
As long as love exists, so do romantic comedies 
AS LONG AS LOVE EXISTS, SO DO ROMANTIC COMEDIES | “As long as people need escapism and believe in love and the possibility of people falling in love, they will always have these types of stories,” Myers said. “Filmmakers just need to be mindful of characters and lean into the relationship to guarantee that these two people belong together.” (Kevin Kozicki/Image Source via Getty Images)
Movies that nail it 
MOVIES THAT NAIL IT | Ross, Schreiber and Myer agree on one thing: certain romantic comedies perfectly exhibit what people love most about the genre. “When Harry Met Sally,” “Sleepless in Seattle,” “It Happened One Nigh,” and “The Philadelphia Story” were all listed as favorites. Effortless dialogue, beautiful characters, and a story that is credible and aspirational help the films stand out from the rest. But inclusive romantic comedies rarely receive the love they deserve. According to Ross, Schreiber and Myers, when you need love, here are a few romantic comedies worth adding to your list. (Joe Scarnici/Getty Images)
‘Love and Basketball’ 
'LOVE AND BASKETBALL' | Released in 2000, “Love and Basketball” follows Quincy and Monica — two characters who sometimes love basketball more than they love each other. As they grow from childhood friends to lovers to professional athletes, they must navigate family, friends and what love really means. “Love and Basketball” is available to stream on Hulu. (Getty Images)
‘Something’s Gotta Give’ 
'SOMETHING'S GOTTA GIVE' | Starring household names like Diane Keaton, Jack Nicholson, Keanu Reeves and Frances McDormand, "Something's Gotta Give" is about the possibility of love at any age. Pretty much everything is discussed in this film — from divorce to dating someone years younger — but glamour and humor are two of the main stars. “Something’s Gotta Give” is available to stream on Hulu. (Sean Gallup/Getty Images)
‘Something New’ 
'SOMETHING NEW' | Led by a Black female protagonist, "Something New" stars Sanaa Lathan as a woman navigating the complexities of interracial dating and what it does or doesn't mean to have a "dream" relationship. Released in 2006, "Something New" is available to stream on Peacock. (Vince Bucci/Getty Images)
‘Bridesmaids’ 
'BRIDESMAIDS' | Starring Saturday Night Live dynamic duo Kristen Wiig and Maya Rudolph, "Bridesmaids" is a film that, according to Myers, proved audiences were ready and willing to pay to see an R-rated comedy. "Bridesmaids" follows Annie as she tries to be the perfect maid of honor for her best friend. Along the way, chaos ensues. "Bridesmaids" is available to rent on Amazon Prime and YouTube. (Michael Buckner/Getty Images)
‘Yesterday’ 
'YESTERDAY' | What if one of the most popular musical acts in history disappeared from the world of pop culture and you were the only one who remembered they existed? What would you do with that knowledge? "Yesterday” answers that question in a light-hearted, comedic fashion. “Yesterday” is available to stream on Hulu. (Theo Wargo/Getty Images for Tribeca Film Festival)
‘Love Jones’ 
'LOVE JONES' | Set in Chicago, "Love Jones" is about a chance meeting between two artists — a photographer and a writer — and the powerful connection they share. "Love Jones" is visual poetry with dynamic acting, memorable lines and music you'll need to add to your playlist. Most importantly, it flawlessly captures the magic of Black love. “Love Jones” is available on HBO Max. (Earl Gibson III/Getty Images for BET)
‘Love, Simon’ 
'LOVE, SIMON' | Fans of teen romantic comedies with a compelling cast will love "Love, Simon." Available to stream on Hulu, "Love, Simon" follows 17-year-old Simon as he struggles to reveal his sexuality to his family and friends. After falling in love with an anonymous classmate that he meets online, Simon tries his best to find out who is secretly the boy of his dreams. (Paras Griffin/Getty Images for 20th Century Fox)
‘Hitch’ 
'HITCH' | From a secret agent who fights aliens to the last man on earth, Will Smith has played his fair share of characters. But "Hitch" is the first time Smith stars as a "date doctor." A nerd who struck out on love in his teen years, Alex — played by Smith — is now a smooth-talking coach who helps clients find the woman of their dreams. That’s until a gossip columnist finally shows Alex his views on love might be wrong after all. "Hitch" is available to stream on Hulu. (ALESSANDRO ABBONIZIO/AFP via Getty Images)
‘The Half of It’ 
'THE HALF OF IT' | “Great rom-coms that disappeared are back with a vengeance on Netflix," Ross said, and "The Half of It" is the perfect example. Set in the halls of high school, the film follows whip-smart teen Ellie Chu. Chu agrees to write a love letter for a student hoping to match with the girl of his dreams, but the line between scriber and lover quickly blurs. "The Half of It" is available to stream on Netflix. (Amy Sussman/Getty Images)
‘Crazy Rich Asians’ 
'CRAZY RICH ASIANS' | "Crazy Rich Asians" is a film you'll love to love. After traveling with her boyfriend to Singapore for his friend's wedding, Rachel Chu discovers that not only is her boyfriend rich, but he's also one of Singapore's most eligible bachelors. "Crazy Rich Asians" perfectly captures the lavish lifestyle we dream of having, but it also touches on real relationship problems, like dealing with in-laws. “Crazy Rich Asians” is available to stream on HBO Max. (Frazer Harrison/Getty Images)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
