Sherri Shepherd is ready to bring something different to the table with her upcoming talk show.
The Emmy Award-winning funnywoman’s new daytime talk show, “Sherri,” will be syndicated in 97% of the nation, producers Lionsgate’s Debmar-Mercury announced Tuesday.
Set to debut Sept. 12 out of New York City’s Chelsea Studios, the weekday chatfest will be mostly carried on Fox TV stations across the country.
“September 12th can’t get here fast enough,” Shepherd said in a statement. “Hosting my own talk show is a dream come true and I’m so excited to take viewers on this joyous journey.”
Sherri Shepherd promises to deliver ‘truly fun and fresh, entertainment escapism’ on new talk show. 
The former co-host of ABC’s long-running daytime staple “The View” experienced a career boost when her solo guest-hosting stints on the recently canceled “Wendy Williams” show turned into ratings gold.
Shepherd is looking forward to the new gig and its contribution to the daytime landscape.
“My new show will be something truly fun and fresh, a daily hour of entertainment escapism with plenty of laughter, fun and flirtiness as I give my take on pop culture,” the 55-year-old Chicago native shared. 
Shepherd and her close friend and producing partner Jawn Murray will serve as an executive producers of the new program.
Fernita Wynn, whose credits include “To Tell The Truth,” “The Sharon Osbourne Show” and “Jenny Jones,” has been announced as a co-executive producer, alongside “Wendy Williams Show” holdovers Suzanne Bass and Joelle Dawson Calia on Tuesday.
David Perler, former producer of “The Ellen DeGeneres Show” and “The Rosie O’Donnell Show,” will serve as showrunner.
“Sherri is a great fit for the daytime audience because she relates to people in such a natural way,” the Emmy Award winner said. “Having worn so many hats over the years between her career, motherhood, her fitness journey and other accomplishments, Sherri brings a mix of fun, laughter and valuable, authentic advice to viewers.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
