The “Black Widow” of Las Vegas, once regarded as one of Nevada’s most notorious killers, has had her 2001 murder conviction overturned.
Margaret Rudin was arrested and sentenced in 1999 to serve two life sentences for the slaying of her millionaire husband, Ron Rudin. The 78-year-old was later released on parole in January 2020, but ultimately spent 19 years behind bars before a judge quashed her conviction over the weekend.
In this file photo, Margaret Rudin, second from left, is escorted out of Florence McClure Women's Correctional Center by prison staff on Jan. 10, 2020, in North Las Vegas. (Benjamin Hager/AP)
Rudin’s attorney, M. Greg Mullanax, told KLAS on Tuesday that the lawyer who previously represented Rudin during her 2001 trial, the late Michael Amador, was “objectively unreasonable.”
“For example, not interviewing witnesses, not knowing all the facts,” said Mullanax. “He gave a rambling opening statement that really didn’t pertain to her cause. He talked a lot about himself.”
In a 68-page ruling, the Nevada Supreme Court agreed with the attorney’s claims, concluding that, if not “for Amador’s unprofessional errors, her trial would have been different.” They now believe his incompetence was intentional and that he “lied to the court because he had book and movie contracts regarding the Rudin case.”
In this undated photo provided by the Nevada Department of Corrections shows Las Vegas socialite Margaret Rudin.  (AP)
Ron Rudin, a prominent 64-year-old real estate developer, vanished in December 1994 — sparking an investigation that eventually claimed headlines nationwide. His estimated net worth at the time was somewhere between $8 million and $11 million, according to the news station.
Fishermen discovered his skull and charred remains about a month later along the shoreline of a Colorado River reservoir, located about 45 miles outside of Las Vegas. He’d been shot in the head while he slept and then placed in the trunk of car, which carried him to the body of water where he was ultimately found.
Prosecutors with the Clark County District Attorney’s Office now have 30 days to file a motion to appeal the court’s ruling or request a new trial, according to KTNV. If the state opts to recharge Rudin, who has long maintained her innocence, jury selection would have to begin within the next four months.
“Margaret has served her complete sentence in prison, and the further prosecution of Margaret Rudin accomplishes nothing,” said Mullanax. “Margaret will be 79 years old in a couple of weeks and would like to live her remaining years in peace.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
