Multiple people shot into a crowd in downtown Philadelphia just before midnight Saturday, killing at least three people and wounding 11 more, according to police.
Police believe the shooting was the result of a fight between two men.
“There were hundreds of individuals just enjoying South Street, as they do every single weekend, when the shooting broke out,” Inspector D.F. Pace said at a press conference early Sunday.
Philadelphia Police investigators work the scene of a fatal overnight shooting on South St. (Michael Perez/AP)
Police reported “several active shooters,” one of whom was shot at by officers. The man dropped his weapon and fled the scene. It’s unclear if he was hit.
Fourteen people were shot during the commotion, including a 22-year-old man, a 34-year-old man and a 27-year-old woman who died.
Police believe the 34-year-old man may have gotten into a fight with one of the shooting suspects, Philadelphia Police Commissioner Danielle Outlaw said during a press conference Sunday.
At least two other men reportedly fired their own guns in the area, according to Outlaw.
Eleven others, ranging from 17 to 69, were rushed to local hospitals. Many are believed to have been innocent bystanders.
“Yesterday was a dark day for Philadelphia. And while many of us were out enjoying the beautiful day in the city, horrendous and unthinkable acts happened in a very popular local and tourists’ hangout,” Outlaw said at a press conference.
A person walks past the scene of a fatal overnight shooting on South Street in Philadelphia, Sunday, June 5, 2022.  (Michael Perez/AP)
The victims have not been identified but American Federation of Teachers Pennsylvania, a union representing more than 36,000 educators and paraprofessionals, said Sunday that one of the men killed was Kris Minners, a second-grade resident adviser  at Girard College.
“Yet another victim of senseless gun violence,” the union said in a statement. “The loss of Kris reminds us that gun violence can and will touch everyone in our nation as long as our elected officials allow it to continue. Mass shootings are a daily occurrence in only one wealthy, peacetime country on Earth. Petty disagreements turn deadly even for innocent bystanders. It doesn’t have to be this way.”
Two semiautomatic handguns were recovered from the scene, Pace said. One of them had an extended magazine.
“The events that transpired last evening on South Street are beyond devastating. Once again, we see lives lost and people injured in yet another horrendous, brazen and despicable act of gun violence,” Philadelphia Mayor Jim Kenney said in a statement Sunday.
“Our city and country have experienced a steep rise in gun violence over the past few years. We’ve spent these years grappling with this epidemic — doing everything not only to stop it but to try to understand why the violence continues — it’s senseless, needless and deeply troubling.”
He also stressed the “uphill battle” for gun control, including the “availability and ease of access to firearms.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
