A suspected gang member has been arrested in connection with a fatal gun battle outside a Queens recording studio, police said Monday.
Alutheimeen Imaduddeen, 21, was charged Saturday with attempted murder, attempted assault, criminal possession of a weapon and reckless endangerment.
Tyda Darden, also 21, was killed in the shootout outside the Rockwell Studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. on June 6.
Both Imaduddeen and Darden were members of the Structure gang and lived a half mile apart in Bedford-Stuyvesant, according to cops. Imaduddeen is not accused of firing the fatal shot.
The victim was shot in the head outside the studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. on June 6. He died at the scene. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
Video recovered by cops shows the gunman whose bullet killed Darden exiting a parked white BMW and firing toward two men exiting the studio. Those two men, one of them Imaduddeen, fired back, according to court papers.
Darden was hit in the head, collapsed in a pool of blood inside the front door and died at the scene, police said.
The initial gunman, who killed Darden, was seen heading back to the BMW, dropping a gun in the car and running into the Halsey St. L train station. He has not been arrested.
Police at the scene recovered ballistics from three different guns, a .38-caliber, a .25-caliber and a 9-mm.
“It’s not surprising what happened. ... Ever since that studio opened there’s always been something happening,” a longtime neighbor said at the time. “They come, they park everywhere, in front of the pump, the crosswalk.”
The studio is in a building that houses multiple businesses, including at least one other studio.
The victim was shot in the head outside the studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. on June 6. He died at the scene. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
Darden, who was expecting a child with his girlfriend, had a 2020 gun arrest that was pending at the time of his murder, police said.
The suspect has a May 2021 gun arrest that was later sealed, police sources said.
Imaduddeen was arrested in Bedford-Stuyvesant last Thursday after police identified him as a person of interest in the Queens shootout. He was allegedly in possession of liquid codeine and 64 oxycodone pills.
He was charged with drug possession with intent to sell and released without bail.
But Imaduddeen was ordered held on $50,000 bail when he was arraigned in Queens Criminal Court on the attempted murder charge Sunday.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
