Myles Frost, the 22-year-old Broadway newcomer who has thrilled audiences by transforming into Michael Jackson in “MJ,” received the Tony Award for best leading actor in a musical on Sunday.
Winning for his sheepish but fleet-footed portrayal of the King of Pop, Frost topped showbusiness veterans like Billy Crystal (”Mr. Saturday Night”) and Hugh Jackman (”The Music Man”) to capture the prestigious honor.
Myles Frost accepts the award for best leading actor in a musical for "MJ" at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
Frost’s Broadway debut beat out Jaquel Spivey’s inspired performance in “A Strange Loop,” too.
“Mom, I made it,” Frost said, wearing shades and a shimmering black suit, during his acceptance speech. “I am so honored and so blessed and so grateful.”
“I really gotta pee right now, so I’ll keep it quick,” he added.
Addressing his mom, he said, “You have taught me and showed me what a strong Black woman is and what it means to raise a strong Black man.”
Myles Frost and The cast of "MJ" perform at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
Frost has said he had researched for the role by diving into Jackson’s creative process.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Winners and losers ]
“Creating my version of it was the fun part,” Frost told the Daily News last month after he was nominated. “It’s the part where we get to do trial and error and see how I can represent Myles while also representing Michael Jackson. That’s the beauty of acting.”
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
Though critics docked it for its sanitized depiction of its subject matter, “MJ” has proved a box office success since it arrived at the Neil Simon Theatre in December, lifted by Frost’s frenetic performance.
“I take every show as like it’s my first show, because to somebody in the audience it is their first show seeing me,” Frost said last month. “I feel like I have to give them a better performance than I gave yesterday.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
