Rapper Roddy Ricch was arrested in Queens for gun possession just hours before he was set to take the stage at Governor’s Ball—only to see the charges dismissed the next day.
Ricch, 23, whose real name is Rodrick Moore, and two other men were in a black 2020 Cadillac passing through a checkpoint in Citi Field, where the music festival was being held, about 6:30 p.m. Saturday when police stopped them and found a loaded firearm, NYPD officials said.
Roddy Ricch (Omar Vega/FilmMagic)
They found a Canik 9 mm handgun with nine bullets loaded into its high-capacity magazine under a passenger seat, officials said.
Ricch, of Los Angeles, Carlos Collins, 57, of New Jersey, and Michael Figueroa, 46, of Brooklyn were all charged with criminal possession of a weapon.
Figueroa was arraigned on the charges in Queens Criminal Court Sunday.
Ricch and Collins’ cases, however, were never docketed. A clerk at the courthouse Sunday said their charges were dismissed. The Queens District Attorney’s office did not immediately respond to request for comment.
Roddy Ricch cancels his performance at Governors Ball 2022 at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York. (Astrida Valigorsky/Getty Images)
Figueroa was riding in the front passenger seat of the Cadillac, according to the criminal complaint against him. “I am not ready to get out yet,” he told a security guard who asked him to exit the vehicle, according to the complaint. He then allegedly pulled the gun out of his waistband and hid it beneath the floor mat.
RIcch’s arrest forced the “25 million” rapper’s set at the Governor’s Ball to be canceled.
Halsey was the top act Saturday night for the three-day festival that  began Friday with a show headlined by Kid Cudi. Ricch was listed third on the bill Saturday among 20 performers.
Ricch, a Grammy-winning Atlantic Records artist, broke through in 2018 with the single “Die Young,” which so far has racked up more than 130 million views on YouTube.
Brandon Hudson and Savannah Hudson of Between Friends perform during the 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival at Citi Field on June 10, 2022 in New York City.  (Taylor Hill/Getty Images for Governors Ball)
He released his second studio album, “LIVE LIFE FAST” in December, a followup to his 2019 double-platinum debut album, “Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial,” which spurred the smash song “The Box.”
Ricch performed with Post Malone on “Saturday Night Live” in May, four months after Ricch had to drop out of an appearance as musical guest on the show due to COVID exposure.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
