Presented by 
Michael Safi with Volodymyr Ksienich, Kyrylo Demchenko, 
Emma Graham-Harrison and 
Shaun Walker, produced by 
Courtney Yusuf, sound design by 
Axel Kacoutié; executive producers 
Elizabeth Cassin and 
Phil Maynard


        
            Mon 6 Jun 2022 03.00 BST


            Last modified on Mon 6 Jun 2022 16.31 BST


On 24 February Russia began its assault on Ukraine. The explosions that day marked the end of an era in Europe and changed the lives of millions for ever. Michael Safi talks to Volodymyr Ksienich and Kyrylo Demchenko, two of thousands of young Ukrainians who answered a call to protect their country, as well as hearing from Guardian correspondents Emma Graham-Harrison and Shaun Walker, who have been reporting on the ground




                How to listen to podcasts: everything you need to know
            

On 24 February, the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, announced a ‘special military operation’ aimed at the ‘demilitarisation and denazification’ of Ukraine. It was the the end of three decades of peace between Europe’s major powers.
Over the past 100 days thousands of Ukrainians have lost their lives and millions have fled their country in the fastest-growing refugee crisis in Europe since the second world war. Today in Focus host Michael Safi talks to Volodymyr Ksienich and Kyrylo Demchenko, who overnight became one of the thousands of young Ukrainians who answered a call to protect their country.
Michael also talks to Guardian foreign correspondent Emma Graham-Harrison, who has been reporting on the ground throughout the war. She tells him about the Chekhanovski family, who spent weeks trapped in Mariupol’s Azovstal steel plant and how they eventually managed to get out.
Hours after Ukraine’s military command announced it was no longer defending the plant, and the remaining fighters were bussed towards an uncertain future in Russia, the prime ministers of Sweden and Finland confirmed they were jointly submitting applications to become members of Nato. If they succeed, the length of Nato’s border with Russia will double overnight.
Guardian correspondent Shaun Walker, who has also been on the ground throughout the conflict, tells Michael about the territory that Russia has seized and where it plans to take next. Putin’s army has lost some battles and won others, but the Russian president’s rash invasion has become a strategic catastrophe. Ukraine is embattled but united. It has become the very ‘anti-Russia’ the war was supposed to extinguish.


The Guardian is editorially independent.
                    And we want to keep our journalism open and accessible to all.
                    But we increasingly need our readers to fund our work.
                
