Exclusive: A new investigation by the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project and the Meduza news site has found links through an email domain name that appear to connect opulent properties across Russia
Vladimir Putin has been accused by western governments of amassing a vast secret fortune through a network of oligarchs and friends. However, there is little evidence on paper that links Putin to the assets – or the friendly benefactors to each other. 
One possible connection has now emerged. An investigation by the the Organised Crime and Corruption Reporting Project and the news website Meduza has identified a group of 86 apparently unconnected companies or not for profit organisations that appear to hold over $4.5bn (£3.7bn) of assets where a common private email address, LLCInvest.ru, appears to be in use. 
The assets which appear to be held by the organisations include a range of luxury homes, yachts and vineyards previously linked in media reports to Russia’s president. The telecoms company hosting the domain name on its servers is closely linked to Bank Rossiya, described by the US Treasury as “the personal bank for senior officials of the Russian Federation”. 
None of the individuals or entities associated with the email domain name offered a comment or provided an explanation for the link when contacted. There is no suggestion that all the users of the LLCInvest.ru are involved in managing assets that have been linked in reports to Putin. It is unclear as to the purpose of the email service or the motivation for apparent cooperation on staffing and logistic issues. A Kremlin spokesperson said: “The president of the Russian Federation is not linked or affiliated in any way with the assets and organisations you mentioned.”
A £1bn palace which Alexei Navalny has claimed was built for Putin’s personal use in Gelendzhik on the Black Sea. The billionaire oligarch Arkady Rotenberg, who is under EU and US sanctions, has claimed ownership of the property. Corporate records held by the Spark database in Russia stated as of June that the property belongs to a firm called Kompleks whose parent company is Binom. The company director at Binom until July last year appears to have a registered LLCInvest.ru email domain. The LLCinvest.ru address remains cited on Spark, Russia’s largest company database, as a contact.
Acres of vineyards around the Gelendzhik palace. Navalny has claimed the wineries were a Putin “hobby” that had got out of control. Vineyards surrounding the palace belong to a not-for-profit founded by two Putin associates, Gennady Timchenko and Vladimir Kolbin, both of whom are also under western sanctions. Kolbin and others associated with the vineyards appear to have LLCInvest.ru email accounts. 
 The Igora ski resort in the Leningrad oblast where the wedding of Putin’s daughter took place in 2013. According to land records, it is owned by Ozon, a company in which Putin’s friend, Bank Rossiya’s chairman and largest shareholder Yuri Kovalchuk, who is under western sanctions, has a large stake. The LLCInvest.ru email account is a contact on the Spark records of Ozon’s parent company, Relax.
A dacha linked to Putin north of St Petersburg known as the Fisherman’s Hut, on the shores of Lake Ladoga near Valaam Island. Emails leaked from a construction company suggest that three different companies which appear to use the LLCInvest domain name own different parcels of land around the complex, while a fourth LLCInvest entity — a nonprofit organisation called the Revival of Maritime Traditions — managed the construction.
A villa north of St. Petersburg, known by locals as ‘Putin’s Dacha’. The Villa Sellgren, on the Gulf of Finland near Lodochny Island, is owned by Sergey Rudnov, the son of a childhood friend of the Russian president, through a company called North, according to corporate records. Rudnov appears to have a LLCinvest.ru email address in his name.
This 46-metre, $23m yacht with five decks and 10 bedrooms was built in 2015 by Sanlorenzo, an Italian luxury shipbuilder. According to the vessel tracking site MarineTraffic, the Shellest often travels between Gelendzhik, the resort town near Putin’s Black Sea palace, and the port of Sochi. It is owned by a non-profit organization called Revival of Maritime Traditions and has been identified by the US Treasury as being linked to Putin.
Additional credits: map by Pablo Gutiérrez and Seán Clarke. Video by Monika Cvorak. Picture research by Matt Fidler. 
