City hall targets ‘anarchic parking’ and pollution with move but bikers say it is just another tax

For years, Paris drivers have complained that while they have been hit with rising parking charges, the city’s estimated half a million motorbike and moped owners have had a certain liberté to park wherever they want for free.
That is about to change. From September, motorcyclists in the French capital will face charges of up to €3 an hour – increasing to €37.50 for six hours – to leave their bikes and mopeds on the city’s streets. Anyone without a ticket will be made to pay the full six-hour rate.
City hall says the measure is being introduced to reduce pollution and to put an end to the chaos that results from two-wheeled vehicles being parked arbitrarily at the roadside and even on pavements. However, it has sparked anger among Paris motorcyclists who describe it as just another tax.
From 1 September, all privately owned motorised two-wheel vehicles apart from those that are electric-powered will be subject to charges of up to €3 an hour.
There are 42,000 parking spaces for motorbikes and mopeds in the city and the authorities have promised to create a further 1,000 spots. It is forbidden to park on the pavements or in spaces reserved for bicycles.
Riders will have to pay for a permit or buy tickets to park from 9am to 8pm every day except Sundays and bank holidays. There will be preferential rates of €4.50 a week or €22.50 a year for residents or those who use a motorcycle or moped for professional reasons. After two hours the longer the stay, the higher the hourly rate: a six-hour ticket will cost €37.50.
The new charges will come into effect in September; from Monday, riders can register their vehicles if they wish to benefit from the reduced charge.
David Belliard, a deputy mayor representing the Europe Ecology and Greens party (EELV), said he understood riders’ frustration but the measure was fair given that car drivers faced charges for parking in Paris.
“I can understand their anger or their incomprehension: we are going to go from a situation where, for years, we have not paid for the parking of motorised two-wheelers, scooters and motorbikes, to a situation where, from 1 September, they will have to pay for parking,” Belliard told FranceInfo.
“This parking charge is obviously lower than that of motorists. And this is a measure of fairness with regard to motorists. Today, we are in a situation where we need to better regulate public space, because there is a lot of anarchic parking.
“We need to reduce both noise and pollution. All of this is part of a logic of better regulation of the city. Everything that is low emission will of course remain free, but we are entering another period where we need paid parking.”
Those who park without tickets will not be given a fine but ordered to pay for a “retrospective ticket” at the highest rate of €37.50.
On Sunday, dozens of motorcyclists gathered in Paris to protest against the new charges.
Jean-Marc Belotti, the coordinator of the French Federation of Motorbikers in the Paris region, described the measure as a further tax and said it was “antisocial”. He accused the authorities of “hypocrisy”.
“It’s a real financial blow,” Belotti said. He added that motorised two-wheelers were an ecological plus, even if less green than bicycles.
“They’re much cleaner and less imposing than a car and [public] space is optimised. Fuel consumption is low and for the same distance you’re riding for much less time,” he said.
The federation has lodged a petition signed by more than 37,000 people with city hall.
