More than just a handy organizational tool, knife blocks also help protect your knives from damage. (BestReviews)
For skilled amateurs, professional cooks and the curious home cook alike, high-quality knives are a crucial tool in the kitchen. Running up to over $1,000 each, knives are an investment in years of delicious meals ahead — but only with proper care. The best knife block will keep your kitchen knives close at hand but still safe from nicks and dings they might otherwise receive in a messy utensil drawer.
The Shenzhen Knives 20-Slot Bamboo Universal Knife Block is spacious enough to accommodate a wide variety of knives in its universally sized slots. Its simple design is at home in many different styles of kitchen, too.
Knife blocks are perfect for cooks who choose to purchase high-quality knives individually. Before you choose a knife block that works for you, you'll need to figure out exactly how many slots you require. If you want to store a full set of steak knives or a pair of scissors, you'll need to consider that as well.
You have options when it comes to the type of knife block that works best for you. There are three main styles:
Individual slots are good if the knife block and knives are from the same brand, but they may not accommodate other brands. A universal design solves this problem but can sometimes be too wide or too narrow. Magnetic knife holders are great for cooks with limited counter space, but knives are left open to be spattered with grease and dust.
Additionally, knife holders with slots or a universal design can accept knives vertically or at a slant. Some cooks prefer a vertical holder as this decreases the chances of passing the knife edge across the slot (potentially dulling or damaging the knife).
Wood and bamboo are classic choices for knife blocks, but others might prefer plastic or metal. If you are looking for a sturdy, substantial block, stick with natural materials. For a more modern feel or a knife block on a budget, metal or plastic may be a better choice for your kitchen.
Keep in mind that wood knife blocks can be made from either a solid piece of wood or simply wrapped in a wood veneer. Solid wood is going to feel more substantial and be more durable.
High-end knife blocks do double duty, with self-sharpening slots that keep the blade edge razor sharp. These tend to work better if the knife block and the knives are the same brand, but self-sharpening knife blocks can accommodate a variety of knives.
Universal design features mean that all sizes of knives can fit without placing them in a specifically designated slot. This might mean that all of the slots are the same size, or the knife block may have a different kind of holder, such as plastic rods that move aside to accommodate a knife.
The last thing you want to do in the kitchen is spend your time cleaning your knife block. Look for easy-to-maintain materials that can be simply wiped down or popped right in the dishwasher.
This affordable kitchen organizer ranges in price from $15 to over $100.
A. Hopefully the knife block you have chosen will require little more than a simple wipe down as you tidy up from a meal.
Once a month, clean your knife block thoroughly.
Do not place a wood knife block in the dishwasher, as the hot water can damage the block.
A. To keep knife edges sharp, remove knives without dragging the blade across the block. If you need to, you can press the top of the blade against the slot of the knife block as you remove it to ensure the knife clears the slot safely.
When placing knives in the block, pay attention so as not to ding the tip of the blade on the block.
Shenzhen Knives 20-Slot Bamboo Universal Knife Block: available at Amazon
Our take: This is a durable knife block that works well and matches a variety of kitchen styles.
What we like: This universally sized knife block fits a full set of knives, plus up to eight steak knives and scissors, too. The slots are deep and can hold a variety of knife sizes. Bamboo is an eco-friendly material that looks great on your countertop.
What we dislike: This knife block is not good for thin knives, as the slots are fairly wide.
Hiware Stainless Steel Universal Knife Block: available at Amazon
Our take: Wavy plastic slots hold a wide variety of knives in this modern-looking knife block.
What we like: The base of this knife block stays sturdy with a weighted bottom. It's made from stainless steel and is easy to care for. It's good for small kitchens and takes up less space.
What we dislike: The slots on this block are wide and may allow thin knives to fall through.
Mantello Wood Two-Tiered Universal Knife Block: available at Amazon
Our take: For cooks with a wide variety of knives, this is the best choice.
What we like: Flexible plastic rods replace traditional knife slots to allow for many different sizes of knives. It fits knives up to 8 inches long and features two tiers for better organization. Flex rods are removable and can also be cleaned in the dishwasher.
What we dislike: This knife block is a bit small, and it fits fewer knives.
Sign up here to receive the BestReviews weekly newsletter for useful advice on new products and noteworthy deals.
Suzannah Kolbeck is a writer for BestReviews. BestReviews is a product review company with a singular mission: to help simplify your purchasing decisions and save you time and money.
BestReviews spends thousands of hours researching, analyzing and testing products to recommend the best picks for most consumers. BestReviews and its newspaper partners may earn a commission if you purchase a product through one of our links.
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
