Today is World Refugee Day, a date with additional significance this year as the United Nations announced a record 100 million people are displaced globally. The scale is hard to imagine, but its impact reverberates throughout our political debates and our communities.
The world is bearing witness to one of the largest forced migration events in recent history. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has displaced millions and triggered food shortages that could displace even more. Last summer, hundreds of thousands of Afghans fled the Taliban takeover of their country. And every day, displaced people from around the world arrive at the U.S.-Mexico border seeking asylum. Yet those are just the examples that have pierced our national consciousness. Conflicts in Ethiopia, Syria, Yemen and elsewhere displace people on a large scale without the same awareness.
The truth is that forced displacement is both inevitable and growing. People will continue to migrate to seek safety due to conflict, political persecution, and, increasingly, climate change. In fact, climate-related disasters are expected to displace more people in coming decades than any other factor, as droughts, floods and storms become more intense and frequent.
Refugees wait in a crowd for transportation after fleeing from Ukraine and arriving at the border crossing in Medyka, Poland, Monday, March 7, 2022.  (Markus Schreiber/AP)
So what can we do about it? Currently, most governments focus on deterrence, operating under the severely misguided belief that if we make it unpleasant enough to seek safety, people will stay home. Not only is this a violation of migrants’ basic rights, but it’s also impractical and counterproductive, inevitably creating humanitarian and national security crises when people are forced to migrate anyway. This myopic obsession with deterrence fosters the conditions in which those peddling fear and xenophobia thrive. Instead, we must ask ourselves how we can best facilitate just, orderly and safe migration.
As a refugee rights advocate and lawyer, I know the same thing that is holding displaced people back can be used to help get them to safety: the rule of law. A new approach centered on this concept will benefit both refugees and countries adjusting to the realities of forced migration.
While “the rule of law” might sound like the start of justification for hardline anti-migrant policies, we at the International Refugee Assistance Project (IRAP) have a different vision. We want to vastly expand displaced peoples’ access to their legal rights. Many people risk their lives paying a smuggler to take them across a sea or a desert because they don’t know that they qualify for a legal pathway. Others may realize that they qualify, but don’t know how to navigate the interviews and the paperwork necessary to get permission to travel. That’s why so many are forced to stay in camps for decades. They’re in legal limbo.
I believe in a new model, centered on getting legal information to the people who need it most through an accessible digital resource hub for migrants, paired with direct services and systemic advocacy. This work needs to be coupled with renewed commitments by the United States and other nations to welcome refugees and apply new legal frameworks to today’s reality of forced migration.
Sound impossible? We know it’s not. The international response to the crisis in Ukraine has charted a way forward. European neighbors and the U.S. have rightfully welcomed Ukrainians fleeing the war, mobilizing to accept and process refugees. These responses also have included innovative and efficient programs that eliminate unnecessary red tape to ensure Ukrainians have the ability to work and access services in their new homes. That sort of welcome should be the norm, not the exception.
Unfortunately, fast, accessible pathways to safety remain out of reach for most refugees, who face a labyrinth of obstacles both bureaucratic and logistical. For example, as climate displacement grows, so does the need to create safe and effective responses. Yet there are currently no legal pathways for climate-displaced people to get to safety. It doesn’t have to be this way. The Biden administration could expand existing refugee and asylum protections to include climate claims, while Congress could pass legislation to create new pathways designed to meet the needs of climate-vulnerable populations.
What we need are innovative solutions, new legal frameworks and the political will to achieve them. This World Refugee Day, let us celebrate the generosity of spirit with which citizens across the world have welcomed Ukrainians and use that as a model for what is possible for all displaced people. Instead of responding to the heartbreaking reality of conflict, violence and climate change with fear and xenophobia, countries can rise to the occasion and create fair and accessible legal frameworks to meet the moment.
If we harness the rule of law to work for refugees instead of against them, we can create a world where everyone has a safe place to call home and a safe way to get there.
Heller is the co-founder and executive director of the International Refugee Assistance Project (IRAP).
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
