Sunday, June 19 - Saturday, June 25
ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING RULES ARE SUSPENDED MONDAY, JUNETEENTH (OBSERVED)
It’s a big week for basketball! The NBA Draft will take place at Barclays on Thursday at 8 p.m. Expect a huge media presence at Flatbush Ave. and Atlantic Ave.
The board after the first round of the 2021 NBA Draft at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn on July 29, 2021. (Arturo Holmes/Getty Images)
On Thursday, the Fulton Mall/MetroTech Area Fair will take place on Lawrence St. from Fulton St. to Willoughby St. in Brooklyn from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Vinyl Nights will be taking place at Bella Abzug Park in Hudson Yards in Manhattan from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m.
The Marlins face the Mets on Monday at 1 p.m. The Astros take on the Yankees, Thursday at 7 p.m.
John Mulaney takes to the stage at Madison Square Garden on Thursday at 8 p.m.
The Pearl St. ramp to the northbound FDR will be fully shut Tuesday from 11 p.m. to 5 a.m. Continue on Dover St., turn left onto South St., and proceed to Montgomery St. to access the Drive.
The Madison Ave. Bridge will be fully shut Monday through Friday, midnight to 5 a.m. Use the 145th St. Bridge instead.
G service is suspended Monday to Friday, 9:30 p.m. to 5 a.m. Free shuttle buses between Court Sq. and Hoyt-Schermerhorn Sts., connecting with the F ay Jay St.-MetroTech
MAILBAG
Dear Gridlock Sam,
I’ve noticed the parking and traffic situation has gotten much worse in the past year or so. At the same time, there’s been a significant expansion of bike lanes. I support building more of them, but I am curious: do bike lanes make traffic slower?
R
Dear R,
It makes intuitive sense: more space for cycling, less space for cars, ergo more vehicle congestion, right? Not so simple. The Manhattan bike lane expansion in Manhattan started more than a decade ago under Mayor Mike Bloomberg and his Transportation Commissioner Janette Sadik-Khan. At first speeds did drop on avenues with bike lanes but, over time, fewer cars came into Manhattan; depending on the year roughly 25-50,000 less daily traffic. Now why didn’t traffic speeds improve? Unfortunately, this was the start of the Uber/Lyft era and micro-deliveries. Midtown speeds just prior to the pandemic were the slowest since the start of last century. In 2020, traffic did loosen up considerably but today traffic is rebounding. Not only did car traffic return to 100% but truck traffic is now about 10% above pre-pandemic levels and each truck is the equivalent of 2-3 cars. So, if you think traffic is worse than ever — you’re right! Now if we can only get some of those car drivers onto bikes.
Gridlock Sam
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
