In 1647, Alse Young of Windsor, Conn., was the first person to be executed for witchcraft in what would become the United States. She was 47, a dangerous age, given that many people prosecuted for witchcraft were middle-aged women.
By the time I was born, not far from where Alse breathed her last, we had long stopped hanging witches. But the custom of blaming post-menopausal women for society’s woes endures. From Cruella to Karen, women past the baby-making years purportedly cannot be trusted.
When I arrived in 1963, Karen was the fourth-most popular girl’s name in the U.S. I’ve always had a friend named Karen, usually several. One of my dear Karens, a dedicated worker for justice, now identifies herself as “Kay” when ordering coffee.
“Karen” has become an unflattering reference to all white women of a certain age. But wearing a reverse bob and yoga pants does not make you a bigot. Attributing negative qualities to people because of their skin color or background does.
“Karen” has become an unflattering reference to all white women of a certain age.  (Shutterstock)
I am about to predict the future (though I am not a witch, I swear). Someone will post this essay and comment that it amounts to “calling the manager,” i.e. complaining. We’re not supposed to complain. The stereotype says that we do little else. We tell our kids to take out the garbage. We tell our husbands to get that overdue physical. We nag.
But you know what would stop the nagging? Our kids could take out the garbage. Our husbands could schedule their appointments. People could listen to and honor our reasonable requests. They could act like we mattered, like we were not the punchline of a tired joke.
To be clear: I have no sympathy for the people captured on video as they call police, management or some other authority to punish a Black person for existing. Taking these horrid incidents, however, and using them to turn a generation of women into a meme is misogynist. In pointing out the inherent sexism, I’m not diminishing the toxicity or omnipresence of racism. I’m saying that you can and should call out racism without falling back on that old chestnut, blaming older women who supposedly have privilege to spare and nothing better to do. In fact, you’ll be far more effective if you don’t dilute your message with misogyny and ageism.
Amy Cooper, a white woman who called police on Christian Cooper, a Black man, in Central Park after he asked her to leash her dog.  
The internet has produced a male counterpart to Karen. Ken is a white guy who calls the manager. But Ken has never caught on the way Karen has, which is telling. “Meme model” may be the only high-profile field in which we surpass men. In 2019, 87% of law enforcement officers were male. Recently the number of women CEOs in the Fortune 500 hit an all-time high — 41. Women make up only 27% of the U.S. Congress. Without question, the world is a mess; and our country painfully so. But women did not design this mess. We’ve never had that kind of power.
The women of my generation fortunate enough to have an education spent the first part of our careers trying not to get our rear ends grabbed, while maintaining the coiffed and high-heeled uniform expected of us in the 1980s. We cheered on Anita Hill and also watched her harasser appointed to one of the most powerful positions on Earth. We worked hard on the job, while doing the majority of the housework, the childcare and — later or sometimes simultaneously — the eldercare. Some of us managed to get back in the fast lane after the Mommy Track, though most of us never caught up to our contemporaries. Women who did rise to positions of professional authority had to play emotional Twister to hit all the right spots: caring, but not the office mother; tough, but not the office…witch. It’s difficult to be a real person when the world wants you to be an archetype. For women in blue- and pink-collar jobs, things were even tougher.
When I was very small, my friends, all those Karens, and I loved to play dress-up. We’d imagine ourselves grown up, round in all the right places, pink and dewy. We never envisioned age spots or gray hairs. No girl aspires to be a day over 40. No girl even imagines it.
But it happens, as night follows day. Breasts sag. Voices lose their lilt. We cannot reproduce or, at least by the standards of our culture, allure. We do acquire other things, like experience and conviction, things that can make us powerful. And that power is terrifying to some people. Before we brew anything too potent in the cauldron, we must be dismissed, reduced, nullified.
That’s how the Karen thing became a thing. It’s not about shaming reprehensible behavior. It’s about dismissing older women, or to cut to the Freudian chase: about blaming your mother.
Nearly four centuries have passed since Alse Young was hanged. Isn’t it time that this country grew up?
Shaddox is a writer who lives in East Haddam, Conn.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
