Over the last month, we have all been shaken by a steady drumbeat of mass shootings. Buffalo, Uvalde, Tulsa, Philadelphia, Chattanooga — the list goes on. And it has brought the nation’s attention where it should be: on an escalating public health crisis that kills 110 of us every single day and wounds more than twice that. We’ve felt that crisis here in New York — in communities, in homes, on subways. Each year, about 870 New Yorkers die from gun violence — homicides, suicides and accidents together — and an additional 2,607 New Yorkers suffer nonfatal injuries. Despite all of this, in the coming days, the Supreme Court could force New York to allow even more guns into public places, leading to even more gun violence.
Amidst this devastation, New York has offered some good news. On Monday, Gov. Hochul signed a package of 10 new gun safety bills into law, including bills that raise the age to purchase semi-automatic rifles and require gun dealers to step up and do their part in keeping guns out of the wrong hands. And the day after the Uvalde shooting, a federal court in Albany rejected a gun industry challenge to New York’s first-in-the-nation gun industry accountability law. This law will enable our attorney general, our mayors, and survivors of gun violence to hold reckless members of the gun industry accountable when they put us in danger.
James Voghts, left, defense attorney for Remington Arms speaks in Superior Court in Bridgeport, Conn., Monday, Feb. 22, 2016. (Ned Gerard/AP)
One of the main drivers of gun violence in New York and around the country is a business model predicated on willful blindness. Members of the gun industry have stuck their heads in the sand while their products are funneled through distribution channels designed to get as many guns as possible to as many people as possible with as little impediment as possible. It’s largely the same playbook as the pharmaceutical industry followed in contributing to the opioid crisis.
Manufacturers and distributors could significantly reduce the number of guns diverted into the illegal market by monitoring their sales practices, refusing to do business with high-volume crime-gun dealers; and requiring downstream sellers to conduct trainings and maintain closer inventory of their products — but too often, they haven’t. Instead, they continue to turn a blind eye to clear signs of trafficking, making it easy for criminals to modify legal guns into assault weapons, and using dangerous marketing practices to sell high-powered rifles to teenagers.
The industry has been able to duck accountability because in 2005, Congress passed the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA), a law which the gun industry used as an excuse to avoid taking responsibility for their actions. Gun dealers and manufacturers could have innovated to make their products safer — instead, they’ve innovated around the law, making their products more dangerous and putting their bottom line over our public safety.
That sort of conduct by the gun industry is all too common, and it’s unacceptable. And in New York, it will no longer be tolerated. New York’s landmark gun industry accountability law gives New Yorkers the power to hold bad actors in the industry accountable when a gun company or store knowingly creates or contributes to a condition in New York that endangers the health and safety of the public.
Last year, faced with this reasonable regulation, the gun lobby sued. But a federal judge dealt the industry a resounding defeat, and rejected each and every argument made against the law, holding that it is both constitutional and in line with federal law. In no uncertain terms, the court stated that even under PLCAA, “Congress clearly intended to allow state statutes which regulate the firearms industry.” The plaintiffs will almost certainly appeal, but in this moment of national heartbreak, we urge them to consider instead adopting business practices that will save lives.
The message of the last few weeks is clear: the gun industry will face consequences for manufacturing, selling and marketing weapons without a care for what happens next. New York will always enforce its laws to keep our people safe.
Sylvester is founder of the Rohan Levy Foundation, named in honor of her son who was shot and killed in 2017. Myrie represents Central Brooklyn in the New York State Senate.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
