Three long months ago, marking a return to some semblance of normalcy in the (hopefully) waning days of the COVID pandemic, Mayor Adams rightly made masks optional again for grades K-12. He wrongly made an exception for kids in pre-K and daycare, on the nonsensical grounds that they weren’t eligible for the vaccine. After all, many older kids — never mind grownups — aren’t vaccinated either, and all of them were allowed to go mask-free indoors.
Thursday, with about three weeks left in the school year, Adams finally made an about-face on that error, saying declining case and hospitalization data proves the rule can be responsibly lifted as of Monday. Correctly, masking goes back to being a choice.
On or off. (Mark Lennihan/AP)
The facts Adams and his Health Department failed to face is that COVID just isn’t that harmful among youngsters — and the drawbacks of making all kids mask are most serious among the littlest, who are still learning to speak properly and reading emotional cues from adults’ and one another’s faces. That’s why the U.K., South Korea, France, Italy, Israel, Spain, Singapore and almost all other countries have let kids this age remain unmasked throughout the pandemic.
Back then, Adams’ health commissioner, Dr. Ashwin Vasan, said of his 4-year-old son, “I want to keep him safe because he’s not eligible for a vaccine.” But 4-year-olds and younger kids are still ineligible for the vaccine, and will likely remain so for many months to come.
COVID continues to spread quite freely in schools and daycare settings because current variants are almost magically contagious. But those same variants are also producing milder disease than earlier mutations, especially in our highly vaccinated population (88% of adults, 60% of children). Citywide hospitalizations, deaths, cases and positivity rates are all falling.
The administration has made a sane strategic decision to tolerate a certain amount of COVID spread to disrupt schooling less. The same logic should inform quarantine policies, which are still sending many mildly ill or asymptomatic kids home when they should be in school.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
