Former Breitbart editor Milo Yiannopoulos seems excited to be going to work for his “friend” Marjorie Taylor Greene on Capitol Hill.
“Mummy always said I’d end up in government!” the far-right pundit who identifies as an “ex-gay” wrote on social media Monday.
That caption ran alongside a photo of what appears to be the 37-year-old provocateur’s House of Representatives ID atop a leather Louis Vuitton bag.
Activist Milo Yiannopoulos speaks during a rally outside of the Baltimore hotel where the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops are holding its Fall General Assembly meeting, Tuesday, Nov. 16, 2021, in Baltimore. (Julio Cortez/AP)
“I’ve finally been persuaded out of retirement,” he also wrote. “But my skills are a bit rusty, so the best role I could land was an unpaid internship with a friend. Pray for me!”
Greene, the conspiracy-crazed 48-year-old from Georgia’s 14th district, has not tweeted about Yiannopoulos’ announcement. She did, however, draw attention for a Monday morning tweet indicating she and her new apparent intern may be at odds on at least one thing.
“I could care less what 2 consenting adults do sexually, nor do I judge, but when it comes to adults training children sexually, both mentally & physically, I do care. And so do MOST people,” she wrote. “We must protect children from child grooming predators & abusers in every way possible.”
[ The most ridiculous edits from Milo Yiannopoulos' rejected Simon & Schuster manuscript  ]
She had earlier complained about children apparently being dragged to “Drag Queen shows and strip clubs” and decried federal funding for educators who “intentionally confuse children about gender/sexuality.”
One of many controversial positions Yiannopoulos has taken over the years — which includes ties to white supremacy — is that adults having sex with tweens isn’t a black and white issue.
“Pedophilia is not a sexual attraction to somebody 13 years old who is sexually mature,” he said in 2016. “We get hung up on this kind of child abuse stuff.”
Claiming he was mature enough to consent to sex as a minor, Yiannopoulos called such parameters “arbitrary and oppressive idea of consent” during a recorded conversation.
[ Three men sexually assaulted nine horses, a cow, a goat and dogs ]
After those comments became public in 2017, Yiannopoulos resigned his position at Breitbart News, claimed he was not advocating pedophilia and said “sloppy editing” played a role in the way his point came across.
Greene is no stranger to absurdities, either. She was stripped of her congressional committee assignments in early 2021 after it was revealed that she believed space lasers operated by a prominent Jewish banking family may be responsible for California wildfires and that the 2018 school shooting in Stoneman Douglas High School was a hoax. Video of Greene harassing a survivor of that massacre, where 17 people were slaughtered, was used to make the case for the latter claim.
A spokesperson for Greene confirmed to Forbes she’d hired Yiannopoulos and touted him as a success story.
“So I have an intern that was raped by a priest as a young teen, was gay, has offended everyone at some point, turned his life back to Jesus and Church, and changed his life. Great story!” she said.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
