In the four-day period from June 18 to June 21, Rikers Island claimed three lives. Antonio Bradley, Albert Drye and Anibal Carrasquillo won’t be returning to their families after perishing at the site of New York’s great shame, a sinkhole for city funds that is in no danger of rehabilitating anyone.
While the rampant violence allowed to permeate the facility are the focus of most news coverage and the anchor of the Nuñez federal settlement — under which the city has adopted a new roadmap that it’ll be hard-pressed to execute given union and bureaucratic obstacles — it appears that a lack of proper medical intervention could have been the determinant factor in all three deaths.
Sentenced to death on Rikers. (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
Drye died in the hospital while suffering from unknown complications, while Carrasquillo is believed to have died of an overdose. Why it took until the latter was unresponsive for Narcan, a medication capable of quickly reversing an opioid overdose, to be administered remains a mystery. Bradley died just over a week after hanging himself in his cell, the result of both a failure to contend with his mental health struggles and to properly staff and monitor his unit.
The 30-page action plan incorporates the vaguest possible commitments to having the Department of Correction’s Health Management Division be made more “efficient, accurate and reliable”; it certainly does not treat detainee health as the crisis it is, evidenced by the failure to fulfill medical appointments as laid out in a separate lawsuit, and the Board of Correction’s findings in earlier death examinations.
At a minimum, jails commissioner Louis Molina must commit to reform deficient intake and screening processes and have a specific protocol for following up with detainees for whom conditions have been identified. Staff must be retrained explicitly around health management and mental health interventions, with special attention paid to a culture of neglect. Statements abdicating responsibility, such as Mayor Adams’ recent suggestion that “pre-existing conditions” may be to blame, are unacceptable. If managers can’t demonstrate progress, then a judge should bring in people who can.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
