Bronx stray bullet victim Angellyh Yambo was dressed in her Sweet 16 gown and tiara in a pristine white casket Monday as shattered family and friends gathered to pay their respects and grieve her senseless death.
The teen — cut down by a 17-year-old gunman wielding a “ghost gun” Friday afternoon — cast a tragic figure in bright pink, with pink eyeshadow, shiny nails and a flowery tiara. She clutched a white rose, and a butterfly decal adorned the back of the casket.
Angellyh Yambo in a photo from her Sweet 16 birthday. (Obtained by Daily News)
Tears flowed at the Williams Funeral Home in Kingsbridge as the slain teen’s mom greeted mourners, accepting hugs. She occasionally bent over her daughter’s casket, rubbing the teen’s hands and leaning in close, as if she was speaking to her.
“I’m a parent myself, and it’s not supposed to be the parents burying their child. It’s the other way around,” said mourner Hector Torres, 45, wiping his eyes as he left the funeral home.
The prayer card for the wake of Angellyh Yambo, 16. (Obtained by Daily News)
Torres doesn’t live far from the building where Angellyh’s father worked for years as a doorman.
Occasionally, the proud dad would bring her with him to work, and take her to trick-or-treat on Halloween.
Angellyh was “full of energy, young, beautiful,” he recalled. “What kids are supposed to be.”
Her accused killer, Jeremiah Ryan, 17, was wielding a build-it-yourself “ghost gun” when he fired a half-dozen bullets a half-block away, near University Heights High School’s South Bronx Campus, police said. Angellyh was fatally struck; two other teens were wounded.
Ryan is charged with murder and is being held without bail.
“It hurts. They could bring him to justice, they could give him life, they could give him capital punishment. But it’s not going to bring the kid back,” Torres said.
Flower arrangements from friends and community groups lined the room, some shaped like hearts and butterflies. A TV screen flashed photos of Angellyh — including baby pictures and an image of her at her January Sweet 16 party, wearing the same pink, sparkling dress.
Several relatives wore shirts emblazoned with her Sweet 16 photo, and a heart on the back with words reading, “Angie you are forever in our hearts.”
Bronx District Attorney Darcel Clark briefly joined the mourners, offering condolences to Angellyh’s family.
“Beautiful family. Her two grandmothers live in the building. Beautiful children, A-student. Never hung in the hallways, nothing,” neighbor Phellissia Adams, 71, said as she left the funeral home.
“I remember when she was a baby, with the grandmother. I love both grandmothers. Her parents are beautiful people.”
Adams said she was shocked to learn the teenage gunman was using a “ghost gun,” which are made by local gun dealers who fabricate some parts with 3D printers, and order the parts they can’t make from online vendors.
“Unbelievable. They should do away with ‘ghost guns’. I’m going to the mayor’s office. They gotta do something about ‘ghost guns’,” she said. “I’m at a loss for words.”
Angellyh will be laid to rest Wednesday in Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
