San Francisco voters overwhelmingly ousted progressive District Attorney Chesa Boudin in a recall election that focused on exasperation with crime in the famously liberal city.
Boudin, whose mother was the late Weather Underground radical Kathy Boudin, was recalled from office by a wide 60%-to-40% margin, although turnout was light.
[ With San Francisco eyeing recall of progressive DA, could Manhattan's Alvin Bragg face same fate? ]
Boudin must leave office within 10 days. A replacement picked by Mayor London Breed will serve his term until the next election in November 2023.
Recall proponents cheered the results as a sign their concerns about crime and quality of life issues were being heard, but insisted they are not conservative Republicans in disguise.
“San Francisco has been a national beacon for progressive criminal justice reform for decades and will continue to do so with new leadership,” said Mary Jung, a recall leader.
San Francisco District Attorney Chesa Boudin (Gabrielle Lurie/AP)
Boudin, 41, defiantly said the movement for racial justice and police accountability would live on.
“We have two systems of justice. We have one for the wealthy and the well connected and a different one for everybody else,” he said. “And that’s exactly what we are fighting to change.”
Kathy Boudin died of cancer just last month at 78. A self-professed radical, she spent two decades in prison for her role in a deadly 1981 armored car robbery.
Chesa Boudin, who was raised by adoptive parents while his mom languished behind bars, was swept into office in 2019 amid a wave of progressive prosecutors who vowed to bring justice to Black and Latino communities, end the racist war on drugs, and hold cops accountable for brutality.
That push was a hard sell even in liberal San Francisco, where open drug use, rampant petty crime and random violence are the norm.
Boudin’s time in office was marked by politically damaging battles with the San Francisco Police Department, with the prosecutor calling out cops for making arrests in just 5% of cases.
Some observers say the recall could mark the end of the movement to elect progressives as prosecutors, a push backed by liberal billionaire George Soros.
A similar situation is playing out in New York City as Mayor Adams has leveled criticisms at the courts and prosecutors for failing to more aggressively go after gun offenders, but he has refrained from calling out anyone by name.
Alvin Bragg, who stepped in as Manhattan DA in January, almost immediately drew criticism after issuing a memo that stated prosecutors shouldn’t bring armed robbery charges as long as the suspect “didn’t create a genuine risk of physical harm.” Instead, the memo recommended that prosecutors pursue petty larceny charges in such scenarios. Bragg later walked back parts of the memo.
But advocates for reform cautioned that the movement is still growing as big city voters, look for alternatives to successive failed crackdowns by police.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
