Like the New York City Bar Association (founded 1870), the Daily News (founded 1919) has long supported the merit selection of judges instead of by election, elections controlled by political party bosses, which means the Democrats here in the city. Having a president or governor or mayor choose judges — and accordingly be wary of picking a rotten apple or a dud — is far better than a backroom deal cut by the hacks not accountable to the public.
So we congratulate the organized bar for going through the time-consuming work of conducting unbiased independent screening panels for judicial candidates. These rigorous reviews delve into each contender’s background and qualifications. Failure to participate is a major no-no from our standpoint. And while in past years we have nudged the bar to be faster to produce their ratings in order for voters to make good use of them, this year the timing of the lawyers’ group was perfect, coming out on Friday, a day before early voting started for the June 28 primary.
Vote Galvan for Surrogate Court. (Kevin C Downs/for New York Daily News)
In three of the contests on the primary ballot, the bar’s ratings are turning into Daily News endorsements. In Queens, there are two openings on Civil Court. Queens Democrats should vote for Karen Lin and Thomas Medardo Oliva. In Brooklyn, our Civil Court endorsement goes to Patrick Hayes Torres. Democrats in Manhattan should support David Alan Fraiden for Civil Court. In each case, the rival candidates failed to make the bar’s bar.
There are two other Manhattan contests this year, where all the candidates were approved by the bar; for Civil Court and for Surrogate Court, which handles the estates of the day. We will make no endorsement in that Civil Court primary, but for surrogate we endorse Elba Rose Galvan for the 14-year position. She has served with distinction for years as a referee in Brooklyn Surrogate Court under former Surrogate Judge Margarita Lopez Torres, a heroine in fighting political influence and running a court free of corruption and cronyism. Lopez Torres has endorsed Galvan and so does the Daily News.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
