(Mary Altaffer/AP)
If New York is to be an affordable place to live for the diverse populace it needs to thrive, it must be, to paraphrase Mayor Adams, a ”a city that says yes” to more of all housing types across the city. That starts with a holistic, growth-oriented housing plan that quantifies needs and sets goals for the entire housing market, not just affordable. It then requires zoning for that growth — changing zoning broadly, across the city, to increase as-of-right development capacity to ensure the housing plan is realized quickly and cost-effectively.
New York’s need for more housing at all income levels across the entire city is immense. Consulting firm AKRF estimates that New York City needs 560,000 more housing units by 2030 to meet existing needs and future population growth. This would require permitting more than 50,000 units annually — twice as many as issued in recent years. New York’s development has sorely lagged its needs, with fewer permits for housing units issued per resident than nearly every other large city — 40% fewer than San Francisco, half as many as Boston, and just over one-third as many as Washington, D.C..
“Yes” was not the City Council’s answer to the recently withdrawn One45 project. Much needed affordable and market rate housing unfortunately will now not be developed. But the path to solving the problems and balancing the city’s needs exists.
To double production, the city’s housing plan should quantify current and future housing needs — for all types of housing, for all income levels and across all neighborhoods. More affordable housing, while sorely needed, is not enough. Perpetuating the shortage of market-rate housing will continue to drive up rents throughout the city, affecting what all New Yorkers pay for housing.
Since implementation is key to getting stuff done, the plan should set ambitious but achievable production goals, identify needed operational and policy actions and responsible parties, set implementation milestones, and commit to tracking publicly both the process and results.
To succeed, several changes must support the housing push.
First, basic operations must improve. This includes speeding up approval times for zoning certifications, building permits and certificates of occupancy; filling affordable apartments more quickly; and ensuring rental housing vouchers get utilized. Much of this relies on hiring and retaining staff, which should be possible given the city’s 22,000 vacant positions.
Second, the city needs to zone for growth. The current zoning code simply does not allow enough development in the right places to meet housing demand.
Citizens Budget Commission research found that under current zoning, only 20% of the city’s residential lots have enough capacity to make it worthwhile to develop, and even fewer in higher density zoning districts that, according to the Furman Center, generate a disproportionate share of the city’s new housing units.
Adams’ proposed Zoning for Housing Opportunity begins the right approach. It would increase the development opportunities by granting bonuses for affordable housing, easing restrictions on studio apartments, duplexes, commercial conversions and reducing minimum parking requirements. While a good first step, it will not unleash the potential required to meet New York’s needs. Broader upzoning to increase allowable building sizes will still be needed to provide enough density to meet an ambitious production target.
Third, New York needs to balance its need for growth with local concerns, including stability. This starts by ensuring that the housing plan balances citywide needs among various neighborhoods and guides citywide zoning changes that set the right framework.
All neighborhoods need as-of-right zoning capacity to increase. Elected officials and community representatives should contribute ideas for how best to make space for growth. Incorporating local concerns into a citywide plan can also reduce the need for uncertain and contentious discretionary approvals that too often generate hyper-local opposition and put pressure on elected officials to reduce density or extract public benefits.
Furthermore, the land-use decision-making process should be improved so that local representatives have a strong voice but do not hamper the city’s ability to meet its stated goals. CBC’s forthcoming work on land use will offer options to accomplish this, including allowing the Department of City Planning to fast-track projects that it certifies as advancing the city’s strategic planning goals, which ideally would already be designed to balance needs. It also will offer options that would require Charter reforms, such as the ability to appeal City Council-rejected zoning changes to a body of citywide elected officials or increasing the number of votes required to overturn City Planning Commission approvals.
Finally, while these steps will allow major progress, ultimately, changes still are needed to make development of all housing types across the city financially feasible. This requires property tax reform and the right tax and other incentives to encourage mixed-income development.
There is no miracle cure to solve New York’s affordability crisis. But we’d better get started trying.
Campion is the director of housing and economic development studies at the Citizens Budget Commission.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
