A Queens man cut down in a hail of 131 NYPD bullets after threatening to “blow the head off” the first police officer he saw may have been looking to stage a “suicide by cop,” police sources said Sunday.
Raul Hardy, 60, had long suffered from mental illness, but apparently got the gun used in Saturday’s deadly confrontation about a week ago — and having the weapon in his hands may have sent him over the edge, the mother of a son they shared told the Daily News.
“I just heard that this past week he started acting different, worse than he was normally acting. Now I don’t know for sure, but I do know he didn’t need no gun, because he had mental problems,” Shirl Hutcherson, also 60, told The News. “I’m thinking it was after he got that gun. I’m trying to figure out who gave him the gun.”
Police and the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives are also trying to trace how the Walther PK380 got into Hardy’s hands, a police source said.
Hardy fired five shots at a group of officers during the deadly confrontation outside his home in St. Albans on 116th Ave. near Francis Lewis Blvd.
NYPD detectives on Saturday investigate an exchange of gunshots in Queens between police officers and an armed man who was fatally wounded in St. Albans. (Jeff Bachner/New York Daily News) (Jeff Bachner/for New York Daily News)
Seven officers opened fire, expending a total of 131 shots, police sources said.
Hardy called 911, identified himself by name, and then unloaded a string of threats against several elected officials, including Gov. Hochul and Mayor Adams, according to NYPD Chief of Patrol Jeffrey Maddrey.
He called 911 a second time, repeating his threats. When cops arrived they found him outside, his hands in his pockets, cursing at the officers, Maddrey said. Hardy brandished a gun and shot at the officers, who also opened fire, mortally wounding him, the chief said.
“When you have a guy who has a gun and calls for police to come there, you are either crazy, really stupid or you’re on a suicide-by-cop mission,” a high-ranking police source said.
Hutcherson didn’t dismiss the idea, though she felt the police should have handled him differently.
“When you’re dealing with someone with mental issues, anything is possible. That’s why I feel like, are these cops not trained?” she said. “Who calls 911 back to back-to-back and says, ‘Oh I’m gonna kill this one,’ but he’s at his house?”
The entire confrontation lasted about 20 seconds.
NYPD detectives at the scene of deadly confrontation Saturday between police and an armed man in St. Albans, Queens. (Jeff Bachner/New York Daily News) (Jeff Bachner/for New York Daily News)
“When you have this many officers shooting it’s expected there will be a lot of shots fired,” the source continued. “This is higher than we’ve had in recent memory for sure, but then again this guy’s also shooting at them.”
Hardy had a half-dozen arrests on his record, including a misdemeanor assault from 2017, sources said.
Public records show he served two state prison terms, one for attempted robbery and assault in 1979, the other for criminal contempt in 2010.
Even so, Hutchinson said, he was a good man who loved his son and two grandchildren. He worked the occasional landscaping job, but was on disability assistance because of his mental illness.
“He wasn’t a bad person. But he had problems,” she said. “By no means, he wasn’t like, ‘I’m just gonna go kill everybody.’ No, that’s why it’s so shocking. I don’t think he should have died. I don’t think they should have tried to kill him. I think he should have gotten to a facility.”
She described the shooting as “excessive, excessive force.”
“They had the guns drawn before they even got to the door. You didn’t have to shoot to kill. And 100 shots fired … if that’s accurate, that’s excessive. I just feel like y’all are trying to kill him,” she said. “Don’t they have people to talk people down? Yes they do, because they seem to talk white people down all the time.”
Hardy was one of two men fatally shot by cops in separate confrontations Saturday.
About 7:30 p.m., Malik Williams, 19, was shot after he opened fire while running away from a traffic stop near Nevins St. and Flatbush Ave. in Brooklyn, police said.
A since-deleted TikTok video viewed by The News shows him running — with the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the background — as a police officer chases him on foot. Williams then swings around and fires a shot over his shoulder, as the officer hits the ground.
The officer took out his gun, returned fire, and shot the man in the chest, Maddrey said.
Police took three other people into custody during the car stop, though it’s not clear if they’ll face charges, police sources said.
With Thomas Tracy
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
