Since Juneteenth — an important holiday we wrote about yesterday that much of America is only beginning to formally celebrate — is being observed today, the city’s schools are shuttered. Which is fine; hopefully, kids will take a bit of time to think about not only about slavery but about the many heroes over the generations who’ve labored to equalize rights and opportunities in America. What’s not fine is that for yet another year, the largest public education system in America didn’t think hard enough about the impact of this and other days off on the academic calendar, resulting in the last day of school falling on a Monday, a week from today. Expect terrible attendance because tons of kids will not be coming back after a summer weekend.
Summer break is almost here and should start a day earlier. (John Minchillo/AP)
We’re not so naive as to think that last days of school are typically productive. No matter when in the week they fall, kids are many times more unsettled, but at least they will show up. So the adults in charge should at least go through the motions of making every day count. There’s a reason state law requires the instructional equivalent of 180 days.
Instead, the 2021-22 school year has been interrupted not only by national holidays and religious observances from Yom Kippur to Lunar New Year to Eid al-Fitr, all understandable in our endlessly diverse city, but by a Tuesday and Thursday just this month that were respectively slated for a clerical day and Anniversary Day, described as a “Chancellor’s Conference Day for staff development.” Subtract just one of those days, or move it to after students depart, and families could finish their school year on a Friday. But that would make sense.
The people who are responsible for teaching our kids are pretty slow learners when it comes to scheduling. Next year, school ends on Tuesday, a two-day squib of a week that thousands of kids will surely miss. Raise your hand if you think families deserve better.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
