Pulitzer Prize-winning historian David Blight recently warned that “with very different circumstances it may indeed be the mid or late 1850s again.” What could possibly justify such a grim comparison to the division and simmering, intermittent violence that culminated in America’s bloody Civil War? Then it hit me: personhood.
In 1850, Congress ratified the Fugitive Slave Act. Under that law, slaves could be captured and forcibly returned to their owners even if they were found in a free state. Agitated abolitionists feared the North would become a stalking ground for bounty hunters. In 1857, the Supreme Court heightened the nation’s festering disarray with its notorious decision in Dred Scott vs. Sandford. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Roger Taney affirmed that slaves were property and that the Fifth Amendment protected the property rights of their owners. The message was clear: Slaves were inescapably precluded from personhood. Once the high court hitched its constitutional authority to that racially skewed notion, the nation’s slide toward Civil War was all but inevitable.
Now leap ahead 165 years. Anticipating the Supreme Court’s reversal of Roe v. Wade in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, a growing number of state legislatures are consigning women to second-class personhood status by casting the unborn, even from the moment of inception, as “persons” in the eyes of the law. Their rights, these new laws say, trump the rights of those who bear them. Will Dobbs become this generation’s Dred Scott?
In the 1850s, bounty hunting for runaway slaves became a thriving, legally protected enterprise. Similarly, today some state laws permit ordinary citizens to sue abortion abettors for civil damages. Anti-abortion bounty hunting, like its antebellum precursor, makes the legal system complicit in subverting the personhood rights of pregnant women. This not only exacerbates social division, but it also cheapens the law’s moral standing in the eyes of many, including those whose religious beliefs directly clash with the law. Consider, for example, Congregation L’Dor Va-Dor’s recent lawsuit arguing that Jewish law requires abortion if necessary to protect the health, mental or physical well-being of the woman.
This kind of religious clash is precisely what Roe sought to avoid. The court concluded that it was in no position to resolve a question theologians and scholars have debated for centuries (“When does life begin?”). Instead, Roe struck a compromise, keeping to a strictly non-religious framework. Personhood commences, the court said, when the unborn fetus attains “viability,” the stage at which it can sustain life outside the womb.
Kelly Schmid confronts anti-abortion protester "Brother John" at an abortion rights rally on Saturday, May 14, 2022, at Kiener Plaza in downtown St. Louis. (Laurie Skrivan/St. Louis Post-Dispatch via AP)
Revisiting Roe means revisiting the grounds upon which it was decided. But if not science, on what basis do we then determine whether and, if so, under what circumstances, the rights of the unborn trump those of their bearers? Saying “just let the voters decide” evades the core issue. Why? Because once state legislatures prohibit abortion with no exceptions for rape or incest or the emotional well-being of the bearer, presumably reflecting the will of citizens acting on the felt imperatives of their Christian faith, the operative constitutional principle will have shifted from the autonomy and privacy rights of pregnant women to the most fundamental principle of all, namely: the separation of church and state.
Casting women as second-class persons based on religious beliefs they do not share and cannot rationally oppose is precisely what the first words of the First Amendment in the Bill of Rights prohibit: “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.”
The state cannot forcibly impose upon others religious beliefs they do not personally uphold. In this dispensation, faith-based claims asserting that the rights of the unborn begin sometime prior to viability lack the well-settled constitutional authority of personhood rights based on principles of individual privacy, autonomy and the free exercise of religion.
The current debate surrounding personhood compels us to confront fundamentals: “Who are we?” “What is America?” Hopefully how we respond will benefit from what history teaches. It was, after all, out of the horrors of endless religious wars that the modern nation-state emerged. The constitutionally inscribed separation of church and state is a vital legacy of that history. Its wisdom was earned in blood and protracted social turmoil.
Living together in a society made up of multiple religious and non-religious beliefs is hard. But religious intolerance makes peaceful co-existence harder still — perhaps impossible.
Is our original compact still sound? Is the pluralist tradition, in the spirit of tolerance, strong enough to protect women from popular religious beliefs that exile them from personhood? Time will tell whether the lessons of history will teach us to avoid the whirlwind.
Richard Sherwin is the Wallace Stevens Professor of Law at New York Law School.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
