Abortion-rights activists breathlessly interrupted a megachurch hosted service by popular televangelist Joel Osteen in Houston on Sunday by shouting at the top of their lungs and stripping down to their underwear.
“It’s my body, my f---ing choice!” shouted one protester who took off her dress to reveal a pair of green hands painted onto her white bra.
The demonstration was posted online to a Twitter account with the handle TX4ABORTION.
Disruption for Abortion Rights at Joel Osteen’s Lakewood Church in Houston TX.@riseup4abortion pic.twitter.com/5XFnHPDEn5
That protester was immediately joined by a woman next to her, who disrobed to reveal a similar outfit.
“Overturn Roe?” she chanted. “Hell no!”
She’s referring to the 1973 Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade that made a right to legal abortions the law of the land. A recently leaked Supreme Court draft indicates the newly conservative court, which includes three justices appointed by former President Donald Trump, may overturn that ruling.
Those women were joined by a third protester. The trio continued shouting as they were ushered through a surprised, but seemingly calm crowd. Osteen continued to speak from the stage.
Lakewood Church pastor Joel Osteen saw his service interrupted. (Richard Vogel/AP)
“Alright y’all, we love everybody so we just thank the Lord that he’s in control and he has all things in his hand, and I think as long as I keep talking you can’t hear what everybody else is saying,” the Catholic News Agency claims he said.
An activist identified as Rise Up Abortion activist Julianne D’Eredita told a crowd outside Osteen’s Lakewood Church that she brought her battle to Osteen’s house of worship because anti-abortion activists recognize no boundaries.
“I know it seems really outrageous to do it in a church, in a private space; however, the people who are enforcing these laws have no qualms coming up to women in private spaces such as doctors’ offices and medical clinics to harass them and call them murderers,” she said.
[ Plumber finds about 500 envelopes full of cash, checks behind loose toilet at Joel Osteen’s Houston megachurch ]
Among the tweets Osteen posted Sunday was one telling his congregants that messages come in different forms.
“We don’t always realize how God speaks to us,” he said. “But most of the time, God speaks to us in a gentle whisper. It’s not something loud; it’s not forceful. It’s called the still small voice.”
Osteen, 59, has two children. The Christian Post quoted him saying “Every baby should live,” during a 2011 interview though that doesn’t seem to be an issue he often addresses. Osteen will preach in Yankee Stadium on Aug. 6.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
