Esias Johnson is arraigned in Manhattan Criminal Court on October 24, 2019 in New York. (Alec Tabak/for New York Daily News)
I often listen to the voice memos my brother Esias left me while he was caged on Rikers Island. As I replay them to savor the sound of his voice, I am haunted by the fear and confusion I hear in it. He was right to be scared.
Last fall on Sept. 7, Esias was found dead in a jail cell on that island. At that time, he was the 10th person detained there in 2021 who ended up dying while in custody. Today, that number has risen to 22 since the start of 2021. The island that houses New York City’s jail complex is controlled by the Department of Correction, but really it’s run by the Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association (COBA), the prison guards’ union that has been allowed to perpetuate a deadly humanitarian crisis through neglect, abuse and violence.
And it’s being allowed to continue by city, state and court officials as the body count climbs.
Crossing the bridge from Queens to Rikers is like entering another realm, one where basic rights and human decency no longer apply. In the days and weeks after Esias’ death, I wanted to make the world see what was going on in this place, this modern-day hellhole. I was so full of sorrow and rage I could think of nothing more than shutting it down, even contemplating using my body as a barricade in the middle of that bridge — like those pipeline protesters on the news — to physically stop the flow of desperate and troubled people into the place that stole the other part of my heart.
Yes, there has been an “end date” decreed when Rikers will close — but that is years away. For now, the jails continue to operate, with deadly consequences. It’s gotten to the point where I wonder almost daily how many more people have to suffer and die until someone with authority says “enough.”
It gets overlooked, but Rikers isn’t supposed to be the place of punishment. People accused of crimes are sent there awaiting their trials or the outcome of their cases. They are innocent until proven guilty. Yet punishment is plentiful. Esias should have been receiving basic health care, including mental health services. Instead, he died as the union ostensibly leveraged the health and welfare of the people at Rikers to get a better contract.
Since 2021, guards have been calling out sick, refusing to work and demanding alternative assignments. During the peak of this “sick out” at the end of 2021, an average of 2,500 officers were out daily. While that average has come down to 1,100 last month, according to the most recent monitor report, this still represents a significant gap in critical staffing levels. With that many personnel away from their posts, it’s not a surprise that the jail became a more dangerous place — that was the point. COBA’s strategy put detainees in danger, and especially the troubled and vulnerable detainees like Esias.
Esias wasn’t like other kids. When my brothers and I would wrestle, Esias would growl. Like, really growl. As a child, he was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome and he struggled with mental health issues for the rest of his short life. Once my parents understood Esias’ needs, they did everything they could to get him the help he needed. He went to a special school where the curriculum and environment was designed with his needs in mind. He thrived there.
When Esias was a teenager, he realized he was gay. Soon after he came out, our church rejected him, and that’s when the real decline started for him. He retreated from the world. He had a loving family, but we couldn’t save him alone. After making some mistakes, Esias found himself at Rikers. He was still young, still able to correct course — if only he had lived through his experience in New York’s criminal legal system.
It took a coordinated and concerted effort to create the dangerous conditions at Rikers — effort by the correction union, continued disregard from the mayor’s office and complacency from New York City public officials.
It’s clear the leaders of this city and this state will not confront this crisis. There will be more lives lost and that blood will be on their hands. It’s time for chief federal judge for the Southern District of New York, Laura Swain, who oversees the department’s compliance with a federal consent decree, to appoint a receiver. It’s too late for my brother. But placing Rikers under the strict oversight of an individual receiver or group of federal officials who are insulated from the politics driving this deadly crisis is the only hope for those still caged at Rikers, waiting for their day in court.
Johnson is a welder from Haverhill, Mass. His younger brother, Esias Johnson, died on Rikers Island in 2021.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
