As New York City emerges slowly from the pandemic, as worries of gun violence in our city rise, we need to talk about a radical reimagining of NYC — one that respects the dignity and humanity of every New Yorker in every neighborhood.
What is at the core of public safety? Strong, vibrant, connected communities, where people know each other, and where people have places to gather and share stories, to hear music and experience dance that revives the soul.
That is not just a pretty idea. The UPenn Social Impact of the Arts Project studied New York City in 2017. Their data showed that neighborhoods with cultural assets had improved outcomes in education, aging, mental health, public safety and decreased engagement with the criminal justice system. The National Endowment for the Arts’ 2012 report, “How Art Works,” detailed civic benefits of engagement in culture, including increased positive contact with diverse groups in a community, and improved ability for a community to problem solve and work together. Surely these outcomes are the ones we are hoping for.
El Museo del Barrio (Finkelstein, Katherine)
Let’s look at some examples. The NeON Arts program, funded by the city’s Department of Probation and Weill Music/Carnegie Hall, works in neighborhoods with high rates of probation to provide youth 16-24 with arts and cultural classes — delivered by cultural groups chosen by members of the community. The courses range from dance to photography to graphic computer arts, not only engaging them in rigorous and rewarding classes, but providing training for jobs in the creative economy.
The city-supported SciNetwork NYC, led by the Wildlife Conservation Society, is a group of 12 zoos, museums and other science institutions. Providing 1,200 jobs and internships across the five boroughs, it is developing the next generation of STEM and cultural professionals into our workforce. This program is designed to reach youth who have been historically excluded from STEM careers–providing critically needed career paths for low-income young people of color.
Programs like Ritual4Return provide theater workshops for people reentering their community after incarceration. It acknowledges years of trauma, encouraging people to tell their stories in collaboration with family members, friends and members of their community. This program is enormously successful, leading to successful reentry. In the words of Lisette Bamanga, a participant who is now in the program leadership, “The legal system is a ritual that degrades people. Ritual4Return felt like getting my voice back, to let me continue moving forward.”
As we know too well, mental health is a huge part of public safety. A past city program, originally called Hospital Audiences and then simply HAI, provided arts and culture programs to people in shelters, at drop-in centers, addiction centers, prisons, and an array of public health facilities. Psychiatric studies show the power of providing a place for marginalized clients to safely express and process emotions. It was defunded and disbanded for a variety of reasons in 2018, and our city has felt its absence.
In response to the tragic killing of Police Officers Jason Rivera and Wilbert Mora while responding to a domestic dispute, the dance troupe, KR3TS, in East Harlem, choreographed an extraordinary dance of pain and grief. One of their choreographers is a cousin of Rivera, and their leader Violeta Galagarza works with young talented dancers, some of them former gang members or kids otherwise at risk. The troupe performed the piece for members of their precinct and posted it online mourning the officers and calling for an end to gun violence. It was an opportunity for community healing and an outlet for healthy expression. Culture connects us, it heals us, and it creates safe, strong communities.
Our city government must remember the critical role culture plays in the economic health and overall well-being of NYC communities, especially when the cultural sector has been hard hit by the pandemic. The organizations most at risk are ones disproportionately led by and serving communities of color. A broad coalition of arts workers and cultural organizations of all sizes have created a detailed plan for a $100 million investment in culture across the five boroughs, with an emphasis on funding culture in historically disinvested communities. It is called CultureVIBE NYC (Fund Culture, a Visionary Investment to Build the Economy of NYC).
As the city hammers out next year’s budget, our leaders must invest in culture for every New Yorker in every neighborhood in every public school and senior center, in prisons and in shelters, giving people invaluable tools to connect and heal and grow. This can and will build the strong, safe, vibrant, joyous and more equitable New York we all long for.
Andrieux is executive director at MoCADA (Museum of Contemporary African Diasporan Arts) and a board member with New Yorkers for Culture & Arts. Rodriguez is executive director of government and community affairs at the Bronx Zoo/Wildlife Conservation Society and a board member with New Yorkers for Culture & Arts.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
