A British journalist and his Brazilian guide have been missing in the Amazon forest for two days, as loved ones beg the Brazilian government to mobilize in search of the two men.
Dom Phillips and Bruno Pereira were expected in the small city of Atalaia do Norte in the far west region of the Amazon on Sunday morning. They never arrived.
Phillips is a veteran reporter who knows the region well and has written for the Washington Post, the Guardian and several other outlets. Pereira has worked for Brazilian Indigenous rights organizations and Brazil’s government agency for Indigenous rights.
Dom Phillips walks through the Amazon rainforest in 2019. (Joao Laet/AP)
According to Phillips’ family, the Brazilian government has spent more time passing the buck than searching for the two men.
“I am here in anguish, hoping for help,” Alessandra Sampaio, Phillips’s wife, told the Washington Post. “And the sluggishness of these agencies and their bureaucracy. Instead of moving with urgency to save lives, they are waiting for someone’s signature, a game of pushing authority from one agency to another, while there are two lives out there.”
Phillips and Pereira were in a vast, remote area of the Amazon where illegal mining and fishing operations often clash with Indigenous groups. Phillips was reportedly there doing research for a book on conservation in the Amazon. Pereira has often been threatened by illegal fishermen and usually carries a gun.
They were supposed to meet a third man, Indigenous rights worker Orlando Possuelo, in Atalaia do Norte, on Sunday morning, according to the Post. Possuelo said he organized an impromptu search party after they didn’t show.
According to Possuelo, Phillips and Pereira encountered an illegal fisherman, who brandished his own gun, the Post reported. Possuelo said Pereira caught it on camera. However, Possuelo heard the locals only saw the fisherman’s boat and never saw Phillips and Pereira.
“And from there, I haven’t had any hope,” he said, pointing out that the two men were unlikely to suffer an accident or get lost, given their extensive knowledge.
Brazil’s military said its official search began Monday and has continued nonstop. However, there has been no sign of either man.
“In the forest every second counts, every second could be the difference between life and death,” Sampaio told the BBC. “Our families are in despair, please answer the urgency of the moment with urgent actions.”
With News Wire Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
