NYPD Commissioner Keechant Sewell intervened to save the job of a decorated Latino cop who called a suspect the N-word during a tense arrest in the Bronx, the Daily News has learned.
Sewell, the first Black woman to lead the Police Department, went against an administrative judge’s recommendation to fire Officer Benito Cruz. The officer yelled the slur as he held down the head of a tasered suspect — a 25-year-old Black man — in the Bronx in 2018, according to newly released NYPD documents.
Sewell declared her decision in an April memo, pointing out the officer’s “otherwise stellar history” as she imposed an already-served 30-day suspension, docked him 45 vacation days and ordered him placed on a one-year “dismissal probation.”
NYPD Commissioner Keechant Sewell (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
That means he’ll be closely monitored for a year and could be sacked without a hearing if he steps out of line.
Shanna Bass, the mother of Jeremiah Bass, the suspect who was chased and called the N-word, told the Daily News she’s disappointed with Sewell’s decision.
“I feel like the justice between the police and the public has always been uneven,” said Shanna Bass, 52. “It’s hard for a person to prove their rights when it comes to the police force.”
Cruz was one of three officers facing disciplinary charges after the dicey 2 a.m. arrest outside the Mitchel Houses on July 29, 2018, according to a report by Deputy Commissioner of Trials Josh Kleiman.
Cruz and another officer, Mariano Bulfante, were responding to a report of a suspect with a gun while a third officer, John Manzo, arrived at a bodega on Willis Ave. to disperse a disorderly crowd. The crowd was made up of the remnants of a Family Day celebration at the housing complex that wrapped up hours earlier.
Cruz and Bulfante joined Manzo when Jeremiah Bass refused to leave, cursing and telling the crowd not to listen to the cops. Bass was trying to intervene in the arrest of his brother, according to his mother.
“The [cop] was cursing him out, cursing out other people that were there,” Shanna Bass said. “My son responded back.”
When another cop, Sgt. William Miller, tried to arrest Jeremiah Bass, he pulled away, smacked the sergeant’s hand, pushed off of him and ran, according to NYPD documents.
“My son got nervous and he started running,” Shanna Bass said.
The officers chased Bass as Bulfante twice yelled out, “You f---ing p---y!” according to Kleiman’s report.
Manzo discharged his Taser, bringing Bass to the ground.
“He shot him with a Taser, his leg got weak,” said Shanna Bass. “[Taser darts] got stuck in his hoodie he was wearing that night.”
Cruz was one of three officers facing disciplinary charges after a dicey arrest outside the Mitchel Houses on July 29, 2018, according to a report by Deputy Commissioner of Trials Josh Kleiman. (Jefferson Siegel/New York Daily News)
That’s when Cruz moved in, got on top of Jeremiah Bass, putting his hand on the man’s head to restrain him. Cruz yelled, “Yeah, yeah, you talking s--t right now, you p---y a-s n----r?” according to Kleiman’s report.
Kleiman ruled Cruz used excessive force — Bass was bleeding and unconscious and needed to go to a nearby hospital to have the Taser prongs removed from his body. Bass later pleaded guilty to aggravated harassment.
“They always find a way to do things to young Black men,” Shanna Bass said. “When they see them they automatically think they’re out to do something negative.”
At his departmental trial in October, Cruz said he used the word p---y to characterize the man as a coward but gave no explanation for the racial slur.
Kleiman found Manzo not guilty of using excessive force by discharging his Taser but recommended Bulfante be docked 25 vacation days for his discourteous shouts. Sewell agreed but split with Kleiman on what should happen to Cruz.
Kleiman wanted Cruz fired, calling his words “the most vile variety of discourteous and offensive language: hate speech.”
“There exist certain acts taken by public officers which so irreparably taint the officer’s integrity that they are no longer capable of fulfilling their duties in a manner that would prevent further damage to the reputation and mission of the agency they serve,” Kleiman wrote. “Cruz has cast a shadow upon his work product and the agency he serves.”
Sewell disagreed with his proposed punishment, writing in April, “Police Officer Cruz’s remark to the complainant in this matter was both vulgar and inappropriate. I make no attempt to defend his remark, but recognize that the statement was made during an otherwise chaotic encounter with a large group of individuals.”
“I find that Police Officer Cruz’s statement was made in a moment of time likely without forethought and that he allowed his judgment to fail him as there is no evidence of past racial or gender animus,” she added.
She also pointed out he had no other disciplinary history and received “excellent reviews” over his career.
Cruz has been on the job since July 2014 and has received nine medals for excellent police duty and 16 for meritorious police duty.
Cruz declined to comment when reached by The News. The police union also did not respond to a request for comment.
Jeremiah Bass died in the years since his arrest. His mother declined to say when or how.
“I’m sure if [Jeremiah] was here he would agree that the guy should not be on the force,” Shanna Bass said.
With Brittany Kriegstein
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
