Not a lot of artists have ever made me say, “Wow, how talented do you need to be?” as if they had an impossible surfeit of ability. Judy Garland, who was born 100 years ago on June 10, is one of those few, and I have loved and studied her artistry as a singer, actor and radio performer for decades.
As a straight male in his 40s, I don’t represent the Judy demo. When she’s spoken of now, it’s usually because of 1939′s “The Wizard of Oz.” But if you don’t partake of this titaness’s work — and she stands up there in American art and entertainment with Miles Davis, Orson Welles and William Faulkner — you’re not just missing out on a cornucopia of enrichment, but also a way of approaching the world that opens up other avenues.
American singer and actress Judy Garland on stage, circa 1960. (Keystone/Getty Images)
Ask someone their interests, and they tend to be boxed-in. Netflix gets cited. In my experience, older people — senior citizens and up — are the most likely to surprise you. That’s where you’ll find the Civil War buff, the gardening expert, the individual ready to quote some lines of Whitman. Society now expects everything to be brought rather than sought. To be put in front of our faces. Most people don’t journey, and it’s bad for all of us.
What I’ll call my journey with Judy began with her 1961 album, “Judy at Carnegie Hall.” When I heard Garland on that album — sounding wiser than she did as an already wise teenager in “The Wizard of Oz” — I heard a jazz singer that no one classified as such, disassembling expectations. Her torch songs torched me, and the technical perfection of her singing was matched by the authenticity of the palpable emotion.
She died at age 47, after years of self-doubt and abuse. Her own movie studio branded her an ugly duckling, and she finally gave out. Items auctioned from her life brought shockingly low figures in return. She was discarded.
And yet in the work of Garland, one experiences an accession of human triumphs. She wouldn’t stop ranging. Six years after “Oz,” she appeared in future husband Vincente Minnelli’s “The Clock,” insisting that this time she wouldn’t sing, would only act, and she acted the hell out of the thing.
That same year found her in one of the grisliest episodes of the ever-grisly radio program, “Suspense,” called “Drive-In.” In 1958, she cut “Judy in Love,” a tour of the American songbook that can comfortably stand alongside Ella Fitzgerald’s more famous offerings. This lady brought it, and she brought it good.
Which is why we shouldn’t just bring ourselves to her, but be inspired to not require everything to come to us. Don’t play to anyone else’s expectations, including society’s.
My own experience with Garland is similar to what often goes down when I buy some flowers to put outside my apartment door. Someone will see me walking home with them, and they’ll say, “She’ll love those!” in reference to the girlfriend or wife I don’t have. And I think, “What? A man can’t enjoy some flowers?”
Call it the Judy Garland effect. Oz is not going to come to you, especially in this algorithm world, where patterns are meant to be reinforced and added to, and never broken. Wouldn’t want to knock those “You might like this” recommendations out of whack.
But people aren’t patterns unless they let themselves become so, and Judy Garland wasn’t. She was a force of an individual whose art and entertainment can help shake us into our own individuality. Click your heels and go.
Fleming is the author of “Sam Cooke: Live at the Harlem Square Club, 1963.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
