After making crimefighting the centerpiece of his campaign last year, Mayor Adams on Monday linked a modest improvement in shooting rates over the last two months to his decision to reintroduce a modified version of the NYPD’s plainclothes units.
But, speaking at a press conference in Brooklyn, Adams said the NYPD’s efforts to get crime under control continue to be hampered by lawmakers in Albany and the criminal justice system. The mayor has repeatedly tied the city’s spate of gun violence to what he describes as the state’s overly lax criminal justice laws — a point he reiterated at Monday’s event.
“No one takes criminal justice seriously anymore. These bad guys no longer take them seriously,” he said. “They believe our criminal justice system is a laughingstock of our entire country.”
After remaining elevated for most of the spring, shootings were as of Sunday down 7% this year as compared with 2021, according to NYPD data. Murders are also down 9% so far this year.
But the major crime rate — a compilation of seven major felonies, including murder — is up 38%, the data show. The surge is fueled by a 40% jump in robberies and a 51% spike in grand larcenies.
“We hope with Gun Violence Suppression Division, with other resources that we have in this city, tackling this out of control gun violence that we’ve seen in previous years begins to decline, what you’ve seen in the last seven to eight weeks,” said James Essig, the NYPD’s chief of detectives. “We see a steady decline in shooting. So hopefully we start to get a handle on this.”
[ Hochul signs off on New York’s strict new gun laws, raising age for rifles, banning body armor and more ]
Adams was also critical of lawmakers in Albany after they wrapped up this year’s legislative session without acting on his demand for a controversial addition to the state’s bail laws.
“Sometimes I just feel that with some lawmakers that they are just not dealing with the reality. Idealism can’t displace realism,” Adams told reporters while visiting an NYPD detective bureau field office in Brooklyn for a gun violence briefing.
For months, Adams and his team pushed state legislators to pass a bill that would give judges the power to consider the “dangerousness” of a defendant before deciding whether to set bail or keep them incarcerated pending trial.
New York Mayor Eric Adams is joined by police detectives of the Gun Violence Suppression Division at a Brooklyn police facility where it was announced that arrests have been made against violent street gangs on June 6, 2022. (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
But the 2022 lawmaking session in the state capitol came to an end over the weekend without any action on the dangerousness front — and Adams said Monday morning that he couldn’t wrap his head around why legislators balked at his proposal.
“When I have some of these conversations, I’ve had lawmakers say to me that young people are carrying guns because they feel unsafe and so there should be understanding for that, that they’re carrying guns. No! No! It’s not understandable.”
During negotiations on public safety issues this spring, Adams said one lawmaker told him to “let everybody out” from Rikers Island to address the crisis at the city jail.
“Where is the reality here? That is not what New Yorkers want,” he said.
New York Mayor Eric Adams is joined by NYPD Deputy Chief Jason Savino and police detectives of the Gun Violence Suppression Division at a Brooklyn police facility where it was announced that arrests have been made against violent street gangs on June 6, 2022. (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
Adams did not name any of the lawmakers he blamed for his Albany headaches, but progressive Democrats in the Legislature have been vehemently opposed to adding a dangerousness standard.
The proposal first came up during budget talks in the spring, when Adams, with support from Gov. Hochul, argued that the inability of judges to consider the dangerousness standard in defendants being needlessly set free to commit more crimes.
But progressives have countered that there’s no data to back up the mayor’s argument and alleged a dangerousness standard would disproportionately impact Black and Brown New Yorkers.
“These proposals would roll back progress the state has made toward ending the criminalization of poverty and do nothing to advance public safety,” Democratic Brooklyn Assemblywoman Latrice Walker, who went on a hunger strike in protest of Adams’ proposed bail law tweaks, said in a statement in April.
New York Mayor Eric Adams is joined by NYPD Deputy Chief Jason Savino (left) and NYPD Chief of Detectives James Essig at a Brooklyn police facility where it was announced that arrests have been made against violent street gangs on June 6, 2022. (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
Despite the dangerousness dilemma, Adams secured some concessions from the Legislature on the heated bail issue this year, including a bill that gives judges more discretion in cases involving gun possession.
Adams acknowledged those wins Monday.
“We made some victories in Albany around public safety. We would have liked to receive more, like the dangerous standard, that’s so important,” he said. “I am hoping that they reexamine that in the next legislative cycle because we have to close some of those loopholes that are dealing with public safety.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
