The Jan. 6 congressional hearings are set to start on Thursday and everyone who’s anyone is weighing in on the momentous occasion.
The hearings have been on the mind of Washington Commanders defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio all week who has tweeted numerous times to say the riot at the Capitol as President Biden’s victory in the 2020 election was finalized was less worthy of investigation as the property damage that occurred during the summer of 2020 during protests held in the wake of George Floyd’s murder.
“Would love to understand ‘the whole story’ about why the summer of riots, looting, burning and the destruction of personal property is never discussed but this is ???” he tweeted on Monday.
Asked Wednesday about how players, many of whom are Black, might react to his social media use, Del Rio replied he was only asking questions about why racial injustice protests weren’t on the same level as a coup attempt that may have originated in the Oval Office.
Commanders Defensive Coordinator Jack Del Rio: "I can look at images on the TV, people's livelihoods are being destroyed, businesses are being burned down, no problem. And then we have a dust up at the Capitol, nothing burned down, and we're going to make that a major deal." pic.twitter.com/99mF3uxUTD
“I just asked a simple question,” he continued. “Let’s get right down to it. What did I ask? A simple question. Why are we not looking into those things if we’re going to talk (Jan. 6)? Why are we not looking into those things?
“Because it’s kind of hard for me to say I can realistically look at it. I see the images on TV. People’s livelihoods are being destroyed, businesses being burned down. No problem.
“And then we have a dust-up at the Capitol. Nothing burned down. And we’re not going to talk about … we’re going to make that a major deal. I just think it’s kind of two standards.”
Del Rio added that he’d talk about it with anyone on the team who wanted to do so.
Washington Football Team defensive coordinator Jack Del Rio (Adam Hunger/AP)
Del Rio, who is also an adherent of Seth Rich conspiracy theories, has coached in the NFL since 1997. He was hired as the Commanders’ defensive coordinator in 2020. He also played 11 seasons as a linebacker for several teams.
Commanders head coach Ron Rivera declined to comment.
“I’m not gonna talk about the stuff that I talk with my coaches about, especially stuff that’s off the field and not pertaining to football,” he said. “It’s just everyone’s entitled to their opinion now.”
With News Wire Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
