A 29-year-old man was stabbed to death with a machete by his uncle inside the family’s Queens home early Sunday, police said.
Cops responding to a 4:57 a.m. 911 call about a man with a machete trying to kill himself found Neraz Roberts dead inside the house in Jamaica. He had been stabbed in the back and right hand, police said.
Police took his 50-year-old uncle Mahadeo Sukhnandan into custody at the scene. He was charged with murder and weapon possession.
Roberts lived in a basement apartment inside the home on 187th St. near Hillside Ave.
Cops investigate the scene of the fatal machete stabbing inside the home on on 187th St. near Hillside Ave. in Queens. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
Neighbors said they witnessed frequent scenes of domestic chaos at the home with police responding to multiple domestic calls there, often for family members loudly arguing.
Cops responding to a 4:57 a.m. 911 call about a man with a machete trying to kill himself found Neraz Roberts dead inside the house in Jamaica. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
“The cops were here all the time, at least three times a week. The kid had problems with his uncle,” said a neighbor who declined to give her name. “For the most part we didn’t really interact with them because the uncle would come out and scream and mostly complain about the guy who lived downstairs. We just saw [the victim] last night. He came home at around 6 p.m. We saw him walk in the house, he was fine.”
Another neighbor recalled an incident where the uncle came to blows with Roberts and Roberts’ father.
“The uncle had a lot of mouth, and so did the nephew,” said the neighbor, who also declined to give her name. “They were always saying they were going to shoot at each other. This isn’t a surprise at all.”
Outside the home, Roberts’ family members declined to speak with reporters.
“Can’t you see I’m grieving?,” said one relative at the scene. “That was my brother.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
