Congress inched towards the enactment of a bipartisan gun law on Wednesday taking its first modest step in decades to curb the only-in-America epidemic of mass shootings that culminated with last month’s bloody shooting sprees at a Buffalo supermarket and a Texas elementary school.
Hailing the proposed bill as “common-sense” and “life-saving,” Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) vowed to push the bill through the evenly divided upper chamber with some Republican support by the end of the week.
“Congress is on the path to take meaningful action to address gun violence for the first time in nearly 30 years,” Schumer said on the Senate floor. “The bill is real progress. It will save lives.”
Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., crosses through a construction tunnel at the Capitol in Washington, Wednesday, June 22, 2022. After Senate bargainers reached an agreement on a bipartisan gun violence bill, Schumer predicted Senate approval later this week, and passage by the Democratic-led House could follow quickly.  (J. Scott Applewhite/AP)
Republican Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) heralded the gun agreement saying that it takes significant steps to address “the two issues that I think it focuses on, school safety and mental health.”
“(The bill will) help make these horrifying incidents less likely while fully upholding the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding citizens,” McConnell said.
[ Texas cops waited for 77 minutes as Uvalde gunman killed kids and teachers inside classroom ]
The bill would spend $8.6 billion on mental health programs and over $2 billion on safety and other improvements at schools, according to a cost estimate by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office. 
The legislative language includes ensuring the juvenile records of gun buyers aged 18 to 20 are part of background checks required to buy firearms, bars guns for convicted domestic abusers not married to or living with their victims and strengthens penalties for gun trafficking. 
But it falls far short of significant reforms like banning assault weapons or high-capacity magazines that gun violence opponents say could make a real difference in stopping mass killings.
Gun control advocacy groups rally with Democratic members of Congress outside the U.S. Capitol on May 26, 2022 in Washington, DC. Organized by Moms Demand Action, Everytown for Gun Safety and Students Demand Action, the rally brought together members of Congress and gun violence survivors to demand gun safety legislation following mass shootings in Buffalo, New York, and Uvalde, Texas.  (Chip Somodevilla/Getty)
The compromise won 14 GOP votes in a procedural Senate vote, enough to overcome a conservative filibuster and a sign it can win quick passage.
The measure is a done deal in the Democratic-led House even though progressives complain it is woefully inadequate, given the scale of America’s addiction to guns.
Schumer praised families of victims of gun massacres like those that wreaked havoc on schools in Columbine, Colorado and Sandy Hook, Connecticut, as well as a 2017 country music concert in Las Vegas.
“Rather than curse the darkness, they lit a candle,” Schumer said. “They have turned their grief into action.”
[ Racist Buffalo killer says he has just $16 to his name ]
Even though it’s a watered-down compromise, the deal marks an unlikely election-year breakthrough on a flashpoint culture war battlefield that has defied any solution for decades, even as the death toll from mass killings soars daily.
The overwhelming majority of Americans favor stricter gun restrictions, especially as killers armed with weapons that can kill scores in a matter of seconds.
People attend a protest near Capitol Hill in Washington, Wednesday, June 8, 2022, sponsored by Everytown for Gun Safety and its grassroots networks, Moms Demand Action and Students Demand Action, as gun violence survivors and hundreds of gun safety supporters demand that Congress act on gun safety issues.  (Susan Walsh/AP)
Gun control advocates like the Sandy Hook parents and a lobbying group led by ex-Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D-Ariz.), wounded by a constituent who opened fire at a meet and greet, called on Americans to back the bill as an incremental step towards a marginally safer nation.
FILE - A cross hangs on a tree at Robb Elementary School on June 3, 2022, in Uvalde, Texas, where a memorial has been created to honor the victims killed in the recent school shooting. Two teachers and 19 students were killed.  (Eric Gay/AP)
Fred Guttenberg celebrated the deal by posting a photo of his daughter, Jaime, who was slain in the Parkland, Florida, school rampage.
“WE DID IT!!! With you standing on my shoulders, it was always only a matter of time,” Guttenberg tweeted.
Jaime, WE DIT IT!!!  With you standing on my shoulders, it was always only a matter of time. pic.twitter.com/6GQ29AOuOK
But the powerful gun lobby has steadfastly blocked even the most basic of reforms, like barring weapons and ammunition that are virtually only used to kill as quickly and effectively as possible.
The National Rifle Association went ahead with its convention in Houston just days after the Uvalde bloodshed and former President Donald Trump drew criticism by dancing on stage at the nation’s largest gathering of gun owners.
[ Even Gov. Greg Abbott backs out of NRA gun fest after Uvalde massacre ]
True to form, the NRA opposed even the Senate compromise bill.
“This legislation can be abused to restrict lawful gun purchases (and) infringe upon the rights of law-abiding Americans,” the NRA said on its Twitter feed.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
