It’s nearly time for tots to get their shots.
Mayor Adams rolled out a plan Friday for administering coronavirus shots to kids younger than 5 — the last age group that has not been cleared for vaccinations in the U.S. yet.
The plan, which comes ahead of this weekend’s expected final go-ahead from the feds on pediatric vaccinations, is focused on distributing doses via local doctor’s offices and 10 new city-run vaccine hubs, Adams’ office said.
“I know how long parents and caretakers of our little ones have been waiting for the moment their youngest would have access to a COVID-19 vaccine, and as soon as that moment comes, I want them to know we will be ready,” Adams said in a statement.
“We are looking to make this process as seamless as possible for parents, which is why we’re preparing, through city sites and partnerships with trusted pediatricians, to vaccinate and protect all of our children as soon as this vaccine is ready and shipped.”
A pharmacist prepares a syringe with the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine at a COVID-19 vaccination site at NYC Health + Hospitals Metropolitan, Thursday, Feb. 18, 2021, in New York.  (Mary Altaffer/AP)
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration gave the green light Friday morning to administer the two-shot Pfizer and Moderna coronavirus vaccines to kids under 5. This weekend, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices is expected to take a final vote on the emergency authorization.
As long as the CDC panel gives the thumbs up, as is widely expected, Adams’ office said, the city’s youngest residents should be able to get their first shots as early as this coming Wednesday.
The 10 new vaccine hubs administering pediatric shots will be spread across the city — two in Manhattan, three in Queens, one in the Bronx, one on Staten Island and three in Brooklyn.
Starting Tuesday, parents and guardians can also use the city’s COVID-19 Vaccine Finder app to make appointments for their children at locations near their homes.
Additionally, the city Department of Health is urging parents to check in with their kids’ pediatricians this weekend to see if they will make vaccines available at their offices.
The expected rollout of pediatric vaccinations comes as COVID-19 infection rates are ticking down slightly in the city after weeks on the upswing.
It also comes on the heels of Adams last week lifting the school mask mandate for kids under 5, which was kept in place throughout the spring  as youngsters were not eligible for vaccinations.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
