More than two years after her mentally troubled police officer daughter died by suicide, a grieving mother still believes the NYPD hasn’t fully accounted for its role in the officer’s death.
Aixa Sanchez has sued the NYPD in hopes of forcing the department to answer to the circumstances surrounding the death of Officer Erica Reyes in a transit police precinct, where she grabbed a colleague’s gun and fatally shot herself.
Cops investigate after NYPD Transit Officer Erica Reyes killed herself on the job inside the Transit District 1 headquarters inside the Columbus Circle subway station. (Shawn Inglima/for New York Daily News)
Sanchez hopes her suit might stop similar tragedies for other officers and their families.
“It’s already too late for Erica,” said Sanchez, 58. “But she counted to me. She meant something to me. And I deserve to have an answer. If doing this will stop someone else from being an Erica, then let it be done.”
Aixa Sanchez, mother of NYPD Officer Erica Reyes, with a portrait of her daughter.  (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
The suit, filed March 9 in Brooklyn Supreme Court, names as defendants the NYPD and a police psychologist. It also names New York-Presbyterian Hospital, where she was admitted for a mental health evaluation, and Staten Island University Hospital, where she got followup care.
Reyes, 34, shot herself in the head with the co-worker’s gun on March 13, 2020, inside Transit District 1 headquarters, which is located in the Columbus Circle subway station in Manhattan.
At the time, Reyes was on restricted duty — her gun taken from her — because she had been hospitalized two months earlier, “diagnosed with anxiety, psychosis and suicidal ideations,” according to the lawsuit.
NYPD Officer Erica Reyes 
The NYPD failed Reyes by underestimating the severity of her suicidal thoughts and then returning her to an assignment where she could easily get her hands on a gun, Sanchez’s lawyers say.
“If you’re not going to allow her to have a gun, then why would you put her in a place where firearms are readily available?” said one of the lawyers, Hugh Ortega.
“It’s not common sense for you to tell somebody, you cannot have a gun, but we’re going to put you in a building where there are guns everywhere. What did you expect was going to happen?”
Aixa Sanchez, mother of NYPD Officer Erica Reyes, displays the business cards of NYPD contacts who she interacted with following her daughter's suicide, alongside her attorney Hugo Ortega.  (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
Reyes joined the NYPD in July 2015. It was her life’s “passion,” her mother said, but she never talked about work — and she never gave any indication she was troubled.
“I go through this every day,” Sanchez said. “Did I miss something? Did she say something and I overlooked it? No.”
On Jan. 16, 2020, Reyes was taken to New York-Presbyterian Hospital for a mental health evaluation under NYPD orders. It’s still not clear what prompted the order, but eight days later she was released.
She was then put on restricted duty, cleared to work but without her service weapon.
Aixa Sanchez, mother of NYPD officer Erica Reyes, discusses the suicide of her daughter. (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
After the officer killed herself, Sanchez got a call at the lab where she works as a phlebotomist,.
Sanchez rushed home, was told by police what happened, then was driven to Bellevue Hospital, where she identified her daughter’s body and got plenty of condolences — but no answers.
“I was beside myself,” she remembered, fighting back tears. “What the hell happened? My daughter didn’t have a gun.”
“Everybody just looked at me like they had no words for me,” she added.
She took comfort in subsequent assurances that as the incident was fully investigated she would learn more.
That never happened, she said.
“I thought they would be transparent,” she said. “I guess I was naive.”
New York-Presbyterian Hospital did not respond to a request for comment, and Northwell Health, which runs Staten Island University Hospital, had no comment.
The NYPD, which in 2020 stepped up its efforts to deal with officers’ mental health after a spate of suicides, wouldn’t comment on the suit or answer any question about how they dealt with Reyes.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
