It seemed as if the earth had opened up and swallowed Helen Moyer.
The last anyone saw of the pretty sophomore was after her last class at Coatesville High School in Pennsylvania, as she headed out into the freezing cold afternoon of Feb. 11, 1937.
Helen Moyer. (New York Daily News Archive)
Her destination was her home in Modena, three miles away.
Helen’s mother, Melba, was frantic when her husband, Absalom, returned from work. Melba told him through tears that their daughter was more than an hour late. This was out of character for the sweet, reliable 16-year-old, whose ambition was to become a missionary.
Absalom and his neighbors set out to search for her, wrote Tammy Mal in her book, “Tortured Minds.” About a mile down the road, they found her books and torn papers, a hat, and shoes.
The tops of the shoes were split, which is what sometimes happens when a vehicle slams into a pedestrian. There was also a shattered headlight of a 1935 Ford, pointing to the possibility of a hit-and-run.
Hundreds of searchers — police, citizens, and even Boy Scouts who were dismissed from school — scoured the dense woods near the road. They found nothing.
Newspapers started calling Moyer the “Lost Girl.”
Police Chief of Coatesville, Pa., Ralph Williams examines shoes, a hat, and other items of the missing Helen Moyer. (Charles Hoff /New York Daily News)
Police assumptions about an accidental hit-and-run were quickly evaporating. Instead, authorities linked Helen’s disappearance to a terrifying incident a week earlier.
Jennie Watterson, 15, a classmate of Helen’s, was walking on the same road after school when an unkempt stranger dragged her into his car, hit her with a screwdriver, and attempted to rape her. She leaped from the vehicle and tried to run away.
“He caught me, and as I turned around, he saw the blood streaming down over my face and hands,” she told a reporter. “He just looked at me and turned and ran.”
The Sunday New York Daily News on Feb. 14, 1937. 
It was likely that the same lowlife had attacked Moyer.
One man reported seeing a green truck that made a U-turn back toward Coatesville around the time Moyer disappeared. He said the truck brushed against a telephone pole. Investigators found green paint on the pole.
Nine days later, the survey of people who owned trucks yielded a suspect — Alexander Thweatt Meyer, 19.
Meyer was the bratty son of a wealthy Philadelphia coal broker. The boy grew up spoiled, arrogant, and lazy in a world of privilege. When he dropped out of high school, his father tried to keep him out of trouble with a job on his 500-acre farm. It did not work.
Alexander Thweatt Meyer. (New York Daily News Archive)
In 1934, Alex committed a crime that should have put him away forever — the attempted rape and murder of two teenagers from Philadelphia.
Instead, he was paroled just 14 months after his conviction.
The girls, Anna Blasch, 17, and Viola Bauder, 19, were visiting family in Glenmore, about 10 miles from Coatesville. On July 22, they took a hike along a dirt road. A car pulled over, and a young man offered a lift. They said no, and he drove away. He returned, insisting they get in his car. Again, they refused.
A short time after he roared off, they heard a gunshot, then another that hit Bauder in the head.
Blasch remembered looking in horror at her friend bleeding on the ground when something knocked her out. When she woke, the young man from the car was dragging her toward a thicket.
Her screams scared him off and brought help from a nearby farmer.
Despite bullet wounds to their heads, both survived. Blasch gave police a description that matched Meyer, who was known to them as a troublemaker.
Meyer pled guilty to attempted rape and murder and was sentenced to an “indeterminate term” in the reformatory.
Behind bars, he put on a model-prisoner act that brought him an early release with, authorities said, a “perfect parole plan.” He went back to work on his family’s farm, delivering milk.
Five months after his release, Helen Moyer vanished.
Police picked Meyer up as he started his early morning milk run on Feb. 20. He admitted that he killed Moyer with his truck, saying it was an accident, and then hid the body.
Officials and volunteers stand over Helen Moyer's body in a well on confessed murderer Alexander Meyer's farm. (New York Daily News Archive)
“I threw her down the well and then dynamited it to cover her up,” he told police. It took hours of digging through about 1,000 pounds of rocks and rubble to find her mangled corpse.
Meyer then changed his story. He said he intentionally slammed into her, sending her flying over the top of the truck. He put the unconscious girl in the passenger seat, drove to an abandoned farm, then stripped and raped her before tossing her down the 40-foot well. An autopsy revealed she was alive when she hit the water.
Meyer said he came back a day later to cover up his crime with dynamite.
He admitted to attacking Watterson and attempting to abduct other girls. One was just 6 years old.
Asked why he picked Moyer, he said it was random. “I had no particular girl in mind. Just any girl.”
At his trial, Meyer’s attorney tried to argue that although his client was legally sane, he was “insensible to pain, either physical or mental.” He also suggested that the parole board was as much at fault as the killer. Such a dangerous character should never have been let loose.
Alexander Meyer leaving court after his sentencing. (New York Daily News Archive)
The judge took no chances that Meyer would ever walk free again and sent him to the electric chair.
“I’m satisfied,” Meyer said when he heard the sentence, which was carried out on July 11, 1937. “I want to get it over with.”
JUSTICE STORY has been the Daily News’ exclusive take on true crime tales of murder, mystery and mayhem for more than 100 years. Click here to read more.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
