He’s got a cannon for an arm, but isn’t so sure anyone needs to be armed with an AR-15.
Cincinnati Bengals quarterback Joe Burrow told reporters Tuesday that he’ll be ready when the NFL season starts in the fall and he hopes lawmakers huddle up and do their jobs, too. That, according to the 25-year-old play-caller, means coming up with a plan that to curb mass killings in the U.S.
Joe Burrow of the Cincinnati Bengals (Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images)
“With everything that’s going on, if you’re not going to outlaw everything, you’ve got to at least make it harder to get all those crazy guns that everybody’s using,” Burrow said at a press conference Tuesday.
The nation’s most recent group slaughters took place in May when one 18-year-old gunman killed 10 grocery shoppers in Buffalo and another shot dead 19 children and educators in a Texas grade school. Legally purchased AR-15 style assault rifles were used in both massacres. Burrow thinks buying such firearms should be made more difficult.
“You’ve got to go through a rigorous process to be able to buy something like that, I think,” he said. “Hopefully, the people that get paid to make those decisions figure that out. My job is to play football, but hopefully the politicians can figure that out.”
Burrow was drafted by the Bengals with the top pick in 2020, but announced his arrival as a force to be reckoned with in the NFL by bringing his once lowly team to the Super Bowl in 2022. On Monday, he posted a photo from training camp that he captioned “My Spidey sense is starting to tingle a bit,” seemingly referencing the superhero Spider-Man who says that when he feels something exciting is about to happen. Former Giants receiver Odell Beckham Jr. responded to that Instagram picture of Burrow at practice by writing “The one.”
Beckham, whose Los Angeles Rams defeated the Bengals in February’s Super Bowl, is currently a free agent. Both super jocks played college football at Louisiana State University where each competed for a national championship. Beckham’s Tigers fell short against Georgia in 2012. Burrow was successful against those same Bulldogs in 2020.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
