A damning analysis of former President Donald Trump’s efforts to overturn the 2020 election is in store for Americans.
“Over multiple months, Donald Trump oversaw and coordinated a sophisticated, seven-part plan to overturn the presidential election,” Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) said at the first hearing Thursday night. “In our hearings, you will see each element of this plan.”
The second televised hearing of the special House committee’s investigation into the Jan. 6, 2021, siege of the U.S. Capitol will show that Trump and his advisers knew he had lost the contest, in spite of his claims to the contrary, Cheney said. The hearing is expected Monday.
“You will see that Donald Trump and his advisers knew that he had in fact lost the election,” she said. “But despite this, President Trump engaged in a massive effort to spread false and fraudulent information, to convince huge portions of the U.S. population that fraud had stolen the election from him.”
The hearings will expose Republican members of Congress for seeking pardons from Trump for their role trying to overturn the election, according to Cheney.
“Rep. [Scott] Perry contacted the White House in the weeks after Jan. 6 to seek a presidential pardon,” she said of the Pennsylvania pol, without going into detail. “Multiple other Republican congressmen also sought presidential pardons for their roles in attempting to overturn the 2020 election.”
Vice Chair Liz Cheney, R-Wyo., gives her opening remarks as the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol holds its first public hearing to reveal the findings of a year-long investigation, at the Capitol in Washington on Thursday. (J. Scott Applewhite/AP)
The third hearing will focus on Trump’s effort to install a new attorney general who would back his false claims, Cheney said.
The fourth one will detail the ex-president’s attempts to force his Vice President Mike Pence to reject the election results and send them back to the states, with the hope that local legislatures would hand Trump victory.
The fifth hearing will be about how “Trump corruptly pressured state officials to change the election results,” Cheney said.
The last two June hearings will be about how Trump “summoned a violent mob and directed them, illegally, to march on the United States Capitol,” according to the congresswoman.
“While the violence was underway, President Trump failed to take immediate action to stop the violence and instruct his supporters to leave the Capitol,” she said.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
