The tasting menu at Sagaponack in Flatiron includes everything from oysters to fluke tartar. The Manhattan eatery also recently added more shared plates. (MELA STUDIOS/Sagaponack)
The revamped menu at Manhattan’s seafood-focused Sagaponack is quite the catch.
Chef Joseph Yi recently reimagined the menu at the Flatiron District restaurant, adding more shared plates so guests can sample as much as possible, while keeping its tasting menu so that even solo diners can enjoy more than one or two dishes. 
“I believe sharing will be more prevalent in the future,” Yi told the Daily News of the changes and his predictions for the food scene this year. “It makes dining more fun. I like going out to eat in small groups so we can order and taste as much variety.”
[ Katz’s Deli offers Passover dinner packages to ship locally or nationwide ]
The shared plates include various styles of oysters; appetizers like chicken bites served with chili honey butter and ramp ranch ($14) and parmesan fries served with scallion aioli and spicy mayonnaise ($9); and mains including curry mussels ($19), hanger steak ($35) and Nduja Mussels ($21).
Sagaponack — which prides itself on “approachable seafood with quality ingredients,” according to its website — also offers a six-course tasting menu at $79 per guest. While full parties at each table must participate in the tasting, those dining alone can also order it.
“I also enjoy eating out alone or with one other person, so that’s why I sometimes like the tasting menus. It allows me to try just as much as if I was sharing,” said Yi, who has worked at Sagaponack since September of 2020 after serving as a sous chef at the two Michelin-starred French restaurant Gabriel Kreuther in Midtown.
[ Kit Kat Blueberry Muffin bars hit store shelves for limited time ]
“Having both options allows for the best possible experience for everyone,” he adds. “We even allow a tasting menu to be served for one guest.”
The tasting lineup begins with dressed oysters in chili and cucumber flavors, before a brightly decorated fluke tartar is brought out that’s flavored with coconut lime dressing, Marcona almonds and tobiko (fish roe).
Those two dishes are followed by a roasted oyster trio of brown butter, curry and tomato varieties. Next up is cavatelli served with Italian sausage, ricotta and kale. And finally, Branzino is the main and comes with artichoke, farro and sauce vierge, a French mixture made with tomatoes, olive oil, herbs and lemon juice.
Dessert is also included in the tasting menu, a Thai milk cake made with cinnamon, pecan and mango.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
