Modest gun-buying restrictions, stronger school safety and mental health investments could be on the way, thanks to a bipartisan Senate deal announced Sunday in response to last month’s mass shootings.
Ten Democrats and 10 Republicans signed a statement outlining policies like tweaking the background check system, among other measures.
“Families are scared, and it is our duty to come together and get something done that will help restore their sense of safety and security in their communities,” the lawmakers said in a statement. “Most importantly, our plan saves lives while also protecting the constitutional rights of law-abiding Americans.”
The deal calls for an “investigative period” for authorities to check juvenile and mental health records of people under 21 who want to buy a gun. The agreement would also extend a gun ownership ban on domestic abusers to include people like ex-boyfriends who do not live with their former partners.
It would provide funding incentives to states that set up “red flag” laws that make it easier to temporarily seize guns from people who could be violent. It also includes unspecified levels of funding for “safety measures in and around primary and secondary schools,” along with a variety of mental health programs.
Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas)  (Jacquelyn Martin/AP Photo)
The agreement, which comes after thousands rallied against gun violence around the country Saturday, falls short of cracking down on assault weapons, among other measures sought by gun-control advocates.
But the effort led by Sens. Chris Murphy (D-Conn.) and John Cornyn (R-Texas) could mark the most significant progress on the issue in years.
“Obviously, it does not do everything that I think is needed, but it reflects important steps in the right direction, and would be the most significant gun safety legislation to pass Congress in decades,” President Biden said in a statement, promising to sign off on the proposals.
“With bipartisan support, there are no excuses for delay, and no reason why it should not quickly move through the Senate and the House,” he added. “Each day that passes, more children are killed in this country: The sooner it comes to my desk, the sooner I can sign it, and the sooner we can use these measures to save lives.”
U.S. Senator Chris Murphy D-Conn.  (Efrem Lukatsky/AP)
Biden previously called for banning assault weapons like the ones used in recent massacres — the May 14 shooting in a Buffalo supermarket that claimed 10 Black lives and the May 24 massacre at a Uvalde, Texas, school in which 19 children and two teachers were killed. Biden also suggested raising the age to buy an assault weapon from 18 to 21.
GOP lawmakers, long opposed to tightening gun control, quickly sought to shift attention to alternative safety measures like strengthening school doors.
No one could predict the odds of passing any of the proposals, which came as Republicans are trying to take the House and Senate in this year’s midterm elections. Negotiations were expected to continue this week. Ten Republican votes are needed to pass legislation in the evenly divided Senate.
“The senators will be meeting with groups including Everytown and Brady, but also gun advocacy groups and mental health stakeholders to ensure that the framework continues to get the broad bipartisan support that has so far manifested,” said a source close to the talks, referring to the nonprofit pro-gun-control groups Everytown for Gun Safety and Brady: United Against Gun Violence.
March for Our Lives participants walk over the Brooklyn Bridge on Saturday, June 11, 2022. (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
With the Senate set to go on a long recess in August, Majority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) is pushing for a vote ASAP, said a source close to him.
The deal “is a good first step to ending the persistent inaction to the gun violence epidemic that has plagued our country and terrorized our children for far too long,” Schumer said in a statement.
“After an unrelenting wave of gun-related suicides and homicides, including mass shootings, the Senate is poised to act on common-sense reforms to protect Americans where they live, where they shop, and where they learn,” he added.
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) praised the bipartisan group’s efforts but stopped short of endorsing the proposals.
Crosses for the Uvalde mass shooting victims are on display in Cadman Plaza Park on Saturday, June 11, 2022 in Brooklyn. (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
“The principles they announced today show the value of dialogue and cooperation,” he said in a statement.
“I continue to hope their discussions yield a bipartisan product that makes significant headway on key issues like mental health and school safety, respects the Second Amendment, earns broad support in the Senate and makes a difference for our country,” he added.
Last week, the House of Representatives passed tougher gun safety measures. Those include bans on semiautomatic weapons sales to those under 21 and on large-capacity ammo magazines. Without Republican support, they’re expected to go nowhere in the Senate.
Sunday morning delivered a fresh reminder of the urgency of addressing gun violence. Two people were killed and four others were injured in a shooting at an Indiana nightclub, according to local police.
With News Wire Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
