It’s going to be a not-so-happy Pride Month for some students in Carroll County, Md.
On Wednesday, after hours of emotional testimony during a school board meeting, the Carroll County board voted to ban the displaying of LGBTQ or transgender Pride flags on school property.
Several students and parents — both in favor and against the ban — spoke during the meeting, according to local television station WBFF-TV.
“We need to affirm these children. We need to support them,” said Dr. J.D. Murphy, a mother of Carroll County students. “We need to normalize them. We need to be inclusive in what we say,” she added.
Murphy, who’s a pediatric nurse practitioner, noted how children who identify as LGBTQ and more likely to be suicidal.
One parent who voted against the displaying of the flags felt that LGBTQ-affirming symbols or colors could make students more sexualized.
“We can be accepting of each person’s sexuality and personal identification. But what I will not accept is over-sexualizing the classroom,” the parent said.
According to new data from the Trevor Project, the world’s largest suicide prevention and crisis intervention organization for LGBTQ and questioning youth, 45% of LGBTQ youth in the U.S., ages 13 to 24, have considered attempting suicide in the past year.
The survey, published last month, also highlighted the importance of an inclusive and accepting environment. Youth who live in a community that is accepting of LGBTQ people — including schools and homes — reported “significantly lower” rates of attempting suicide compared to those who do not.
The issue in Carroll County first made local headlines last month, when students carrying Pride flags and signs that read “We are people too!” and “Protect LGBTQ + Youth” took to the streets to protest the upcoming vote, WJV-TV reported.
While the policy does not specifically mention LGBTQ or Pride symbols, it doesn’t include them in a list that allows which flags — aside from the American flag — are allowed to be displayed.
Only the Maryland state flag, Carroll County flag, banners for academic achievement, sports tournament banners, pro and college sports team banners and flags from other countries that are part of a multinational display are now allowed on school property.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
