Wandrea (Shaye) Moss decided to be a Georgia election worker because her grandmother told her about the brave struggles of their African-American ancestors to win the right to vote.
The Atlanta woman told the Jan. 6 committee on Tuesday that she proudly delivered absentee ballot applications to hospitalized and disabled voters. Moss also mailed documents to people who didn’t have laptops or printers.
Wandrea "Shaye" Moss, a former Georgia election worker, testifies while her mother, Ruby Freeman listens, as the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol continues to reveal its findings of a year-long investigation at the Capitol in Washington,  D.C. on Tuesday, June 21, 2022.  (Michael Reynolds/AP)
A proud calling turned to fear for Atlanta poll workers Wandrea “Shaye” Moss and her mother, Ruby (Lady Ruby) Freeman when then-President Donald Trump and his attorney Rudy Giuliani falsely accused the pair of introducing suitcases of illegal ballots and committing other acts of election fraud to try to alter the outcome.
Weeks after the vote, Trump called Freeman a “hustler” in a call to Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger. Giuliani compared Moss to a drug dealer in a shameless racist canard.
Within seconds, Moss’s Facebook feed was overflowing with hateful messages, threatening her with the kind of violence that Black Americans in the Deep South know only too well.
“They said: ‘You’re lucky it’s 2020 and not 1920,’” Moss recalled.
Wandrea "Shaye" Moss, a former Georgia election worker, is comforted by her mother Ruby Freeman, right, as the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol continues to reveal its findings of a year-long investigation, at the Capitol in Washington, Tuesday, June 21, 2022.  (Jacquelyn Martin/AP)
“It has turned my life upside down,” Moss said. “(I) don’t want anyone knowing my name. I don’t want to go to the grocery store with my mom because she might call my name out.”
“It’s affected me in a major way,” she added. “All because of lies.”
A mob of Trump supporters went to the home of Moss’s elderly grandmother, threatening to make a “citizens arrest.”
U.S. Capitol Police Sgt. Harry Dunn greets Wandrea "Shaye" Moss, a former Georgia election worker, after she testified as the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol continues to reveal its findings of a year-long investigation, at the Capitol in Washington, Tuesday, June 21, 2022.  (Jacquelyn Martin/AP)
Freeman said she was once proud of the moniker “Lady Ruby” and even built a small business around the nickname, which was revered in her Atlanta community.
After Trump’s lies, she doesn’t introduce herself by name and gets nervous when giving her name to food delivery workers.
“I’ve lost my name, and I’ve lost my reputation. I’ve lost my sense of security,” she said. “Do you know how it feels to have the President of the United States to target you?”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
