Panicked witnesses called 911. NYPD divers recovered one of the two just before 1 p.m. and rushed him to Jamaica Hospital, where he died. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
Two Queens boys celebrating the start of summer died Friday after they fell into Jamaica Bay and never resurfaced, police said.
The two victims, who are both 13, were on an outcropping of rocks near Broad Channel at about 11:40 a.m. when they fell into the water.
Panicked onlookers called 911. NYPD divers recovered one of the two just before 1 p.m. and rushed him to Jamaica Hospital, where he died.
The two victims, who are both 13, were on an outcropping of rocks near Beach 121st St. in the Rockaways about 11:40 a.m. when they fell into the water.  (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
The second teen was found under the waves about 40 minutes later. He was rushed to Jamaica Hospital in extremely critical condition but he could not be saved, officials said.
Their names were not immediately released.
The two boys, accompanied by a group of friends, made their way to the bay in celebration of the first day of summer break, a shaken uncle of one of the teens said outside the hospital Friday evening.
“Yesterday was the last day of school and they were just trying to have a good time, messing around like kids do,” said Michael Rachel. “They were out on the rocks but when the tide comes in you couldn’t see them. They’re gone.”
“We’re suffering,” said Rachel, 60. “We’re messed up, man.”
A firefighter sustained a minor injury in the rescue operation, FDNY officials said.
The tidal currents of Jamaica Bay can be a deadly draw for teens on warm, summery days.
A 15-year-old boy died after he was believed to have been swept away by the bay’s currents while he went swimming with several friends on a Sunday afternoon in August 2019.
In that incident, the teen and his friends went into the water near a city kayak launch spot that is not meant for swimming. The city warns kayakers that the bay’s tides, currents and winds can be treacherous.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
