You can feel it happening as America and the world get distracted, as we always do, by one thing and another and another: The brutal and unprovoked invasion of Ukraine by Vladimir Putin’s Russia, which commenced 136 days ago, is becoming background noise. We can’t let it happen, because if it does, the odds increase that fatigue will set in and Putin will succeed.
Consider the chaos and destruction that Putin has unleashed. Twelve million Ukrainians have been forced to leave their homes, about half of them internally and half beyond Ukraine’s borders.
Still on the warpath. (Mikhail Klimentyev/AP)
In official tallies alone, 4,889 civilians have been killed, 335 of them children. The actual numbers are certainly far higher.
Russia is escalating its internal crackdown on dissent; an official in Moscow was just jailed for seven years for speaking against the war at a city council meeting, deemed guilty of a new law that makes anyone who spreads “fake news” about the military punishable by up to 15 years in prison.
Russia has blocked ports where Ukraine ships grain around the world, a move that will likely exacerbate world hunger.
Meantime, its military continues its barbarous assault. Missile attacks last week hit major cities in the Dohansk region. The governor of the Luhansk region, now almost completely under Russian control, says that the city of Severodonetsk is facing a “humanitarian disaster.”
Ukrainians are putting up a fight — aided by armaments provided by the West, especially the United States, and more on the way — but they are being worn down.
President Vlodymyr Zelenskyy has understandably reiterated that he will not trade away his nation’s territory to end a war he and his people did nothing to invite.
Friday, Putin blamed the West for escalating a conflict he initiated, saying, “we haven’t even yet started anything in earnest.” As horrible as it is to wish for the prolongation of a war that is costing blood and treasure and disruption around the world, this is preferable to seeing a proud nation, tormented by a bully neighbor, break.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
