Avra Estiatorio has opened its latest location in Rockefeller Center, a sprawling 16,500 square-foot space. (The Avra Group)
Everything’s big in Rockefeller Center — from the world-famous Christmas tree to the latest outpost of an upscale Greek restaurant group.
The touristy area has officially welcomed Avra Estiatorio Rockefeller Center, a massive multi-level eatery with sister locations on the Upper East Side, Midtown East and Beverly Hills.
The trendy new 16,500 square-foot restaurant, located across the street from Radio City Music Hall, boasts four floors-worth of both indoor and outdoor dining space.
Octopus is one of the many menu items at Avra Estiatorio Rockefeller Center. (ROBERT BREDVAD/The Avra Group)
Seating options in the opulent eatery include a main dining room, central bar, cellar-level dining room, mezzanine looking out onto the main dining room and an outdoor plaza on Sixth Ave.
The Greek islands-inspired restaurant also offers an open kitchen and seafood display reminiscent of what you’d see in a market.
“With a tailored menu curated by Executive Chef Arman Arsan and Co-Executive Chef Jose Diaz, diners will experience iconic Avra-style dishes with a something-for-everyone-appeal with Greek signatures such as freshly caught seafood (flown in daily), local and sustainable catches, small plates, caviar, meat, sashimi, ceviche and more,” according to an announcement from The Avra Group.
The new Rockefeller Center outpost, designed to look like a chic Mediterranean courtyard with its white backdrops and use of water and greenery, will also offer menu items not found at other locations.
Standouts among the newbies include an American Wagyu Cote De Boeuf, which is a 32-ounce bone-in filet that’s aged for 30 days and served with truffle fries and house-made onion rings.
Avra Estiatorio's new Rockefeller Center location will offer dishes not found at other spots, like the Whole Fish Sashimi. (The Avra Group)
Other new dishes include the Whole Fish Sashimi, Rockefeller Ceviche and Fennel Soup.
The 500-seat eatery, located at 1271 Avenue of the Americas at 50 St. in the Time-Life Building, is the largest of the Avra locations.
“At night, the restaurant transforms into a glowing jewel box, beckoning customers with dining rooms and bars on full display, thanks to 30-foot, floor-to-ceiling windows that wrap around the building,” the group behind Avra said of the new space.
“The cellar-level dining room contains an open kitchen theatrically framed by a glass and blackened-metal proscenium. A neutral palette and organic materials — white oak, limestone, oil-rubbed bronze, natural linen, rough-hewn stone, water features, and greenery — evoke a refined Grecian courtyard.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
