The Belgian firefighter who died aboard an FDNY boat that collided with a fishing vessel in the East River had deep ties to the American smoke-eater scene.
Sgt. Johnny Beernaert had interned in Prince George’s County, Md., according to a translation of an article in Belgian news outlet HLN. The website reported Beernaert was “particularly popular” among Belgian firefighters. Beernaert grabbed headlines in 2009 when he and a partner were badly injured by an explosion in the Belgian city of Diksmuide.
“On behalf of the Consulate General of Belgium in New York, we express our deepest condolences to the family, the friends and the colleagues of Sergeant Johnny Beernaert,” the consulate wrote on Facebook.
Sergeant Johnny Beernaert 
Beernaert’s social media show he frequently visited firehouses in the U.S. and had an affinity for American culture.
“Great to be back and say hello to my Brother firefighters. Thanks to all for the hospitality and friendship. Come and see me in Belgium someday,” he posted on Facebook on June 11, along with photos from a visit to the Prince George’s Fire Department.
Much about Beernaert’s death on Friday remains a mystery. The FDNY has declined to share many details, citing an ongoing investigation.
The city’s medical examiner said the cause of death was “blunt impact injuries” to the head, and ruled the it an accident.
Damage is seen on the FDNY boat that collided with a fishing vessel in the East River. (Obtained by Daily News)
The FDNY says an on-duty firefighter was piloting the boat, Marine 1 Bravo, when it collided with a charter fishing boat near Pier 11 about 11 p.m. A Fire Department source identified the charter boat as the Honcho, which also offers sightseeing tours. Efforts to reach the boat owner have been unsuccessful.
Beernaert died of his injuries at Bellevue Hospital.
An FDNY boat in the East River near the Manhattan Bridge in 2015. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
The firefighter piloting the boat and three other civilians onboard — including Beernaert’s wife, Heidi Vermandel — were treated at Bellevue for minor injuries. No one on the Honcho was treated by EMS.
A Fire Department source said that in addition to the crash itself, the investigation is focused on whether protocol was followed for allowing civilians aboard the boat used for rapid response to emergencies on city waterways.
The pilot was administered a breath alcohol test, according to the source, who said booze does not appear to have been a factor.
Uit respect voor Johnny hielden we vandaag even een moment van stilte en brachten we een groet uit tijdens onze oefening met de posten Diksmuide, Leke en Koekelare. ❤️
Beernaert, a 25-year veteran and father of two, was also a diver and ambulance driver, according to the Belgian report.
A video posted to Facebook showed Beernaert’s colleagues back home honoring him with a salute as sirens blared.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
