A college basketball star home for summer break was killed by a stray bullet — and eight people were wounded — when a shooting erupted early Monday at a Harlem rapper’s Father’s Day cookout, police said.
“Greatest kid ever,” is how fatally shot Darius Lee was described by his former coach, Chris Williams. “This is like a Harlem angel. I want my 5-year-old to be like Darius. I’m not just saying this.”
The barbecue in Harlem River Park, near Harlem River Drive and E. 138th St., was organized by local rapper Rich Rhymer, who was shooting a video when rival groups started shooting at each other, according to cops.
Eight people were wounded and a star college basketball player killed after a shootout erupted at a cookout on Harlem River Drive.  (Luiz C. Ribeiro for New York Daily News)
Lee, 21, was shot in the chest. He had received a full scholarship to Houston Baptist University, where he played a guard and forward for the Huskies. He was due to graduate in December and had just returned home to Harlem two weeks ago for summer break.
“Darius always said he wanted be on TV. He got his wish. But in a wrong and bad way,” his father, Eric Lee, 50, said Monday. “He didn’t deserve this.”
Lee, recently named Houston Baptist’s male athlete of the year, led his team in scoring and rebounding and was sixth in the nation in steals per game, school officials said.
“He only cared about basketball,” said Lee’s sister Tiara. “He decided to stay outside one day and this happened . . . These are innocent kids that’s in school, playing basketball.”
Lee had NBA dreams, his father said. “He wanted to be a New York Knick. He was a New York native. And he was on his way. He had a full ride in school full scholarship. The school paid for him to come back and forth,” Eric Lee said.
Lee fell in love with basketball at a young age, surprising his youth coach, who noticed that he was a “chubby kid” at age 10, his father recalled.
“He said to his coach, ‘I want to play basketball’, he said . “The coach looked at him and said‚ ‘You?’”
Eric Lee, father of killed college hoop star Darius Lees at a Harlem vigil for his son on June 20, 2022. (Kerry Burke/New York Daily News)
“The next I know he was at St. Mark’s with a full scholarship,” he said, referring to the parochial elementary school St. Mark’s the Evangelist across the street from his son’s home on W 138 St.
When they spoke Sunday, Lee asked his dad what he wanted for Father’s Day.
“I said, ‘I want a 2022 white Range Rover, red seats,’ Eric Lee said. “He said to me, ‘I got you.’
The former player at St. Raymond’s High School in the Bronx does not appear to have been the intended target, police said.
Lee never cursed, never drank, never hung out on the streets and stayed out of trouble, his father said.
“My brother’s gone,” his devastated sister said. “Great kid. He’s gone, for no reason.”
“Humble,” she said, searching for words to describe her slain brother. “Star. Basketball player. Don’t bother nobody. Stayed out the way.”
“Just pray for our family,” she added. “This has been going on for how long? It’s not gonna stop.”
Vigil for killed college hoop star Darius Lee, 21, at William McCray Playground across the street from his home on West 138 St in Harlem on June 20, 2022. (Kerry Burke/New York Daily News)
It wasn’t yet clear what prompted the shooting, which broke out about 12:40 a.m. but police said it involved rival groups shooting at each other in the crowd. One handgun was recovered at the scene.
“They just went to a cookout to listen to music,” Lee’s cousin Dee Cook said. “They just kids, want to enjoy themselves for the summer. A lot of innocent people got hit. They just shooting wild. They don’t care who they shooting.”
Lee “never had a fight in his life,” Cook added. “This should have never happened.”
On Instagram, Rich Rhymer posted a video showing cops shutting down his initial planned location for the annual Father’s Day cookout on Eighth Ave. and asked followers to direct message him for the new location.
“We heavy on the food & drinks,” he promised in the post.
The holiday has special significance for the rapper, whose real name is Troy Rhymer Jr. His father died while he was in prison on a weapons charge.
The survivors are two women and six men between 21 and 42, police said. Most of the victims were in their early 20s.
Darius Lee (left) with his high school coach Chris Williams (Courtesy of Chris Williams)
‘’The emboldened individuals responsible for this are exactly who our officers are battling every day to make our city safe,” Police Commissioner Keechant Sewell said at pre-dawn press conference near the scene.
Among the wounded was Trevor Gibbs, 22, who was shot in the lower back as he ran away, according to his mother. Hours after the shooting the mother said the bullet was still lodged in her son’s back. He also suffered a broken pelvis, she said.
“All you hear on the news is guns, guns, gun violence,” the mother said. “When you have a big crowd like that, it’s messed up. It’s a higher chance that a lot of people are going to get hit.”
Also wounded was Francisco Batista, 24, who managed to escape the melee with a badly broken finger.
“‘I said, ‘Yo bro, I’m hit.’ But I kept running,” he said.
Officers responding to the scene found five of the bleeding victims on the Harlem River Drive footpath under the Madison Avenue Bridge, according to NYPD Deputy Chief Brian McGee. Medics rushed them to nearby hospitals.
Police later found out four other gunshot victims had gone to the hospital on their own or with the help of others, he said.
NYPD crime scene investigators search for evidence near 139th Street in Harlem.  (Luiz C. Ribeiro/for New York Daily News)
The 6-foot-6, 230-pound Lee, whose family lived near where he was shot, died at Lincoln Hospital.
“We are looking for anyone with information,” McGee said. “We know that there were a lot of people out there.”
Williams, who coached Lee in high school, called him the “glue” when he starred at St. Raymond’s. The talented player never forgot his roots.
A handgun recovered at the scene of the Harlem shooting. (NYPD)
“We train with each other in the off-season,” Williams said. “He comes to the school, talks to the kids. We were just together, literally like soon as he came home for the summer. It’s just crazy.”
Lee inspired the students he met whenever he returned to his alma mater.
“He just came and brightened up the gym,” Williams said. “That’s what he does. Big bright smile.”
“Harlem just gotta do better,” Williams added. “I don’t know what happened but you don’t find a better kid than Darius Lee.”
Lee’s college coach James Sears Bryant said the team was “devastated.”
“Darius was a remarkable young man . . . We are in shock and cannot wrap our heads around this news. My heart breaks for his mom, his sister and his entire family, and for our basketball team . . . As great of a basketball player as he was, he was an even better person. I can’t even think of basketball right now. I can only think of what a light Darius was during his short time on earth. He was a joy to coach and we loved him so much,” Bryant said in a statement.
NYPD Detectives search for evidence on a cookout area at a Park under the Madison Avenue Bridge near 139th Street and Fifth Avenue on Monday, June 20, 2022.  (Luiz C. Ribeiro/for New York Daily News)
“He was a very fine young man who had a very bright future in front of him,” added Houston Baptist University Director of Athletics Steve Moniaci. “This is unfortunately, yet again, another example of the senseless gun violence that seems to be plaguing our country right now and we all pray it will cease.”
Shootings in New York City, while still up dramatically by 38% compared to two years ago, are down 12% so far this year versus the same period last year.
“While we are making some headway against violence we have a lot of work to do,” Sewell said. “But we need help [from] the entire criminal justice system.”
*Despite the drop in shootings, Lee’s father had a message for Mayor Adams.
“Do your job,” he commanded. “The gun violence is ridiculous.... It has gotten worse since he came in. These kids are not playing out here.”
With John Annese
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
