Kingston, N.Y.: I have been watching the Jan. 6 committee meetings. After viewing, I feel sorry for those individuals who will probably go to jail or be fined for participating in the insurrection at the Capitol that day. They and their family members will need to spend money for legal services that they may not be able to afford. All they did was drink the Kool-Aid that was delivered by Donald Trump. The committee and the witnesses have shown evidence that the former president definitively lost the 2020 election and that Joe Biden is the president of the United States.
What surprised me is that Trump is now still trying to convince those people that he will pardon them if he wins the 2024 election! Ha! I hope they don’t believe or trust the former president, who has turned against his own vice president who followed him through thick and thin during their four years in the White House.
Former President Donald Trump, speaks at a campaign rally in Greensburg, Pa., on May 6, 2022.  (Gene J. Puskar/AP)
Please don’t be taken in by his pitch. We know from the past that Trump doesn’t honor his promises and protect people who are loyal to him if they don’t agree with him 100%. Also, he lies so much of the time that he probably won’t remember this promise to pardon those people, so I hope they don’t drink the Kool-Aid.
Let’s give our country and our legally elected politicians the time needed to heal and work together to get on with the business at hand. Patricia Guida
Manhattan: It absolutely boggles the mind how a group of religious, conservative Republicans can get together at a Donald Trump rally, listen to the things he rambles on about and applaud and chant. Religious conservatives means that they follow a religion, which means “good,” and “conservative” means cautious and careful. Republicans today are a static party that caters to the rich — they are nothing like the name religious conservatives. They are just the opposite if they can applaud and chant at the dribble that Trump claims is truth. It should be clear to sane Americans that this man has a personality disorder (possible histrionic personality disorder or narcissistic personality disorder). At any rate, whatever he suffers from mentally, it should be clear to the country that something is wrong and he has no place in the White House — and yes, he should be prosecuted for Jan. 6! Michael DeSouza
Bronx: I just read in the Daily News that Rick “the Moron” Perry was involved in the plan to replace legitimate electors in swing states with Trump supporters who would ignore the votes and declare Trump the winner. Just a reminder that Perry said during a presidential debate in 2016 that he was going to get rid of three government agencies — one of which, the Department of Energy, he couldn’t remember, which ended his campaign. We later learned why he couldn’t remember when Trump made him head of the department, famously saying, “I didn’t know it did all this.” Republican stupidity is through the roof. Randall Borra
Brooklyn: Voicer Elizabeth D’Angelo rhetorically asks if CNN, MSNBC and other supposedly liberal media outlets will cover the assassination attempt on Justice Brett Kavanaugh. A quick Google search of “Kavanaugh” with any of those media outlet names shows that they all covered it. So, what’s your point, Elizabeth? To spread easily disproven lies, like your idol Trump? Trudi Rosenblum
Rockaway Beach: Please stop reporting that people are swimming and drowning after lifeguards are off duty because the places where people are drowning have no lifeguards at all this year. The city has time and money for speed cameras, red-light cameras and to encourage overdevelopment to the highest bidder but no time to hire the people responsible for saving lives along our miles and miles of beaches. Lifelong lifeguards have made recommendations to save lives and they have been blatantly ignored. The city and Parks Department dropped the ball badly this year and now people are dying as a result. Jessica Glennon
North Babylon, L.I.: Thank you, Voicer Ben Jordan, for your sense of history regarding the gas crisis of the 1970s and its inability to move the needle on the climate-killing pollution we’re experiencing today. Yes, more efficient cars became popular for a time. Now, however, we drive gas-guzzling SUVs, and more and more of them. Trimming gas prices will certainly not save us from our current climate crisis or high levels of air pollution. Electric vehicles will. The Climate Action Council draft scoping plan has already committed to electrifying New York State’s light-duty vehicle fleet by 2035, and to pumping $1 billion into supporting EV adoption and infrastructure, as well as committed to zero-emission school buses by 2035. What we need to see is commitment to electric trucks, to good transit to reduce vehicle miles and to increased affordability of EVs to all New Yorkers. Alexa Marinos
Scarborough, N.Y.: If the U.S. Supreme Court rules that New York’s stringent gun permit law is unconstitutional, there can be a legal response, although we’ll need to get Gov. Hochul and the Legislature to agree. Anyone convicted of illegally firing a weapon at a person in New York must serve a minimum three-year prison term. No ifs, ands or buts. Thomas F. Comiskey
Massapequa Park, L.I.: Kudos to you, Daily News Hometown Hero Lisette Caesar (June 20). You’re an amazing woman who loves her children so much and gives them the spiritual wisdom that they can get through the difficulties of life by giving back to others. You are a hero. God bless you!! Frank Mullahey
Manhattan: On Saturday, I had the great pleasure of attending a performance of “Don Quixote” by the American Ballet Theatre at The Met at Lincoln Center. However, I was horrified when I saw what was done with that beautiful promenade in the front of all the buildings, anchored by that magnificent waterfall. The promenade looks like an outdated version of Coney Island. Shame on the powers that be who allowed that. Roberta Horowitz
Chester, N.J.: To all the drama queens damning Patti LuPone for calling out an audience member for not wearing a mask and then having the audacity to not wear a mask at the Tony Awards, here is why those are not the same thing: If one member of the cast gets COVID, the show shuts down for quarantine. Hundreds of people are out of work. So yeah, wearing masks in the audience isn’t fun, but keeping the show open is important to maintaining the industry. Also, at the Tonys everyone needed proof of full vaccination and a recent negative COVID test and masks were required for people in the mezzanine and balcony, although they didn’t need the negative test. LuPone did the right thing calling out the audience member. She was protecting every person working at that theater. David J. Melvin
White Rock, British Columbia: Re “Florida woman busted in hate-spray attack” (June 19): Canadian and American residents/citizens of East Asian heritage have been unjustly attacked. They’ve suffered verbal and/or physical assaults since the COVID-19 pandemic began. Many victims are Chinese, though their assailants seem to perceive the entire East Asian ethnicity/race, which includes different nations and cultures, as being all the same. It’s inexcusably horrendous treatment of fellow human beings who’ve done nothing at all to merit such vicious abuse. Also, overlooked is that there’s a good chance the assault victims came to the West to leave precisely that which many Westerners, perhaps including the hate-crime assailants, currently dislike about some authoritarian East Asian nation governments. Frank Sterle Jr.
Bronx: Father’s Day 2022 will be past when you receive this letter, but there will be another day celebrating fathers next year. Honor our fathers, sons and heroes and remember why (sometimes we have to overlook their human imperfections because we all own some). You will be uplifted and cheered by these men’s enduring best. Rose Mary Lancaster
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
