Arizona executed a man for the second time in less than a month Wednesday after going eight years between executions.
Frank Atwood, 66, was killed by lethal injection at Florence state prison and pronounced dead at 10:16 a.m. He maintained his innocence throughout the entire legal process.
In 1984, Atwood, kidnapped, raped and murdered 8-year-old Vicki Lynne Hoskinson before dumping her body in the desert northwest of Tucson, according to authorities. He was convicted in 1987 and sentenced to death.
Frank Atwood, left, was convicted of kidnapping, rape and murder in the 1984 killing of 8-year-old Vicki Hoskinson. 
Investigators never determined little Vicki’s cause of death because her body had decomposed too much. Her remains were found about seven months after she was reported missing. Her family said she was walking down the street in Tucson to deliver a birthday card when she was snatched.
“Vicki was a vibrant little girl with an infectious laugh and a smile that would melt your heart,” her mom, Debbie Carlson, said after Atwood was killed. “Her royal blue eyes reflected an old soul of wisdom, and her freckled nose was unique and we are blessed to see it in our grandchildren today.”
Debbie Carlson, mother of murdered 8-year-old Vicki Lynne Hoskinson, wipes away a tear as she speaks at a news conference. (Ross D. Franklin/AP)
Atwood filed several legal challenges to the execution, including a claim that he would be in excruciating pain if strapped to the gurney because of a debilitating back condition. Judges rejected his appeals, saying that the gurney could be placed at an incline and a pillow could be added if necessary.
When the time came for Atwood to die, he actually helped death row personnel find a vein in his right hand for the lethal injection, according to media witnesses. The corrections officers struggled to find one in his right arm.
“I pray the Lord will have mercy on all of us and that the Lord will have mercy on me,” Atwood said in his final words.
The Arizona state prison is shown, Wednesday, June 8, 2022, in Florence, Ariz.  (Ross D. Franklin/AP)
On May 11, Arizona executed Clarence Dixon for the murder of an Arizona State student in 1978. Initially, Dixon was charged with raping 21-year-old Deana Bowdoin as well. However, the charge was dropped on statute of limitations grounds. Dixon was not convicted of Bowdoin’s murder until 2008, while already behind bars for sexual assault.
Arizona temporarily stopped executing people after the botched 2014 execution of Joseph Wood, who was stuck gasping on the gurney for two hours waiting for a lethal injection to kill him. The backlog has left 111 people on the state’s death row.
With News Wire Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
