Mayor Adams is touting his decision to walk back a plan for solo police patrols in the transit system as a testament to his administration’s flexibility and his ability to communicate with the city’s police unions.
“We’re not going to be so rigid,” Adams said Wednesday after an assault on a cop in a Brooklyn subway station caused the mayor to retreat from the solo patrol plan the same day it was announced.
An NYPD officer walks the beat alone at the Canal St. and Sixth Ave. subway station. (Luiz C. Ribeiro/for New York Daily News)
Adams and the NYPD devised the solo patrol plan to cover more ground in the transit system, and announced Tuesday the patrols had started a day earlier.
By 6:45 p.m., though, an NYPD detective had been dragged down a flight of stairs by a suspect who repeatedly grabbed for his gun in the Pennsylvania Ave. subway station. That led to a phone call between the mayor, Police Benevolent Association president Patrick Lynch and NYPD Commissioner Keechant Sewell. Adams also spoke with the Detectives’ Endowment Association president Paul DiGiacomo.
On Tuesday night, Adams agreed to modify the plan by requiring at least two officers on patrol to stay in eyesight of each other.
“We came to a real meeting of the minds,” Adams said. “Let’s have the separated solo patrols stay in eyesight of each other.”
The Daily News was first to report the decision Tuesday night.
Adams added that the decision showed his ability to engage in dialogue with police union leaders — an apparent shot at former Mayor Bill de Blasio, who had a notoriously bad relationship with police unions.
“There’s something that many people are missing — I can speak with my unions,” Adams said.
Suspect Alex Eremin — fidgety and swaying at his Brooklyn Criminal Court arraignment Wednesday night — was ordered held on $50,000 cash over $200,000 partially secured or $250,000 insurance bond after Judge Laurie Peterson rejected his defense lawyer’s bid for supervised release with mental health support. 
Alex Eremin (Obtained by Daily News)
A police spokesman said Eremin was smoking a cigarette on the southbound platform when an officer told him to stop; Eremin then threw himself partway down the platform stairs.
When the cop approached him to render aid, Eremin pulled the detective down the rest of the stairs, and tried to take his gun during a pitched, minutes-long struggle, cops said.
Eremin, who is homeless, faces charges in two earlier confrontations with police in Manhattan this year.
On Feb. 27, he was accused of spitting in an officer’s eye on Eighth Ave. near W. 14th St.; on May 11, he punched his mother at the Union Square subway station, then punched and bit an officer who intervened, according to court documents.
He didn’t face any bail-eligible charges in the spitting incident, and in the May attack, his mother advocated against him being sent to jail because he has schizophrenia and needs mental health treatment, a source familiar with the case said. A judge ordered him placed on supervised release.
With Molly Crane-Newman and Harry Parker
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
