Mayor Adams recently acknowledged what parents have known for years: that the methods used by New York City’s public schools to teach children to read are fundamentally unsound. The change to better methods, grounded in science, can’t happen fast enough. As a result of New York’s disastrous decision to shutter schools during the pandemic, literacy rates have plummeted. That’s saying a lot since the city had — before the pandemic — only been successfully teaching about half of all kids to read at grade level.
What’s not as clear, however, is if either Adams or School Chancellor David Banks realize what a tough road lies ahead and that they are largely powerless to overcome the real reasons bad reading methods are so entrenched in the city’s schools.
The real problem for New York — and the nation — is the poor quality of teacher preparation by higher education institutions, and the fact that their regulators — state departments of education — are complicit in allowing inadequate preparation to go unchecked.
Teacher in a classroom (Shutterstock/Shutterstock)
The truth is that the lion’s share of the higher education institutions in New York State engage in nothing short of educational malpractice when it comes to their preparation in reading instruction. Harsh words? Yes, but to call it anything less than malpractice does a disservice to the thousands of children throughout the state who could learn to read but do not, solely by virtue of the deeply flawed approaches taught to future teachers by these institutions.
For the past decade, the organization I recently led, the National Council on Teacher Quality, has been regularly examining the reading coursework taken by future teachers. In examining the lecture topics, assignments and textbooks, we found that two out of three institutions in New York still ignore what decades of scientific research have well established and which would lower rates of reading failure to as low as 5% instead of the 35% average schools now report. Even in the institutions where the scientific methods are taught, it is often only presented as one of several “equally valid” approaches a teacher might take, not much different than a restaurant menu offering steak, chicken or hamburger.
In fact, many institutions still encourage their aspiring teachers to not opt for any formal approach to teaching reading, encouraging instead that aspiring teachers devise their own methods — a blatant but ill-advised declaration of teacher autonomy.
In truth, there is only one authority in a position to fix this problem and it is not the city, but the New York State Education Department. This agency, which ultimately reports to the Board of Regents, is charged with setting the conditions that higher education institutions must follow if they want their graduates to qualify for a New York teaching license. Instead, it rarely wields this authority, intimidated if not bullied by the ever-powerful higher education lobby.
Lately New York education officials and other state education officials have been casting about looking for reasons why there is such a dwindling interest among college students in a teaching career. They cast their blame widely, but rarely look under the hood of these institutions, ever attempting to grasp why so many college students (particularly more talented college students) routinely eschew the education major. The largely vapid coursework where As are handed out like candy and their perpetually low standing on college campuses goes unchecked. Instead, the state takes the path of least resistance. In a move just approved this week, the Regents decided that the best course of action to stem shortages is to lower still further the already low requirements needed to become a teacher.
In defending this recent move Jim Baldwin, senior deputy commissioner for education policy, characterized a teacher’s job as helping children to “self-actualize.” If this is now how the state views the role of a teacher, instead of actually teaching children, it is no wonder it no longer matters who is licensed to become a teacher.
Imagine instead if New York insisted that its institutions taught future teachers only content that is well grounded in science, that coursework should be held to the same standard of other majors on college campuses, and that it should be an honor and achievement to complete a program of study.
I have witnessed many educators over the years who have had to confront the horrible truth that the methods they were taught to use to teach their students to read were fundamentally unsound. It is invariably a moment of deep anguish, guilt and even tears over the unnecessary fate of their former students.
Every child in New York City deserves to be able to read, but getting from here to there is going to require that the state do its job, holding programs accountable for what they fail to teach. It’s also going to require intensive support to teachers already well into their careers as they wade through this emotionally fraught process.
Walsh recently retired from the National Council on Teacher Quality, where she served as president from 2003-2022.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
