City judges and prosecutors are processing firearms possession cases at breakneck speed, according to data obtained by the Daily News that counters Mayor Adams’ gripe that the “laughingstock” justice system is to blame for the gun violence crisis.
Since August 2021, state Supreme Court judges in the city have required people charged solely with second-degree criminal possession of a weapon to appear in court every two weeks until their cases are resolved.
Such cases amount to a quarter of about 11,000 pending felony cases before city judges.
A gun police recovered from underneath a parked van at the scene of a shooting. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
The requirement of more frequent court appearances has led to the speedy resolution of 1,383 cases and shrunk a backlog of 4,242 such cases by 33%, to 2,859 cases, the state Office of Court Administration says. Prosecutors negotiated plea deals in nearly every case, with few going to trial.
Much of the backlog built up during the pandemic, said Janet DiFiore, the state’s top judge. Since January, DiFiore has said, courts in New York City have nearly tripled the number of gun cases they dispose of each week, from around 30 to about 100.
Implementing the program required a tectonic shift in a longstanding “culture of complacency” between judges, prosecutors, public defenders and defense attorneys, said court system spokesman Lucian Chalfen. He said the courts are resolving about 100 gun possession cases a week.
“These numbers are a result of our continuing effort to create a cultural shift in aspects of the judicial process and its participants,” said Chalfen. “This is a cooperative effort with the judiciary, prosecution and defense bar all playing integral parts.”
The data starkly contrasts with descriptions by the mayor, the NYPD and Republican gubernatorial candidates that prosecutors and judges are failing to go after firearms cases aggressively.
“People no longer believe that you can’t do a shooting in the city,” Adams said earlier this month. “They believe our criminal justice system is the laughingstock of our entire country.”
New York City Mayor Eric Adams  (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
The mayor repeated his complaint in a TV interview last week.
“[We] have to look at our court system ― it’s bottlenecked,” Adams told Fox5 about getting guns off the streets. “Judges need to use the power when they have it to hand down sentences.”
But the data show prosecutors seek prison sentences in virtually all gun possession cases, and judges usually impose them.
Manhattan District Attorney Alvin Bragg and Queens DA Melinda Katz are more likely to send people to prison than their counterparts in Brooklyn and the Bronx ― even though those two boroughs have more gun cases.
Queens District Attorney Melinda Katz and Manhattan DA Alvin Bragg (right). (Mary Altaffer/AP)
Since August 2021, courts in Manhattan and Queens each sent about 71% of those convicted of gun possession to prison, the state court system data show. Manhattan ranks fourth citywide in the number of gun cases, and Queens ranks third.
Brooklyn and the Bronx, which prosecute most of the city’s gun cases, each sent about 64% of those convicted to prison. Staten Island, which had the lowest number of possession cases, sent about 90% of those convicted to prison.
Adams spokesman Fabien Levy said the data shows “meaningful progress.”
“All New Yorkers should hope for an end to the backlog, including those who are suspects in crimes. Suspects are entitled to a speedy trial. The legal system owes them that,” Levy said.
But the mayor believes the prison sentence stats aren’t high enough. He thinks anyone found guilty of gun possession “should be taken off the streets before they endanger another life” and wants to see more defendants jailed after their arrest, Levy said.
State law does not permit judges to remand people charged solely with gun possession.
Police are “encouraged by the forward movement of cases through the system. Gun arrests are among the most dangerous things police officers do. It is important that consequences follow,” said NYPD Deputy Commissioner John Miller.
“With gun arrests at a 28-year high, we know our officers are focused on violent criminals but that is only effective when the whole criminal justice system is fully engaged.”
Punishment for criminal weapons possession varies. By itself, second-degree criminal possession of a weapon carries a minimum sentence of 3½ years.
Civil rights lawyer Ron Kuby said the state courts and Manhattan DA Bragg were bowing to political pressure, and the court system’s fast-track program is railroading poor Black people to prison without giving them adequate time to prepare a defense.
“These numbers tell us that almost three-quarters of people who possess firearms in Manhattan end up behind bars,” Kuby said. “And that much-touted diversion and restorative justice projects have been shelved to appease the howling mob of people who favor carceral solutions.”
In response, Bragg spokesman Doug Cohen said the DA is trying to strike a balance by holding offenders accountable and investing in prevention initiatives.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
