Fewer than 90,000 city residents cast early voting ballots in this month’s primary elections — a measly turnout for races that will decide which candidates get their party’s nod for governor, lieutenant governor and dozens of State Assembly seats.
In total, 86,890 people across the five boroughs voted early in the primaries set for Tuesday, according to tallies from the city Board of Elections.
June Primary Early Voting Complete!Manhattan - 29,205Bronx - 10,045Brooklyn – 25,644Queens - 17,157Staten Island – 4,839Total Early Voting Check-Ins 86,890*Unofficial & Cumulative Polls Open Tues 6/28 from 6am to 9pmFind your poll site at https://t.co/I4TNpgInSR
Manhattan outpaced the other boroughs, with 29,205 residents participating in early voting, which began June 18 and ended Sunday. Brooklyn was not far behind in second place with 25,644 ballots, while the Bronx, Queens and Staten Island each saw less than 20,000 residents come out to the polls for early voting, according to the board’s count.
For a city that has nearly 5 million registered voters, the early voting turnout is anemic, and political watchdogs have in part blamed it on an insufficient educational campaign from the Board of Elections.
Turnout wasn’t much better outside the city. According to Board of Elections tallies, 91,333 New Yorkers in the state’s remaining counties cast early voting ballots.
Early voting signage in New York. (KENA BETANCUR/AFP via Getty Images)
Voters still have the chance to vote in-person on Tuesday, and the big-ticket items are the Democratic and Republican primaries for governor.
Gov. Hochul, who took over after Andrew Cuomo resigned last year and has emerged as the Democratic Party’s frontrunner in the race, is vying to beat back challenges from city Public Advocate Jumaane Williams and Rep. Tom Suozzi (D-N.Y.).
The GOP showdown, meantime, is pitting frontrunner Rep. Lee Zeldin (R-N.Y.) against former White House aide Andrew Giuliani, ex-Westchester County Executive Rob Astorino and businessman Harry Wilson.
☑️✏️ New York Voting Guide: What voters need to know for the June 28 primaryCandidates for N.Y. State governor, AG, Comptroller, U.S. Senate, New York State Assembly.Early voting ends Sunday, June 26.https://t.co/sPPeX0HUmj
Down the ballot, both parties are nominating candidates for lieutenant governor and all 150 seats in the State Assembly. The Democratic lieutenant governor’s race has taken on a competitive air in recent weeks, with incumbent Antonio Delgado fending off against Ana María Archila and Diana Reyna after the post became vacant when ex-Lt. Gov. Brian Benjamin resigned in April after being indicted on corruption charges.
On Tuesday, polls for the primaries will be open between 6 a.m. and 9 p.m. at about 1,200 sites across the city.
Due to the state’s chaotic redistricting process earlier this year, there will be a second set of primary elections in New York for congressional and state Senate seats on Aug. 23.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
