Fresh air | Opening your windows and pulling back the drapes not only lets natural sunlight into your home, but it also allows fresh air to come in and flush out polluted indoor air. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, if you're not letting enough outdoor air come in, pollutants can accumulate in your house to levels that can pose health problems. Clean air equals a happy home. (Yaraslau Saulevich/Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Start with lighting 
Good lighting makes all the difference | According to experts at Architectural Digest, lighting is one of the most essential elements of a room and can impact how everything from the color of your wall to the design on your rug looks. 
There are plenty of options when it comes to the type of lighting you want to add and you shouldn’t hesitate to mix designs and styles throughout your space. (onurdongel/Getty Images)
Lighten up a corner 
Is there anything cuter than a cozy corner nook? | If you have a decent-sized corner to work with, add an armchair and a metallic floor lamp and it will instantly add depth to your space while also functioning as a quiet place to sit and read (or scroll through Instagram). If you have even more space, you can add a small side table and top it with a candle and a floral arrangement. (alvarez/Getty Images)
Don’t hide your windows 
If you have windows in your home, don’t block them. |Depending on the size of your space, it might be difficult to avoid placing furniture in front of the window altogether, but you can at least try to keep some of it uncovered. (Portra/Getty Images)
Clean air means happiness 
Fresh air | Opening your windows and pulling back the drapes not only lets natural sunlight into your home, but it also allows fresh air to come in and flush out polluted indoor air. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, if you're not letting enough outdoor air come in, pollutants can accumulate in your house to levels that can pose health problems. Clean air equals a happy home. (Yaraslau Saulevich/Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Clean your windows 
Wipe the windows | Letting your windows breathe without furniture in the way is step one — but making sure they’re clean is even more important. If you really think about it, when was the last time you wiped down your windows? Grab some Windex and a microfiber cloth and wipe away the dirt and grime buildup. Clean windows let the sunshine in to brighten your space. (Nastasic/Getty Images)
Add mirrors 
Give your space a glow-up | Not only do mirrors give the illusion of a larger room, but they also give off a delicate and soothing energy. And the bigger the mirror, the brighter the space will look as it catches textures and reflections of what is placed against it. (DOMINIK PABIS/Getty Images)
Hang a mirror strategically 
Let the mirror catch light | If you’re fortunate enough to have a window in your main living space, position the mirror in a way that it catches the light. A mirror will essentially harness daylight and create double exposure. Placing a mirror across from a window (if you have a wall to do this), can also bring both natural light and greenery into one room. (Bulgac/Getty Images)
Bring colors of the sun indoors 
Play with reddish hues |An easy way to bring some brightness into your home is to fill it with the colors of the sun, like reddish hues, yellows and oranges. A warm-colored throw pillow against a neutral couch, bed or futon is always a safe bet, and a well-chosen palette of bright shades can really make the entire space feel more lively. (Photographee.eu/Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Bring in some greenery 
Get houseplants | Indoor gardening is a popular way to freshen up a room, and bringing the outside in is a great way to do it. In fact, sprinkling in some outdoor elements is a feature of feng shui, the Chinese art of creating harmony in your living space. You can set up a plant corner with an array of greenery or add some planters throughout your space. Some easy-to-take-care-of houseplants that tolerate low light include sansevieria (snake plant) and Zanzibar gem (ZZ plant). (Abdullah Jaafar/Getty Images)
Swap out dull shades with soft tones 
Pick pastels |Another quick fix is to simply swap out darker hues with softer tones. Subtle shades like pastel blue and green, or peach and light yellow add a serene and uplifting quality to any space. Shades of blue are especially known for being relaxing and work perfectly in the bedroom. (Photographee.eu/Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Pops of color in your room 
Color your room | There is nothing more streamlined than a mostly white bedspread with a pop of color. You can pick any color combination — blue and green, yellow and pink, red and purple — and find pillows, a rug, candles and other accents to add bursts of color to a bright white room. (Photographee.eu/Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Repaint furniture 
A coat of fresh paint | If you have chairs with a darker finish or a distressed wooden table that’s bringing the entire space down, give them a makeover. With a fresh coat of white paint, you can dramatically liven up tired-looking chairs, tables and more and make them look good as new. (DIDECS/Getty Images/iStockphoto)
A bright rug makes all the difference 
Add a white rug | If you have young children or pets, you might want to skip this one. But if you don’t, there's nothing quite like a white rug on the floor to make your space feel bigger, cozier and so chic.  Find one that’s plush and at least 3 inches thick with a shaggy, furry feel to it. Rugs like this can  add a comforting yet luxurious feel to your living room. (Image Source/Getty Images)
Add some fancy fluff 
Ever seen smaller sheepskin rugs? | Typically, these sheepskin rugs are expensive at higher-end furniture stores. But you can find similar styles at places like TJ Maxx HomeGoods or Ikea. For a creative twist, instead of using it on the floor, drape pale sheepskin rugs over the back of an armchair for a fancy, fluffy and modern design. (jodiejohnson/Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Sprinkle in metallic elements 
Just a touch | You don't need to dust your entire house with gold and silver to brighten it up — all you need is a few tasteful touches. Metal decor can be a light fixture, wind chimes at the front door, metallic vases and wall art, metal frames, a pillow with metallic sequins or even a coffee table with metal legs. The metal elements add a glistening, cheerful vibe. (NelleG/Getty Images)
Light candles 
Get cozy | Candles are by far the best trick to give your home a soft, bright glow. Aside from just the different scents, you can also play with heights and colors when it comes to picking which candles to burn. Play around with tall ones, short ones and perhaps even add a lantern into the mix. (Medea83/Getty Images/iStockphoto)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
