
Submit 



Δ

		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
Apple unveiled a slate of new products and features on Monday, including new Mac computers and an iMessage upgrade that will allow iPhone users to edit and un-send regrettable texts. 
In the moments after an iMessage is sent, users will be able to click either the “edit” or “undo send” buttons to modify their messages, Apple revealed at the company’s annual WWDC conference on its campus in Cupertino, Calif. 
Craig Federighi, an Apple executive who followed CEO Tim Cook on stage, said the “edit” and “undo send” buttons were one of the “most requested features to Messages.” 
The features will be made available with the new version of its mobile operating system, called iOS 16, which will be released in the fall.
Apple also unveiled an upgraded version of the MacBook Air laptop. The slimmer version of the laptop comes with an upgraded camera and speakers and starts at $1,199. It features a more powerful M2 chip.
There will also be a new MacBook Pro 13-inch laptop, which will also feature the M2 chip. It looks the same externally as the current MacBook Pro and will retail for $1,299.  Both new laptops will be available next month. 
Apple shares were flat despite the much-ballyhooed annual conference, closing at $146.14 on Monday. 
Elsewhere during the presentation, Apple announced new privacy features as well as new upgrades to its Apple Pay system, including an “Apple Pay Later” system that will break up purchases into several interest-free payments.
The Silicon Valley tech giant will also overhaul the iPhone lockscreen. Users will now be able to create their own lockscreens with custom fonts and add widgets for everything from the weather to NBA game scores. 
Notifications will now “roll in” through a compact bar at the bottom of the lockscreen rather than dominating the entire display, Apple said. 
Apple additionally announced upgrades to the Apple Watch and iPhone’s health and fitness features, as well as a new version of its Mac operating system called “Ventura” that features improved multitasking and email tools. 
Most of the new iPhone features will roll out in the fall with the release of iOS 16.  
Apple also showed off a new version of “CarPlay,” the interactive display system that pairs with in-vehicle display systems. In addition to displaying traditional information like maps and music, the new version of CarPlay will display information including speed and car temperature. 
The company said a slate of carmakers including Ford, Mercedes and Porsche were “excited” about the feature — although Elon Musk’s Tesla was noticeably absent from the list. 
Share Selection
