England have completed a series win over Netherlands
Here is the report from Amsterdam.
That wraps up the series for England. They plundered the Dutch on Thursday, and things continued in the same vein with the opening partnership today, as Jason Roy and then Phil Salt laid into the bowling. But in the end, today was a much more even contest. The openers were dismissed, then a couple of wickets fell quickly with Morgan and Livingstone. Malan was then given out, but had the lbw overturned - and had that gone differently, the match might have done the same. 
Good bowling from Dutt and Pringle especially today, so the home team will be heartened by that. And disheartened by Seelar’s retirement that we mentioned earlier. 
One more match to come, this Wednesday. We’ll see you then. 
36.1 overs: England 239-4 (Malan 36, Moeen 42) It only takes Moeen one ball from Snater, pulling a short one to long leg for four. 
36th over: England 235-4 (Malan 36, Moeen 38) The field comes up for van Beek, and Malan struggles to finish the game off. Hits cover, misses a bouncer, swishes and misses at a length ball that moves away. Inside edges into his pad and back to the bowler. Throws back his head in frustration. Then defends with a straight bat! Respect to van Beek there. One ball to come... slower ball! Yorker length, wide of off stump, and Malan can’t make contact. A scoreless over with scores level. Well bowled. 
35th over: England 235-4 (Malan 36, Moeen 38) Now it’s Pringle to bowl his eighth and final over. He’s giving the ball more flight late in the day, and eventually Moeen can’t resist, lifting it straight over the sightscreen. It takes the ground crew a while to find the ball among some bushes, and as soon as they return it, Moeen sends it back in the same direction with a flat-batted four. Scores level. 
34th over: England 224-4 (Malan 35, Moeen 28) They’ve just announced on the broadcast that Netherlands captain Pieter Seelar has retired from international cricket. He played the first match of this series, but withdrew from the XI today with back soreness. That injury has been a long-lasting one, and he’s now decided that it won’t let him play any longer to the required standard. He’s been turning out for the Dutch team for 18 years. A major moment for Dutch cricket. 
Dutt does now bowl his ninth over but if there was a glimmer before, it has faded out. Six runs from it, 12 required to win.
33rd over: England 218-4 (Malan 31, Moeen 26) Back to seam with Logan van Beek. Netherlands have missed a trick here, Dutt and Pringle have looked the most dangerous but they’ve both been sent out to graze with overs to spare. The English knock around singles without trouble. 
32nd over: England 213-4 (Malan 29, Moeen 24) It has been a scratchy day for Moeen Ali thus far, so he decides to take on Cooper: twice he comes down the pitch and plays a one-legged flamingo flick over the leg side for four. Either side of those two shots, he gets a lucky inside edge to balls that would have bowled him or trapped him lbw. He finishes the over with a loft over extra cover for a third boundary. 
31st over: England 200-4 (Malan 29, Moeen 12) More part-time spin, it’s Teja Nidamanuru this time. For one ball, it is almost a blessed move. He drags the ball down, Malan pulls, and it lands just short of Pringle at deep square leg. By the fourth ball it looks less inspired, as Malan undaunted tries again, and this time sends his shot into the crowd. 
36 runs to win. 11 overs left. 
30th over: England 192-4 (Malan 22, Moeen 11) Cooper continues, around the wicket to Moeen, hitting a hard length that Moeen is finding difficult to get away. Just keeps driving into the ground and then to the ring field. Five dot balls, then Cooper lets the sixth ball slip through his fingers to give away one run. 
29th over: England 191-4 (Malan 22, Moeen 10) With the overs reduced, most bowlers can bowl eight overs and one can bowl nine. You would imagine that Dutt will get the bigger complement. He finishes his eighth having conceded two runs, and he is getting braver and braver, giving the ball air, extracting sharp turn to draw a desperate defensive stab from Malan, then getting one to kick up at the gloves of Moeen. Good bowling. 
28th over: England 189-4 (Malan 21, Moeen 9) Netherlands want to keep spin going, given that is what has changed the tenor of the match. So they go back to Cooper, but Moeen is able to pick off a couple of twos to start the over, which ends up costing eight. 
England need 47 runs in 13 overs. 
27th over: England 181-4 (Malan 19, Moeen 3) A wicket is overturned! That would have made things very interesting. Aryan Dutt again, who already has two today. This off-break from around the wicket straightens sharply down the line of the stumps, beats Malan’s attempted shovel to midwicket, and smacks into the back leg in front of the stumps. It was a fair impulse from the umpire to give it out, because Malan was so far back on his stumps, but it hit above the top flap of the pad. Malan tentatively reviews, and ball-tracking shows it going over the bails. 
26th over: England 178-4 (Malan 18, Moeen 1) A lift for Netherlands, who are not letting England have it all their own way. Another left-hander to the crease in Moeen Ali. Only one run and the wicket from the over.
It’s Pringle madness instead! First international wicket for the young bowler, who goes a bit round-arm again around the wicket, puts some fizz on the ball despite its flat trajectory, and straightens it down the line of off stump. Livingstone flutters his bat all around the line of the ball and loses his bails. 
25th over: England 177-3 (Malan 18, Livingstone 4) No Livingstone madness as yet, he just collects a couple of singles and has a look. 
24th over: England 172-3 (Malan 17, Livingstone 2) One over, one wicket, four singles. What’s so hard about bowling to England? asks Tom Cooper. Liam Livingstone has come out to bat though, so Cooper might want to get himself out of the action now. 
Another duck for the captain! Seven balls he lasts this time. Tries to beat the field a couple of times but can’t. Tom Cooper comes on to bowl this over, off-spin. Lands one very wide of off stump, and Morgan has a cross-batted swipe at it. Can’t tell if he was trying to hit that over mid-off or over midwicket. I don’t think he knew either. What happens is that it swirls off the toe of the bat towards point and gets comfortably caught. 
23rd over: England 168-2 (Malan 15, Morgan 0) A noteworthy moment now, because Eoin Morgan has come in to bat. England’s captain made a first-baller the other day while his teammates engaged in run-gluttony. He wants a hit for himself rather than sending in Jos Buttler to finish things quickly. And he is certainly in preservation mode, blocking out five balls to give Dutt a wicket-maiden. 
There’s some joy for Netherlands. Salt advances to hit over the leg side, but Dutt fires through his delivery as fast as he can, beating the bat to hit the stumps. Salt made a century two days ago but can’t go back-to-back.
22nd over: England 168-1 (Salt 77, Malan 15) No miscuing that sweep shot! Salt absolutely rasps the first ball of Pringle’s over, flat and hard, skimming across the turf for four. Clips another two in the same direction, so the Dutch push deep midwicket out and bring long-on up. Salt drives wide of that position and turns for two but Malan says no. He does give back the strike from the next ball.
68 needed from 19 overs.
21st over: England 159-1 (Salt 70, Malan 14) Both batters have a crack at Dutt after drinks but neither can find the gaps. Malan plays a powerful pull shot to deep midwicket but Max O’Dowd slides to save. Salt tries another sweep, moving across his stumps, and gets an under-edge for a lucky couple. 
20th over: England 153-1 (Salt 67, Malan 11) Pringle is starting to get a bit of turn to the left-hander. Gets a straight ball past Malan’s edge, then turns one past the inside edge that hits him too high, but does draw a false shot. Malan for his part waits for a ball that is too full, then drives four through cover. 
83 runs needed from 21 overs. Drinks.
19th over: England 148-1 (Salt 67, Malan 6) Dutt helping to calm the scoring rate a bit as Malan gets his eye in. The left-hander slices one away behind point and races through for a rare ODI feat of three runs. 
18th over: England 143-1 (Salt 66, Malan 2) Pringle returns with his tall-feller spin. Does the job alright, four singles from that over. Around the wicket to Salt, bowls him an undercut delivery that looks short but keeps low, and the opener nearly chops it onto his stumps. Salt and Pringle, what a combination.
17th over: England 139-1 (Salt 64) He started quietly, but Salt is making some noise now! Three boundaries in a row to start Aryan Dutt’s over, one slammed down the ground and two swept behind square. Punches a single, giving Jason Roy the chance to smack four over mid-off. But the last ball of the over brings the breakthrough, as Roy aims over midwicket and instead gets a swirling edge to backward point. 
97 runs to win from 24 overs.
16th over: England 122-0 (Roy 69, Salt 51) Quite the shot from Phil Salt: a walking front-foot pull from that goes through wide long-on for four. Against de Leede’s pace. The Dutch bring deep third inside the circle, only for de Leede to bowl outside the off stump and let Salt glide four. A couple of braces, a single, a wide, and 14 from the over. Salt now has three scores of 50+ in five career ODIs.
15th over: England 108-0 (Roy 69, Salt 38) The century stand comes up, as Roy laces a cut shot behind point from a ball that wasn’t short enough to deserve it. Aryan Dutt bowling now, the finger spinner. Roy follows up by genuflecting and launching a slog-sweep over midwicket! Over van Beek on the rope there. England hit 26 sixes in their innings the other day. That one is their first today. 
14th over: England 95-0 (Roy 57, Salt 37) Twice in the over, Bas de Leede does Roy for pace. He’s not bowling up the speed gun, it’s registering mid-130s, but perhaps that’s sufficiently faster than everything else today. Roy gloves one such ball for a streaky four, and has the other cannon into his pad outside the line of leg stump. 
13th over: England 89-0 (Roy 52, Salt 36) Five runs from the Snater over, mostly pushed into the leg side. 
“Wouldn’t calling a player Tim Single affect his marital prospects?” asks John Starbuck. Au contraire, it lets people know he’s available. 
12th over: England 84-0 (Roy 50, Salt 33) A chance with the ball for de Leede now, a tall fast bowler who can look good. Got belted in the first match but who didn’t? Roy uppercuts a single to raise his fifty. A direct hit of the stumps gives up a run from an overthrow, then Salt gets low and cuts hard behind point for four. 
11th over: England 76-0 (Roy 49, Salt 27) So the Dutch hit 11 fours and 8 sixes in their innings. No sixes from England yet today but a dozen fours already, ten of them to Roy. Gorgeous economy and efficiency for the tenth, as he just steers Snater through deep third. Snater tries a slower ball that Salt slices up in the air, but it lands right between van Beek running in from deep point and Bas de Leede running back. 
10th over: England 66-0 (Roy 44, Salt 22) Salt comes up with a method against Pringle’s darting pace, getting down on one knee and sweeping hard behind square for four. Pringle responds by flighting the ball for the first time today, drawing an attacking shot from Salt that looks a chance to be caught at long-off, but in the end requires a great piece of fielding from Tom Cooper to knock it back into play after the bounce, saving four. No such luck when Roy cuts behind point, then he drives two straight of Cooper.
9th over: England 54-0 (Roy 37, Salt 17) Snater on for his first over, usually the best bowler for Netherlands. And he draws a thick edge promptly, with extra bounce against an angled bat, but Roy gets lucky by hitting the gap between two fielders behind point. Four. 
8th over: England 47-0 (Roy 33, Salt 14) Pringle coughs up a boundary, dropping short enough for Salt to club it through cover. But Roy, once he comes on strike, plays circumspectly as Pringle keeps darting the ball at his thigh pad. Four dot balls, after Roy’s flying start. 
7th over: England 42-0 (Roy 33, Salt 9) Suddenly van Beek looks the goods, carving one off the seam that goes right through Roy, over the stumps. Salt has quietly knocked runs around so far after his century a couple of days ago. 
6th over: England 39-0 (Roy 32, Salt 7) Tim Pringle comes on for a bowl early, on debut. Both commentators keep calling him Chris Pringle, his father, who played for New Zealand in the 1990s. Pringle the Younger is a tall all-rounder who notionally bowls left-arm spin, though they’re more like darts in this over against England’s power openers with the fielding restrictions in place. Concedes five runs, one at a time. Should call him Tim Single. 
5th over: England 34-0 (Roy 30, Salt 4) Bowling to Salt is proving easier right now than to Roy, as van Beek is able to send down an over conceding a single. He only has to bowl one ball at Roy, and makes it a good bouncer over Roy’s right shoulder.
4th over: England 33-0 (Roy 30, Salt 3) An error in line from Kingma, down leg, and Roy flicks four very fine, no chance for the long leg fielder. Then walks at Kingma and flicks it squarer of that man for another boundary. 
“From 1969 i think, reporting on a first class JPL match,” writes Jeremy Boyce. 
“At Yeovil on 27 July Langford bowled his full complement of eight overs without conceding so much as a single. It is a feat that has not been repeated in the 44 years of List A cricket that has followed and, realistically, is a bowling record every bit as impregnable as Jim Laker’s 19-90.”
3rd over: England 25-0 (Roy 22, Salt 3) The response from van Beek after the first over is to bring his length back, trying to bowl at the body without getting short enough to hook. It works to a point, as he gives up only a brace and a couple of singles, pushed away rather than whacked. 
