Guardian photojournalists share their jubilee experiences – including beach, street and park parties from Glasgow to Cornwall

A beach party at Holywell Bay in Cornwall, organised by the local surf lifesaving club
Driving around Cornwall on Saturday morning, it looked as though the Queen’s jubilee had been cancelled. Due to the grim weather, only a smattering of people braved the big street lunch in Falmouth where free Cornish pasties were being doled out. I feared the weekend would be a total washout.
Ironically, as I returned home to my local village, the weather eased and I stumbled across a proper street party in full flow. It featured a wetsuit boot ‘wanging’ competition, with people young and old lobbing the boot as far up the street as they could.
I also photographed two beach parties – one in Porthtowan where Paddy, a 12-year-old black Labrador, was crowned King of the fancy dress competition, and another in Holywell Bay where people didn’t seem to care much about the jubilee – it was just an excuse to head to the dunes and have a few drinks at sunset. How very Cornish.
Above: Sally Main, Jim Main and Averil Billing at a beach party at Holywell Bay in Cornwall, organised by the local surf lifesaving club
Below: Paddy, the King dog, meets his subjects at a beach party at Porthtowan in Cornwall
Flypast at Trafalgar Square
At events such as these, what I’m always most interested in as a photographer is people-watching.
It was a pleasure on Thursday hanging out in the huge crowd at Trafalgar Square. After two years of Covid fears , and before that the fractious divisiveness of Brexit, it was such a pleasure to see a good-natured, calm crowd enjoying the sun and the collective experience.Visually, I found myself most interested in the many young people who’d been taken there by their parents, presumably to “experience history”. It occurred to me that for many of us in the crowd, this may well be our last jubilee event but would probably be just the first for the younger spectators.
In Trafalgar Square, the crowd was enormous, the largest I’ve ever seen in central London, and – about 90 minutes before the flypast – it became pretty much impossible to move.
I was very tickled to see three bemused and masked American tourists trying to navigate their huge suitcases towards Whitehall. I asked them what they were doing and they said they had just arrived from Heathrow and were trying to get to their hotel and seemed very surprised by the event they’d wandered into, asking me: “Do you guys do this a lot over here?”
At St Paul’s on Friday, outside the service of celebration I was most struck by a family with two brothers clinging to a narrow ledge on a pillar trying to get a better view of the royal arrivals.
I spoke to their grandmother, who said they were the Chung family and were first-, second- and third-generation Jamaican immigrants with mixed Jamaican, Chinese, German and Scottish heritage.
She said she was very proud to be British but always had the national motto of Jamaica in her mind – “Out of many, one people” – when thinking of her family’s Britishness and multicultural roots.
Above: flagging jubilee celebrations in London on Friday
Below: two flags, one hat and a huge smile
Residents of Pinewood Crescent in Cardiff enjoy a platinum jubilee street party.
Among the vibrant parties and picnics I have witnessed this weekend in south Wales, what struck me the most was this palpable sense of renewed community cohesion that was evident everywhere I went – where inclusion and conversation were as abundant as the teacups, cake and, surprisingly, sunsets that flooded the scenes I observed.
It was refreshing to be among communities that, for at least this weekend, put aside societal or neighbourly differences, and really talked to each other.
It was summed up by a conversation I had with a street party attendee who said: “For many years, I’ve only exchanged passing pleasantries with some of my neighbours, but today I talked to them for the first time.”
Above: families come together at Penarth Cliff Tops for the lighting of beacons on Thursday that started the platinum jubilee celebrations
Below: Lorna Sylvester paints the face of children attending a street party at Woodland Place in Penarth
Platinum Jubilee river pageant – from Shepperton Lock to Sunbury Weir.
I was kindly invited to board a boat called Old Guilder, taking part in a river pageant on the Thames.
It was a magical spectacle. The river banks were lined with people waving. Riverfront gardens hosted little parties or solitary figures stood, formally – one in particular saluting the lifesize cardboard cutout of the Queen that was on our boat.
I was standing next to the cutout for much of the journey and found myself waving back, surprisingly emotional and, indeed, almost believing I was royalty.
As is tradition on my home turf, the Kirby Estate in Bermondsey laid on an incredible display of union jacks. They certainly know how to party, and I’ve already had my invitation to watch the World Cup celebrations in November.
Below: children on the Kirby estate watch the party activities.
People and Crowds gather at the Queen’s Jubilee Service of Thanksgiving at St. Paul’s Cathedral in London.
I am a republican at heart and overall very indifferent to the idea of monarchy. But the photographer in me was relishing the large crowds I knew would gather in central London for the platinum jubilee.
I arrived at the Mall early on Thursday and likewise at St Paul’s on Friday. One of the great joys of big events like the jubilee is that I can wander aimlessly around the crowd pretty much totally unnoticed.
It is one of those times when the presence of the camera-wielding media is expected and ignored. I enjoy watching people as they watch something else. The craning of the necks to get a better view, the clambering on to railings, walls and trees to get find a vantage point.
And the weariness of a long day waiting. The parents struggling to keep their kids interested.
I am also fascinated by how many people use their smartphones as an extension of their eyes. I sometimes bemoan the fact that people don’t enjoy the moment as they are caught up in recording it, something that we photographers experience a lot.
I saw none of the pageantry on the Mall or the great and the good ascending the steps of St Paul’s. Instead I saw people, citizens and tourists, trying to enjoy a once-in-a-lifetime experience.
People will ask if I saw Harry and Meghan but I will reply that instead I saw three generations of an Afro-Caribbean family trying to get a glimpse of Harry and Meghan, and that is the way I like it.
Above: Beverly and Noel Chung and their grandchildren watch the parade and events at St Paul’s
Below: Amy and Malie from Pembrokeshire, Wales, watch the events at St Paul’s from atop a red postbox
John Paton has been playing the bagpipes for 70 years, having started when he was 10.
There was jubilee jubilance and celebration here in Glasgow over the bank holiday weekend, but it was largely owing to the fact that the sun came out for the very first time.
One of Glasgow’s best attributes is people’s enthusiasm for sunshine. Folk were out and about in their droves, but you were hard-pressed to see a union jack being waved about or a Victoria sponge.
The power of football here (Celtic v Rangers) seems to still be so divisive that it feels slightly controversial to celebrate either way. However, I did visit two of the only street parties in the area, and the sense of community and inclusivity was warm, inviting and really enjoyable.
I had some delicious mince and tatties, and I always love to hear the commanding sound of the bagpipes. I’m fairly sure Glasgow is the only place that had a techno dance party in the middle of the day to celebrate the Queen.
Above: Possilpark parish church held a party for the jubilee with free food plus crafts and games for children
Below: Rutherglen West and Wardlawhill church parishioners celebrate with trifle and bagpipes in a vibrant street party
