Collin Morikawa has denied he intends to join the LIV Golf Series after reports emerged on Tuesday linking the reigning Open champion and another high-profile player, Brooks Koepka, to the Saudi-backed league.
“Last week at my press conference, I said the media loves creating drama. Sure enough, I woke up this morning to everyone thinking I’m next. Not to say I told you so but … I told you so,” Morikawa wrote on Twitter.
“To state for the record, once again, you all are absolutely wrong. I’ve said it since February at Riviera that I’m here to stay on the @PGATOUR and nothing has changed. Now if you’ll excuse me, I’ve got some cereal to pour in my milk.”
Several high-profile players, such as Phil Mickelson, Dustin Johnson and Sergio García have joined the LIV Series, which has come under criticism because of Saudi Arabia’s history of human rights abuses. However, as yet no player in the world top 15 has decided to join the competition. The PGA Tour has suspended 17 players, including Mickelson and Johnson, after they signed up for the LIV Series. Morikawa, 25, would have been the first top-10 player to join the breakaway league.
Reports on Tuesday said that Koepka, the world No 19, would announce his decision to join the LIV Series in the coming days. The four-time major champion has yet to comment on the reports but at the US Open last week he bristled when asked about the LIV Series.
To state for the record, once again, you all are absolutely wrong. I’ve said it since February at Riviera that I’m here to stay on the @PGATOUR and nothing has changed. Now if you’ll excuse me, I’ve got some cereal to pour in my milk
“I’m here at the US Open,” he said. “I’m ready to play the US Open, and I think it kind of sucks, too, you are all throwing this black cloud over the US Open. It’s one of my favorite events. I don’t know why you guys keep doing that. The more legs you give [LIV Golf], the more you keep talking about it.”
After its opening event in England, the series moves to the US with tournaments in Portland and Bedminster. The Bedminster course is owned by Donald Trump, who is under investigation for his role in the 6 January attack on the US Capitol.
