Final thoughts
“I was born in ’98. That was way before my time,” Jayson Tatum says upon hearing his team get compared to the Magic Johnson/Kareem Abdul-Jabbar Los Angeles Lakers.
Jaylen Brown, Jayson Tatum & Marcus Smart are the first trio to each have 20 pts, 5 rebs and 5 ast in a Finals game since Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Magic Johnson and Michael Cooper in 1984 pic.twitter.com/tsiPQ4E5gJ
Yes, this time around the younger team beat the more experienced team. The Celtics have the lead in the NBA Finals, but we know that the Warriors are capable of a counter-punch. 
Game 4 will once again be in TD Garden on Friday night at 9:00 pm EST once again (at least it will be the weekend). The Guardian will continue to have live coverage of every game of the 2022 NBA Finals here at the Guardian but this will do us for today’s coverage. Thanks to everybody who followed along with today’s Game 3 liveblog, Ciao!
In a much closer game than the final score indicated, the Boston Celtics absorbed the Golden State Warriors’ best third quarter punch and have taken a 2-1 lead in the NBA Finals.
Warriors 100-116 Celtics, FINAL
Do we really need play-by-play here? Well, nobody scores so that makes it rather easy to do. Listen, these guys haven’t played in ages. The clock hits triple-zeroes and that will do it.
The Boston Celtics have won Game 3 of the NBA Finals.
Warriors 100-116 Celtics, 2:00, fourth quarter
Warriors have emptied the bench, it’s better to keep their starters healthy. Celtics are not. It’s their first NBA Finals home game in over a decade. Brown gets to the line and makes both free throws.
And there’s the Celtics bench.
Warriors 100-114 Celtics, 2:19, fourth quarter
Smart goes right into his defenders yet still gets close enough to make a shot that has no business going in. Warriors call a time out but they’re going to need another seven-point possession to stay in this one.
Warriors 100-112 Celtics, 2:45, fourth quarter
It looks like Horford landed on Curry, but he’s staying in the game. I’m sure we’ll hear more about this and Green fouling out after the game.
Meanwhile, a Horford-to-Rob Williams almost feels like it’s the dagger but they let Wiggins go off for a fast break basket.
Warriors 98-110 Celtics, 4:07, fourth quarter
Brown with a block on Thompson. The Celtics defense has stepped up seriously. Warriors offense has answered however, Poole hits a layup.
There’s a scrum on the court and eventually get the ball and a foul on Green, who has fouled out of fhis game.
Meanwhile, Curry is on the ground in pain. 
Warriors 96-110 Celtics, 5:07, fourth quarter
Celtics nearly pick off the Warriors, but leave them just a few seconds left on the shot clock. Curry throws a prayer of a three point attempt that goes unanswered. Meanwhile, Smart makes his three.
Tatum now with a team-high 26 points (one more than Brown). He seems to thrive in the fourth quarter, which is exactly what the Celtics need right now.
Warriors 96-107 Celtics, 5:51, fourth quarter
Smart and Tatum miss back-to-back three-pointers. Put a pin on that if the Warriors go on another spurt. The clock would normally be an issue, but not with these Warriors.
Tatum drives to the basket, makes it and he could argue that he deserved an “and one” there. Warriors take a timeout. 
Warriors 96-105 Celtics, 7:22, fourth quarter
Smart picks up a foul, Curry hits another jumper, Brown can’t convert on the offensive end. This is the recipe for a Warriors mini-run…
…Or it would be if Wiggins didn’t turn it over. Meanwhile, Green picks up his fifth foul putting Brown on the line. Brown hits one of two free throws.
Warriors 94-104 Celtics, 8:21, fourth quarter
The trick here is for Boston to put their foot down in the fourth, like they did in Game 1. It’ll be tricky with Klay Thompson back on the floor.
Oh wow, Robert Williams with his fourth block, this one on Curry. Unfortunately, Wiggins hits a three pointer instead. Oh well, right process.
On Boston’s end, Tatum hits a layup.
The Celtics were playing with fire there with some of that iffy ball-handling, but sometimes when you play with fire it’s the others who get burned. (Note: this is a metaphor, do not actually play with fire.)
Warriors 91-102 Celtics, 9:09, fourth quarter
Make that a mere seven point lead after Poole scores immediately. However, they do get a foul on Payton and another score, courtesy of Tatum who is starting to heat up as well.
And Grant Williams scores to force Golden State into a timeout. Boston is back up by double-digits, has the storm been weathered?
Warriors 89-98 Celtics, 10:35, fourth quarter
Curry misses. Every one of those missed feels like a basket for Boston. What feels more like a basket is Smart hitting another ridiculous three-pointer. Boston’s lead is back up to nine points.
Warriors 89-95 Celtics, 11:30, fourth quarter
Poole gets called for traveling to start the fourth quarter and then Wiggins picks up his fourth foul, one that puts Tatum on the line to make two free throws.
3Q points this series:106 — Warriors63 — Celtics pic.twitter.com/DIwHjT7j7I
The disparity feels even larger than that.
Warriors 89-93 Celtics, end of the third quarter
Smart throws the ball away, forcing Brown to block Poole. He gets called for a foul, but hack-a-Poole accidentally works as he hits one of two. Grant Williams picks up a third foul on Wiggins. Grant makes one of two free throws.
Grant and Klay exchange threes. That’s 25 points for Thompson and the last scoring of the third quarter. The Celtics have a four-point lead after Golden State put together maybe its deadliest third ever. Is the worst over now or have the Warriors worn them down?
Warriors 83-87 Celtics, 2:53, third quarter
The good news for the Celtics is that now both Green and Curry have four fouls. Tatum is on the line, he makes both.
Warriors 83-87 Celtics, 2:53, third quarter
The good news for the Celtics is that now both Green and Curry have four fouls. Tatum is on the line, he makes both.
If Warriors win this game and win this series, that seven-point possession will go down in history.
Warriors 83-85 Celtics, 2:53, third quarter
When all else fails, Smart unleashes one of his wild threes and this one goes in. After a shooting foul on Draymond Green, Celtics take a full timeout.
Warriors 83-82 Celtics, 3:19, third quarter
Warriors can tie the game here. Curry misses a three pointer. Celtics get several chances to score and Horford picks up another foul: a loose ball foul that will turn it over. This is one of the worst stretches of Celtics basketball I’ve seen and watching them is literally my job.
Of course, Curry hits a three-pointer that gives the Warriors a lead.
Warriors 80-82 Celtics, 4:23, third quarter
Porter hits a difficult three. That was a seven-point possession. And the Celtics can’t score on their end.
Warriors 77-82 Celtics, 5:06, third quarter
That could be a flagrant on Horford, which would make this an utterly disastrous sequence for Boston. And it is. So, Curry will shoot two to make one free throw and the Warriors will retain possession.
Curry doesn’t need the two-for-one to complete the four-point play. Five-point Celtics lead.
Warriors 76-82 Celtics, 5:06, third quarter
Wiggins drives into Derrick White, who takes a charge. However, he can’t score on his end, Wiggins gets the rebound, Curry hits a three AND draws a Horford foul. The Celtics lead is six and it’s probably about to be five after a foul on Horford.
Warriors 73-82 Celtics, 6:02, third quarter
Curry cuts it to eight points with a jumper. Can the Celtics answer?
Yes, they can. Tatum with a three-pointer! However, Horford gets called for a hard foul that will lead to free throws for Thompson. He makes both.
Warriors 69-79 Celtics, 6:42, third quarter
Brown and Green get tangled up and you better bet that after Sunday that they’re going to ring him up on that. 
OK, on replay that also looks legit. Horford rises above all the bad blood on the court by calmly making a shot. However, the red-hot Thompson hits a three-pointer to make it a ten-point game.
Warriors 66-77 Celtics, 7:54, third quarter
Curry’s staying in for now. Green misses a shot as the crowd cheers. They then groan at a bad Brown pass. Thompson finds Green on the other end. They just have to chip away. There’s a lot of time on the clock.
Feel like it’s going to be down to Thompson and Poole with Curry in foul trouble.
They’re capable of having huge nights however. Of course, Boston should know that by now.
Warriors 64-77 Celtics, 9:08, third quarter
Steph Curry is called with his fourth foul this early in the third quarter. Maybe not a shooting foul but a legit one nonetheless. Smart gets three free throws and makes all of them. This time it’s the Warriors who make a turnover, Horford capitalizes throws to Brown for an easy basket that forces the Warriors to call an early timeout.
Warriors 64-72 Celtics, 9:18, third quarter
A loose-ball foul gives Rob Williams a turnover and Curry hits another three-pointer. An eight-point game already, that’s starting to be worrisome. Oh man, another Celtics turnover: Smart is called for a foul on a Curry charge.
Warriors 61-72 Celtics, 9:49, third quarter
Kevon Looney responds with a dunk. Brown gets a key rebound and gets the ball to Horford for another layup. 
Yet there’s Curry, hitting another three-pointer. 
Warriors 56-70 Celtics, 10:58, third quarter
Okay, are going to see the Death Lineup Warriors here in the third quarter? Curry is starting the half even with three fouls. Rob Williams, however, pushes through the Warriors defense for a basket that he makes look easy.
This “forgot your passwords” commercial was funnier before I accidentally wiped out my entire browser history and bookmarks list with one button an hour before this blog went live.
I had a lot more relevant links to give you. I promise.
I know it was a good year for the Celtics but having Nelly perform at the Finals is almost *too* 2008
Wish it were Furtado instead. Although that would be more 2006?
I am convinced that the Celtics are a better team but there’s something to be said about experience. We’re going to find out a lot about both teams in this third quarter, the NBA Finals could hinge on it.
I am going to be lazy here and just post this Tweet here by someone who knows way more about NBA basketball than I do.
The #Celtics withstood mini-run by GSW, lead 68-56 at the half. Key Takeaways...* Tatum 11 pts, 4 rebounds, 5 assists*Second-chance points: 13-3 Boston* Steph Curry 14 pts, 3 personal fouls
Halftime thoughts
Obviously the Celtics dominated in the first half but, after all that, the 12-point lead can’t feel comfortable. The Warriors are the kings of the third quarter and the Celtics haven’t quite solved their ball security issue. That 9-0 Warriors run could be a sign of things to come if the team becomes complacent.
Warriors 56-68 Celtics, end of the first half
The refs are letting the two teams play out this quarter. Smart hits a layup, Curry hits a jumper, Smart hits a layup. That’s the end of the first half scoring as the Celtics take a 12-point lead into halftime. 
Warriors 54-64 Celtics, 1:13, second quarter
Otto Porter Jr, who has been sneaky good this series, is in the game here. He assists Wiggins for a layup. That’s good for the Warriors but Brown responds with a three because that seems to be how Golden State’s day is going.
What was I saying about Otto Porter? He hits a three-pointer here to keep the Warriors afloat.
Warriors 49-61 Celtics, 2:27, second quarter
Shot clock violation on Golden State. Horford does what the Warriors have been doing to them: Horford picks off Green, gets the ball to Tatum who gets the ball to Brown who nobody can touch. That thundering dunk will force the Warriors to call a timeout, down 12.
Warriors 49-59 Celtics, 2:58, second quarter
That’s eight turnovers already this game. Maybe it’s just part of their identity?
Good news for the C’s? That’s the third foul on Curry. Kind of ticky-tacky, but that’s home cooking. Horford attempts a three, it doesn’t go in, but Brown gets the rebound. White has a chance at a three… and also misses. Tenacious Golden State defense and Curry scores on their next possession.
Oh that’s a good sequence for White, diving in for a layup and drawing a foul on Green. He makes his free throw to finish up the old-fashioned three point play.
If I ran the Celtics I would just always tell them the scoreboard was wrong and they were playing in a 10-point deficit.
Warriors 47-56 Celtics, 4:27, second quarter
And Smart throws the ball away and Curry makes them pay with a three-pointer of his own. Just when you thought that the Celtics had figured out their issues they suffer a defensive breakdown and an unforced turnover after two missed free throws and instead of potentially a 19 point lead it’s a nine-point lead. 
Boston with a needed timeout.
Warriors 47-56 Celtics, 4:44, second quarter
Horford is on the line with free throws. He misses… both? A lot of free points left on the line so far, we have to see if this game because close enough for them to be a factor. Miles to go, though.
And Thompson hits yet another three-pointer. Safe to say he’s back on and is going to be a problem. And, finally, the Warriors get back-to-back scores with Wiggins making a dunk.
That fast-paced sequence was more like Game 1. I’m not sure if that’s what the Warriors wanted to hear considering how that worked out for them.
Warriors 39-56 Celtics, 5:31, second quarter
Looney picks up his second foul. Tatum finds Smart for an alley-oop. Poole makes a layup. Tatum hits a three-pointer. A lot is going on, but the Warriors can’t find separation.
Poole hits another three-pointer. He could be the not-so-secret weapon here. 
But of course Tatum scores immediately to respond. Looney picks up another foul and the Celtics call a timeout.
Warriors 34-49 Celtics, 7:03, second quarter
All the Warriors’ offense seems to be on the free throw line this quarter. Wiggins gets on the line, hitting one-of-two. And there’s a turnover… Smart throws a ball carelessly and lets Wiggins dunk. This is going to be rough if…
Well if the Celtics don’t keep making up for these mistakes: Tatum hits his first three-pointer of the game.
Warriors 31-46 Celtics, 8:12, second quarter
Tatum rightfully gets called for a shooting foul, his first, but the crowd does not agree and join in on an off-color chant of displeasure. Wiggins hits both of his free throws. Rob Williams scores again, right underneath the basket, and he’s looking a lot healthier.
Warriors 29-44 Celtics, 8:48, second quarter
Robert Williams gets called for a foul on what looks like a rather clean block. So it goes. Thompson, of course, is automatic today so he hits both of his free throws. You’d think this would be a swing moment, but again the Celtics aren’t giving them any quarter. Derrick White with a layup. 
Warriors 27-42 Celtics, 9:26, second quarter
Grant Williams gets fouled and jaws with Green. I’ve seen this show before. Thompson scores yet again: that’s four in a row. However, Boston keeps answering every Warriors punch. In this case it’s Payton Pritchard, in the game and hitting a three-pointer. 
Warriors 25-39 Celtics, 9:51, second quarter
The Celtics crowd cheers Green’s first foul of the evening. Pretty much expected that. Tatum misses a three but the Celtics secure the rebound. Second-chance opportunities are big: Williams cashes this one in with another score.
Thompson, however, looks to be heating back up after a tough start to the series. He knocks down a three pointer but, on the other end, Williams the Robert dunks all over Golden State.
Warriors 22-35 Celtics, 11:37, second quarter
Grant Williams is in the game and he scores immediately to start the second for the Celtics. 
