Another terrific day saw England lose the toss then bowl superbly before New Zealand fought back in style
Otherwise, that, I’m afraid, is us. Thanks all for your company and comments – check back here or on the site for our report and accoutrements, then join us again tomorrow at 10am BST! Love. 
Some other news lines from the cricket world today:
This has been such a fun series, and that’s another excellent day of it. England’s attack was superb in the first two sessions, then New Zealand came back well in the evening – not because the bowling was poor, but because Mitchell and Blundell are fine batters in nick. Tomorrow should be a lot of fun. 
90th over: New Zealand 225-5 (Mitchell 78 Blundell 45) Stokes gives Leach a short leg and a leg slip, then Mitchell turns to midwicket for the one which raises the century partnership – the third of the series for these. In goes a silly mid off, then Blundell gloves one that bounces just wide of slip, giving soft hands a new, and probably sorer meaning. A bunt to cover then adds two to the total, and a forward defensive later it’s stumps. Very well batted mates. 
89th over: New Zealand 222-5 (Mitchell 77, Blundell 43) A final roll of the dice from Stokes: Potts returns at the Kirkstall Lane, for his 20th over. Again, though, Mitchell lines him up nicely ... but as I type that, he stomps down to drive and half-bats towards short midwicket, only for the ball to drop in front of Pope! A single follows, taking the partnership to 99, and Leach will now see us to stumps. 
88th over: New Zealand 221-5 (Mitchell 76, Blundell 43) Leach returns having got a wicket with the ball still hard this morning; I wonder if Stokes knacked himself in practice yesterday. Either way, it’s another maiden, the insertion of Bairstow at silly point failing to coax the error, and I wonder when the last time was that a spinner bowled 30 overs on day one at Headingley. So far, Leach has 29. 
87th over: New Zealand 221-5 (Mitchell 76, Blundell 43) Overton is cramping as Broad runs in – he’ll sleep like a metaphorical baby tonight, having, presumably, slept like a real baby last night – barely, before waking up crying. mitchell takes one to square leg, then Blundell does likewise to fine before easing two away through point. These two are so good together, and have – so far – navigated a potentially nasty period with skill and composure. 
86th over: New Zealand 217-5 (Mitchell 73, Blundell 42) Potts triers a fuller length to Mitchell, and Nasser approves. But there’s not much going on here and a single to leg is all the over has to say for itself.
85th over: New Zealand 216-5 (Mitchell 72, Blundell 42) Mitchell punches to mid off and takes a single to Stokes, who shies and misses – but even if he’d hit, his man was hame. It’s the only run from the over, and this has been an excellent fightback from these two; whatever happens tomorrow, their team should be in the game. 
84th over: New Zealand 215-5 (Mitchell 71, Blundell 42) I know why Stokes saved his quicks for the new ball, but it means they’re bowling at two set batters; especially odd given Athers told us just a few minutes ago that the captain was bowling flat-out yesterday in training. Perhaps we’ll see him for one or two before the close, but in the meantime a typically wholehearted over from Potts yields a maiden – but one which causes Blundell few alarms. 
83rd over: New Zealand 215-5 (Mitchell 71, Blundell 42) Broad replaces Overton and his loosener hits Mitchell on the kneeroll; there’s a an appeal but no review when it’s rejected. I think he was on eight when England opted not to send Potts’ refused inquiry upstairs, but he rubs that in further by taking two to mid on, and two singles follow. 
82nd over: New Zealand 211-5 (Mitchell 68, Blundell 41) It’s Potts from the other end – Overton is at Broad’s – and Blundell sees out five dots comfortably enough, refusing a single with Mitchell halfway down the track. Good job too, because the final ball has him up on his tippytoes to guide four through backward point; what a pairing this is. 
“Your recent correspondence on childhood cricket rules (over 71) reminded me of the extensive list of local laws that my brothers and I played to,” emails George Browne. “We grew up on a farm, where the cricket area was in a sort of courtyard formed by barns/stables on the leg side and straight, while the off-side of the courtyard was the farmhouse itself. Among the rules were:
- WFT (Window Full Toss) - any ball leaving the bat and making contact with a window without previously striking another surface (ground or wall) was Out. Given that the kitchen window was about 10 yards form the bat at around short extra, with another at point, it really taught you to keep your shots down when driving or cutting. There were also windows at mid-on, off, midwicket and square leg.- RFT (Roof Full Toss) - hitting the ball onto a roof was Out-OTR (Over the roof) - striking a ball over any of the roofs square of the wicket was out, unless it was a straight hit over the Big Barn roof, in which case you were deemed to have hit a six, but had to go and fetch the ball.The stumps were chalked on a wall and there was an area of wall that, should a nicked ball hit it, was deemed ‘automatic keeper and first slip’. The pitch was 16 yards long, the bowlers’ run up about 5, and we used taped tennis balls. With two seam-bowling brothers hooping it about, I learned that leaving the ball was key to batting for more than about three deliveries!”
Autowicky! I’d forgotten about that, what a great law. 
81st over: New Zealand 207-5 (Mitchell 68, Blundell 37) Overton starts well, full of length, then strays down leg before a waist-high full toss completely eludes Mitchell’s gaze, nearly pings Foakes, and hustles away for four byes. 
“Regarding Matt Dony (59th over), verbally distracting an opponent is a yellow and indirect free kick to the other team!” chides Matthew Stephenson.
Only if you get caught, though I must also say that Matt’s email came with the subject “ungentlemanly conduct”. How on earth is that still a thing? 
80th over: New Zealand 203-5 (Mitchell 68, Blundell 37) Leach rattles through a seventh maiden, ending a marathon spell, and England take the new ball; interestingly and, I’d say, cleverly, Stokes allows Overton to stay on and take it. 
“Sound advice on crocodile wrestling,” says John Starbuck, “to which one might add: Climb a tree and call for help. This won’t however work against a Komodo dragon or indeed a python or big cat. There must be specialist trainers in self-defence against various creatures (plus, of course, people armed with fresh fruit).”
Climbing a tree is only partially useful – I believe that if you can’t get help, the croc will wait until you’re too tired to stay up there. Tangentially, a mate of my brother-in-law keeps snakes that wander about his yard. He kept finding one of them stretched out next to him on the bed so took it to the vet, where he was advised that he might get rid, given it was measuring him up for potential consumption. 
79th over: New Zealand 203-5 (Mitchell 68, Blundell 37) Mitchell eases a brace to third man, ducks a bouncer, and top-edges a bouncer on the pull; the ball sails fie of fine leg for four. 
78th over: New Zealand 197-5 (Mitchell 62, Blundell 37) Leach is in for what will surely be his penultimate over of a surprisingly bus day. His first ball yields a single to cover, for Mitchell, after which five dots. The partnership is now 76. 
77th over: New Zealand 196-5 (Mitchell 61, Blundell 37) Mitchell taps Overton to leg for one. 
There was a sound, but not when the ball passed the bat, and indeed there was no edge.
77th over: New Zealand 195-5 (Mitchell 61, Blundell 36) I said earlier that Overton missed his calling as a crocodile wrestler but forgot to say that, should one ever find onself in a wrestling match with a crocodile, when it tries to roll one, do not under any circumstances try and roll the other way, for this will result in broken bones. Go with the roll, then hope Overton – or Peter Willey – is in the vicinity. If not, similarly, do not try and hold its mouth open for this will not be possible, but do try and hold it shut, and should there be a chase, run zig zag. Anyway, two singles, we learn that DRS is back, then Mitchell misses a leg-side glance and there’s an appeal for lbw! It’s rejected, and England review! 
76th over: New Zealand 193-5 (Mitchell 59, Blundell 36) New Zealand will as cognisant as England that they new rambutan is imminent, and when Leach drops short, Blundell zetzes him through cover for four. His final ball, though, is more testing and Blundell tries to glance it around the corner; Foakes takes it well down leg side and there’s a loud shout, but when the umpire says no, no possibility of DRS to check should England have wanted to. I don’t think there was bat involved, but. 
75th over: New Zealand 189-5 (Mitchell 59, Blundell 32) Overton begins with an inswinger full of length; Mitchell edges into his pads. Two singles follow, Overton diving to save runs when his fifth delivery is hammered back down the ground by Mitchell. 
“Perhaps tests should be held in sunny north-east Scotland,” emails Mike Rodgers, “it’s 25 degrees and sunny here yet again. Our local club, MCC (Methlick Cricket Club) would, I’m sure, allow its ground (Laird’s) to be used.”
We go again...
“Not sure if you listen to Bob Mortimer and Andy Dawson’s surreal, football-adjacent podcast, Athletico Mince,” says Simon Harding, “in which Steve McLaren’s hair island is an oft mentioned topic.”
It’s a Jim Robinson/Alan Dale and that’s that. 
Emails Simon Burnton, one of our team at Headingley.
“Funny you mention your powers of Neighbours recall,” says Darrien Bold, “as driving down a winding Cornwall road earlier my wife pointed out a bloke who looked like Lou Carpenter and I was straight in there with ‘Tom Oliver?’”
Oh well played – though in this case, I’d probably have gone with “Ian Branfoot”. 
The main covers is on the square, but otherwise it’s just tarpaulin on its immediate neighbours. It’s still mizzling, but hopefully we’ll get more cricket presently. 
Talking of Jim Robinson, how many soap characters have a haircut named after them? What people now call a “hair island” is, at least among people I know, referred to as a “Jim Robinson”. 
“Yes, it was the Bungle Bungles,” returns James Debens. “She used to go with Bob Dylan (pictured here, right) and they lived off witchetty grubs and painted portraits of one another. Here’s Helen’s oil on canvas of Uncle Bobby.”
I remember this episode, Mrs Mangel as a Cluedo character – genius. 
It doesn’t look – gulp – “set in” – but given the hour, they’ll do well to get back on today. 
74th over: New Zealand 187-5 (Mitchell 58, Blundell 31) England are just waiting for the new blob now, and Blundell plays out a maiden from Leach, then the players go off for rain. 
73rd over: New Zealand 187-5 (Mitchell 58, Blundell 31) Mitchell cracks Overton’s first ball hard to the man at midwicket, as we learn that DRS is still down – the little minx etc etc. Three further dots follow, Mitchell making decent connection with he third but picking out the fielder. No matter, he twizzles the next ball to fine leg for four then wears the one after on the pad; there’s a shout, but it was above the kneeroll. 
73rd over: New Zealand 183-5 (Mitchell 54, Blundell 31) Overton returns, but before he can bowl a ball, the umpires call for drinks because DRS is down. 
72nd over: New Zealand 183-5 (Mitchell 54, Blundell 31) Mitchell turns Leach to wide long on and they amble a single, the only run from the over. 
“Didn’t Helen Daniels off Neighbours used to go and paint in the Bongo Bongos?” wonders James Debens. “Is that a euphemism then? ... And is bongo bongo is the old bunga bunga? I remember Frank D’Arcy was this Pan-like figure enticing elderly ladies to the depths of the bush.”
Helen went to the Bungle Bungles, I believe. I can remember Neighbours episodes and actors from 35 years ago, not a clue what I had for tea last night. 
71st over: New Zealand 182-5 (Mitchell 53, Blundell 31) Blundell defends the final ball of the over. 
There was no edge, or at least no spike on the line. 
Root flings down an arm-ball, Blundell appears to edge behind, and that’s gone! 
71st over: New Zealand 182-5 (Mitchell 53, Blundell 31) “Oh no!” says Root as sends one outside off, the field set for straight bowling, and Blundell clatters him for four through cover. 
“They were always grub-hunters in my day,” reports Tom Levesley on daisy cutters. “Which leads me down a path of childhood cricket rules – did anyone else do peg leg to solve an argument about lbw or caught behind? You face the next ball holding the bat upside down and using the handle to play the ball. Survive that and you’re not out. Beats the review system any day.”
Yup and agree, though our rules were hit it you’ve got to run one, miss it you’ve got to run two. 
70th over: New Zealand 178-5 (Mitchell 53, Blundell 27) Mitchell bangs one to cover, then skips down and takes it on the pad. There’s a big appeal, a long chinwag, and no review, before Overton barrels after a drive to cover and slides to turn four into three. So Mitchell compensates by blocking, then coming down and, knowing there’s a long on in place to protect against his favourite shot, he gets outside the ball to tickle Leach for six over long off instead, raising his fifty in the process. He’s batted beautifully this series. 
