The US men’s national team wore orange armbands in support of tighter gun control before their 0-0 draw with Uruguay on Sunday.
The move came after the US Soccer Federation wrote to Congress asking for stricter gun laws following several mass shootings in America in recent weeks. The US House of Representatives is set to vote on gun legislation in the next week.
“With legislation being considered in the coming days in the House and Senate, we implore you to stand with the majority of Americans who support stronger gun laws,” the letter read. “… Certainly, we can all agree that the safety of the children in our country is a sacred responsibility that is shared by all of us.
“We believe it would be irresponsible not to use our platform to raise awareness and call for change. Our activism is borne out of necessity – we are talking about this issue because many of you refuse to take action.”
On the pitch, Jesus Ferreira failed to convert a pair of first-half chances as US forwards kept up their goalscoring struggles, and the Americans played out a 0-0 draw against Uruguay in their second of four World Cup warm-up matches this month.
The US took the field three hours after learning Wales will be their opening World Cup opponent in November, and the Americans stretched their home unbeaten streak to 25 matches since a September 2019 loss to Mexico. That’s one shy of the team record set from 2013-15.
Ferreira had the best American chances, a 15-yard shot saved by Fernando Muslera in the 19th and then an open header wide a minute later. Haji Wright, who debuted on Wednesday, replaced Ferreira in the 61st. Weston McKennie played in his first start for club or country since breaking two bones in his foot with Juventus in February.
American forwards have one goal in the team’s last 13 matches. That was scored by Ferreira in a 5-1 rout of Panama in a World Cup qualifier in March. Edinson Cavani missed a good chance for Uruguay in the final seconds of the game.
Sean Johnson was in goal for the United States for the 10th time, the first since January 2020, and the 32-year-old made a point-blank save in the 61st. In an odd twist, match officials allowed Uruguay to make seven substitutions, one more than rules allow.
