Final thoughts
It’s the least surprising thing in the world that the Warriors tied up the NBA Finals at 1-1 although, if you happen to be a Celtics fan, it has to be annoying that they lost what was a one-possession game at halftime in blowout fashion after committing so many lazy turnovers. You can’t do that against any team especially not Maybe The Greatest Third Quarter Team In NBA History.
The good news for Boston is that the Celtics haven’t lost two games in a row this entire postseason and they will be playing at home in Game 3. One assumes their head coach has plenty of film for them to watch and mistakes that he needs to point out. We’ll continue our coverage of the 2022 NBA Finals here at the Guardian all this upcoming week but that will do it for today’s live coverage. Thanks to all who followed along with this liveblog, particularly those who contributed. Ciao!
The Golden State Warriors have evened out the NBA Finals 1-1. The series will continue on Wednesday in Boston’s TD Garden!
You can read a full report of the game here:
Celtics 88-107 Warriors, FINAL
Veteran Nik Stauskas, who nearly quit basketball, is in for the Celtics and he hits a three-pointer. It won’t affect the final outcome but it’s nice to see him get a basket in a Finals game. The Celtics’ Malik Fitts gets the final meaningless points for Boston and that will do it.
Celtics 82-107 Warriors, 1:38, fourth quarter
Luke “The Green” Kornet dunks. Poole hits a three-pointer. The clock mercifully ticks down without any whistles from the officials.
Celtics 80-104 Warriors, 2:44, fourth quarter
As expected, Kerr has called off the dogs. The ends of the benches are all out, so be prepared to see news names in the next few updates.
Aaron Nesmith makes a layup. Moses Moody gets a dunk. 
Celtics 78-102 Warriors, 3:35, fourth quarter
Looney with a crowd-pleasing dunk. A lot fewer fans have left in the fourth this time around. The Warriors take a timeout. “This one feels done.” Yeah, it has for a while, ABC Broadcasting Crew.
Celtics 78-100 Warriors, 4:17, fourth quarter
The “Poole Party” continues as he splashes a three-pointer and honestly I feel ashamed at even typing that out. Somebody get Jordan Poole a less-embarrassing catchphrase.
Hey, Sam Hauser hit a three for Boston. Good for him!
Celtics 75-97 Warriors, 5:38, fourth quarter
All that the Warriors are giving up now are free throws. White is on the line and makes his free throws but, to be gentlemanly one assumes, promptly fouls Klay Thompson. Of course, he makes them.
White dunks and and that’s enough for the Warriors to take another team timeout.
Celtics 71-95 Warriors, 6:35, fourth quarter
Grant Williams gets on the free throw line after colliding with Draymond Green. He makes one of two free throws. That’s not going to move the needle, not now with basically half a quarter remaining.
Celtics 70-95 Warriors, 6:55, fourth quarter
Pritchard makes another basket. The announcers are wondering if Udoka replaced his starters en masse as sort of a “give them a different energy” here, sort of let the starters stew a little bit. I could see that as a long-term motivation thing.
Celtics 68-95 Warriors, 7:38, fourth quarter
Thompson hits a 16-footer. We’re reaching the point where we’re just getting stories from our announcers and not a lot of play-by-play. I don’t blame them.
Hey, a Boston basket! Pritchard snags a Nesmith assist for a layup. Rather smooth that.
Celtics 66-93 Warriors, 8:58, fourth quarter
And after that, Bjelica misses a layup. The Celtics defense is still playing hard, but the Celtics offense is almost nonexistent. 
Can we just hit the “simulate game until end” option on this one?
Celtics 66-93 Warriors, 9:25, fourth quarter
Poole misses a layup but the Warriors get the the ball and Kerr calls a timeout, presumably to make sure they get a great shot here. Burying the C’s right here and now would be ideal. I’m sure he’d like to get his starters some rest here at some point.
Celtics 66-93 Warriors, 9:25, fourth quarter
Aaron Nesmith is getting minutes and considering how little Udoka likes to use him, that gives you an idea of where this one is going. It’s time to rest the starters unless there’s some sort of miracle run here.
Oh hey, Nesmith with a layup. Good for him.
Jayson Tatum now a minus-36 in this game.Career-worst: Minus-33 (11/24/21)
Tatum is playing a surprisingly terrible game for one in which he has scored 28 points.
Celtics 64-93 Warriors, 10:45, fourth quarter
Tatum misses, Thompson gets the rebound. Poole hits a jumper. Horford turns it over. Bjelica scores quickly and yeah that fast start by Golden State might have just ended the suspense. Boston takes a timeout.
Celtics 64-89 Warriors, 11:21, fourth quarter
And the Warriors score first. Payton makes a two-pointer to extend the lead.
Boston outscored Golden State 40-16 in the fourth quarter of Game 1.If they do so again, they'll win by 1.
Yeah but they’re playing against a Warriors team that knows the Celtics are capable of doing it. I don’t think they believed in Game 1. Look for a more focused closedout here, especially since they know a Game 2 loss puts their season in serious jeopardy.
But the good news is that this is not over, so there’s reasons to continue reading this blog.
When that shot goes in, it’s not going to be your night. Sorry, Boston.
Celtics 64-87 Warriors, end of the third quarter
Tatum goes back on to the line, drawing a foul on Curry. He misses his first again but makes the second to cut the lead down to 15 points. Going to need a perfect defensive ending here…
They don’t get it, allowing a Looney layup. Then the C’s pick up their 16th turnover of the game with a shot clock violation. Poole scores with a jumper, White misses a long three and Poole, with the buzzer expiring, hits a near half court shop to top the Warriors’ perfect third.
Celtics 63-79 Warriors, 1:32, third quarter
Tatum goes to the line and makes one of two free throw. Curry goes for an early dagger three, but it’s nothing doing. 
Celtics 62-79 Warriors, 1:54, third quarter
And another three-pointer from Curry to make it a 17-point Warriors lead. I don’t think the Celtics can rely on another magical fourth quarter.
Celtics 62-76 Warriors, 2:22, third quarter
And Derrick White travels right when it looks like the Celtics have the perfect chance to score. As always, whenever the Celtics have given them a free possession, they take advantage. Curry hits a three-pointer and the Warriors look as control as they have all game.
Celtics 62-73 Warriors, 3:13, third quarter
Marcus Smart picks up his fourth personal foul and Green goes to the line. He makes his first free throw while Payton Pritchard comes in to spell Smart. Green hits his second. I’d say Golden State absorbed that blow rather well.
Celtics 62-71 Warriors, 3:35, third quarter
Otto Porter Jr responds with a three of his own which is just what the Warriors needed: they want to vanquish all ghosts of their stumble towards the finish line in Game 1.
Celtics 62-68 Warriors, 4:16, third quarter
In the time it took to post that tweet I missed another Celtics turnover. The Warriors can’t convert and Grant Williams hits a three-pointer. Then Tatum does and it’s suddenly just a six-point game.
The Celtics out here with beautiful yet fruitless plays.
This is an oddly poetic way to put it. There’s a beauty to this game, but of the frustrating kind.
Celtics 56-68 Warriors, 5:45, third quarter
The Warriors take a timeout. They’re up by 12-points now halfway through the third quarter: nothing can possibly go wrong from here, right? 
Celtics 56-68 Warriors, 5:45, third quarter
And a technical foul on… Celtics head coach Ime Udoka. I love it when that happens, to be honest. Curry makes the technical free throw. Meanwhile, Brown misses a three-pointer on their end. Just a not-great shooting quarter for the Celtics here, credit the Warriors defense for some of that.
Celtics 56-67 Warriors, 6:51, third quarter
There’s Horford’s first basket of the game, a layup set up by Jaylen Brown. Brown gets called on a foul that the crowd wants to be a shooting foul on Curry. It is not by the letter of the rule (the announcers are complaining about the rule, but whatever). Curry’s shot isn’t good but he does get two fre throws and makes both of them.
Celtics 54-65 Warriors, 7:17, third quarter
Marcus Smart lands on Robert Williams. He’s a little wobbly and I don’t see how he’s still in the game. Plus, he fouls Wiggins. He misses his first free throw and Grant finally comes in for the ceremonial Changing Of The Williamses. Wiggins makes free throw number two.
Celtics 54-64 Warriors, 7:57, third quarter
Curry makes a jumper to keep pacing. Horford, also swarmed, can’t score. Thompson hits another layup and yep this is looking like another red hot Warriors third quarter.
