Saudi-backed events threaten major disruption to golf’s old order, though top players are not signing up in numbers for now
How did this come about? Saudi Arabia’s increasing involvement in sport included them targeting golf, initially via single tournaments on existing male and female tours. This quickly evolved into a lucrative series, fronted by Greg Norman but strongly opposed by the PGA and DP World Tours. This event is one of eight planned across the world in 2022 in a serious disruption plan.
Who has signed up? Phil Mickelson, Dustin Johnson, Sergio García, Lee Westwood, Ian Poulter and Martin Kaymer are the biggest names. Bryson DeChambeau has announced that he will be playing the second event in the USA at the end of June. The 48-man field today includes amateurs and 27 of the world’s top 150.
Who hasn’t signed up? Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy are the highest profile opponents of the LIV plan. None of the world’s top 10 have any apparent interest in it.
Why is it called LIV Golf? This relates to Roman numerals. Fifty four is the score under par if every hole in an LIV tournament is a birdie. Each competition is played over three rounds, as opposed to the four that are standard on mainstream tours.
What is the playing format? The overriding plan has been to provide a shorter and more exciting model. Standard stroke play takes place over 54 holes but within that comes a team element, presided over by a dozen captains. Players for those teams were selected at a draft party on Tuesday evening. The top three teams will win prizes.
What is the prize money? The winner will receive $4m (£3.2m) from a $20m individual pot. Second earns $2.125m with third collecting $1.5m. Last place is worth $120,000. The winning team will pocket $3m, split evenly among four, with $1.5m and $500,000 on offer for second and third respectively.
Why is it starting at the Centurion Club in Hertfordshire? LIV faced the difficulty of finding a UK venue capable of hosting a tournament with crowds but without ties to the DP World Tour. Centurion has previously staged the Aramco Team Series, a Ladies European Tour event with sponsor links to Saudi Arabia, but fell off the DP World Tour’s radar after the short-lived Golf Sixes competition.
What does a player “resigning from a Tour” mean? Johnson and García have ended their relationship with the PGA Tour so they will not be eligible to feature on that circuit. Many believe this is a pre-emptive strike by players to avoid any punishment the PGA Tour may hand out for violations of their rules via involvement with the LIV Series.
What’s the effect of this on the majors and Ryder Cup? The majors, including next week’s US Open, remain unaffected. In theory, Johnson is no longer eligible for the Ryder Cup because of his resignation. Golfers hope those behind the biennial event will ultimately decide it is not worth negatively affecting their product – in terms of both players and captains – by ostracising LIV participants.
Why is it not on a recognised TV network in the UK? Sky has a close relationship with the PGA and DP World Tours and therefore would not touch this. Mainstream broadcasters in the UK have shown no recent interest in golf. Facebook and YouTube will instead offer streaming services.
What do golf’s traditional sponsors make of it all? Some, such as Royal Bank of Canada and UPS, have ended relationships with golfers because of participation in the LIV Series. Equipment and clothing brands have stuck by their men.
Will it be a success? No one really has a clue. Initial signs are, if only because of the wealth available via Saudi’s Public Investment Fund, it will not go away quickly. Fascination surrounds whether players of a higher calibre can be coaxed towards the series. And if so, when. Without that, LIV would be regarded as a second-rate scene.
