This video has been removed. This could be because it launched early, our rights have expired, there was a legal issue, or for another reason.
The world of rugby has united in tribute to Phil Bennett, one of the greatest fly-halves to play for Wales and the British and Irish Lions. The 73-year-old, famed for his thrilling attacking play, has died after a long illness.
An integral member of a golden Welsh generation, he represented his country in 29 Tests, scored 166 points and helped secure two Five Nations grand slams, including the 1978 crown when he scored two tries in a 16-7 win over France in Cardiff.
Famed for his skilful play, his range of passes and his ankle-snapping sidesteps, Bennett, affectionately known as ‘Benny’, is universally regarded as one of Wales’ best ever players. He was the lynchpin in a team that dominated northern hemisphere rugby in the 1970s alongside Gareth Edwards, Derek Quinnell, JPR Williams and Gerald Davies.
Born in the village of Felinfoel near Llanelli on 24 October 1948, he made his debut for Llanelli RFC at 18 and would represent the club 413 times, accumulating 2,535 points across 15 seasons. He also captained the side for six years.
Paying tribute on their website, the Scarlets said: “A player with stardust in his boots, he possessed a sidestep that would mesmerise defenders – his jinking run to spark ‘the greatest try ever scored’ for the Barbarians against New Zealand in Cardiff in 1973 will live long in rugby folklore.”
The statement quoted Bennett’s former club captain and Wales and Lions teammate Delme Thomas, who said: “He was the best fly-half I have ever seen.” Bennett inherited the Welsh No 10 jersey from another legend, Barry John, who retired a year after orchestrating a Lions series win in New Zealand in 1971. Bennett was born for the role and forged a scintillating union with Edwards at scrum-half.
His first Lions tour was to South Africa in 1974 and he was at the heart of a team dubbed “The Invincibles”. The tourists won 21 of their 22 matches and the Test series 3-0, with one game drawn. Bennett top scored with 103 points. He was captain for the tour to New Zealand three years later in a series the hosts won 3-1 but Bennett was again top scorer with 125 points.
He did not only inspire on the field. As captain of Wales in 1977, he gave a rousing speech before a clash with England. He spoke of how his nation had been “exploited” by the English and how their larger neighbours had “taken our coal, our water, our steel”. The rallying cry worked as Wales won 14-9 in front of a frothing Cardiff crowd.
Reflecting on Bennett’s key role in Llanelli dominating the domestic scene, including four Welsh Cup successes in the 1970s, Scarlets’ executive chairman, Simon Muderack, said: “Wherever the Scarlets travel around the world, people mention the name Phil Bennett. He was an icon of our sport, a rugby superstar, but someone who always remembered his roots. There was no finer ambassador of Scarlets Rugby than Phil, a player respected across the rugby world, both during his career and long after he finished playing. Phil was a hero and friend to so many people, not only in Llanelli and west Wales but throughout the game and I am sure a lot of Scarlets supporters will have their own particular stories of the times they met and chatted to ‘Benny’.”
The Welsh Rugby Union expressed their condolences and appreciation on Twitter: “Such sad news from Llanelli this evening with the passing of Phil Bennett, a Welsh rugby legend in every sense and true gentleman. Our deepest condolences to Phil’s wife Pat, their family and his many, many friends. Rest in peace Benny.”
Paying tribute on their website, the Lions said: “He is widely recognised as one of the all-time greats of the game and dazzled in both the red of Wales and the red of the British and Irish Lions at the height of his career in the 1970s.”
He also starred for the Barbarians 20 times. Two minutes into the match against New Zealand in 1973, he collected a long kick inside his 22 while facing his own try-line. He skipped around one All Black and then whizzed past another. By the time he looped a long pass to Williams he had left another two in his wake.
What followed will forever be enshrined in rugby mythology. “That try”, as Edwards’ score would simply be known, involved seven Barbarians players and included so many jaw-dropping off-loads, dummies and steps that the commentator, Cliff Morgan, said: “If the greatest writer of the written word would have written that story, no one would have believed it.”
In a poll conducted by Channel 4 in 2002 it was voted No 20 on the list of the 100 greatest sporting moments. The Barbarians won the match 23-11 but that is a sidenote to a try sparked by Bennett’s genius.
After retiring in 1979 he was awarded an OBE and was inducted to the World Rugby Hall of Fame in 2005. He became a popular pundit for BBC Wales and remained a loyal supporter of Felinfoel RFC, the amateur club in his home village where his statue was unveiled in April this year.
Bennett was that rare breed of athlete: a wizard on the pitch who never compromised on entertainment in pursuit of victory and who enthralled and triumphed in equal measure.
