The 27-year-old from Sheffield claimed his first major by winning a thriller at Brookline with a superb bunker shot on the 18th
Congratulations to Matthew Fitzpatrick on adding the US Open to the US Amateur title he won at Brookline nine years ago! He was pushed all the way by Will Zalatoris and Scottie Scheffler, but when it came to the crunch, he produced a moment of carpe-diem genius from a bunker at 18 that registered a full ten on the Sandy Lyle-o-meter. That’s a shot that’ll be remembered for a very long time, and one that deserved the reward of the US Open. Thanks for reading this report. Nighty night!
-6: Fitzpatrick-5: Scheffler, Zalatoris-3: Matsuyama-2: Morikawa, McIlroy-1: McCarthy, Hadwin, BradleyE: Woodland, Dahmen+1: Power, Rahm
Ewan Murray was at Brookline. His report has landed. Here it is!
Fitzpatrick talks to Sky Sports. “It’s incredible. It’s ten million times better than I thought it would feel. I never wanted to say it, but it felt like it was meant to be. I’ve played so well so many times and come up just shy. For it to happen here, it just felt right. Billy Foster was massive, so calm the whole day. It means even more to him than to me, given he’s been around so long. I know it was eating away at him, and to get it done for myself but for him as well is great.”
The new US Open champion talks! “No words. It’s what you grow up dreaming of. it’s something I’ve worked so hard for, for such a long time. There was a big monkey on my back, trying to win over here. All everyone ever talked about was that. To do it as a major for my first win, there’s nothing better. I had so much patience today. If I can hit 18 greens, I’d like to think I’ve got a good chance. I near as dammit did it. I got a couple of nice breaks on 15 and took advantage of it, and that’s what it took at the end. Me and Billy [Foster, his caddie] spent a lot of time talking about the 18th tee shot. Undecided. I hit 3-wood today into the bunker, and if there’s one shot I’ve struggled with this year that I just do not want, it’s a fairway bunker shot. Ha ha! I guess ability took over, and it’s one of the best shots I’ve hit of all time!” 
“With a score of 274, the Jack Nicklaus gold medal for the winner of the 122nd US Open goes to Matt Fitzpatrick of England.” Will any words have sounded sweeter in Matt Fitzpatrick’s life? This is his first win in America, by the way. What a prize to bag! He’s handed the trophy, hoists it into the sky, and soaks up the applause. He’s a popular winner all right!
It’s Father’s Day, of course, and Fitzpatrick enjoys a moment with Pop. “How good is that?! How good is that?!” he guffaws as the pair hug ... but dads will be dad. “Just sign your card, alright, will ya?”
“Great play! Well deserved.” Will Zalatoris, despite the smile as he warmly shakes Matthew Fitzpatrick’s hand, will be bitterly disappointed. He’s also a gentleman. His time will come. But this is Fitzpatrick’s moment, and now he’s laughing hysterically, with tears of joy, as he collapses into the embrace of his family. This is such a sweet moment ... and one richly deserved. He becomes only the second man, after Jack Nicklaus, to win the US Amateur and the US Open at the same course!
Zalatoris looks to have made his birdie putt ... but it shaves the left-hand lip. He drops to his haunches in anguish. Fitzpatrick smiles, but for a minute nothing seems to register. Stunned delight!
-6: Fitzpatrick (F)-5: Scheffler (F), Zalatoris (F)
Fitzpatrick’s downhill left-to-right slider is always missing on the left. Just a par. Just a par! He’d have taken that walking up to the bunker, for sure. It’s his third 68 of the week. Is it enough to win the US Open? Zalatoris has one throw of the dice. Can he make his birdie putt?
This is utterly sensational from Matthew Fitzpatrick! He’s up close to an island of grass in the middle of the bunker. Can he get over? There’s just enough room for a route to the green via the left-hand side of the island. He doesn’t faff around, and having decided to go for it, he really goes for it. With it all on the line, he flushes an iron into the heart of the green, 18 feet from the flag! That’s outrageous! Zalatoris follows him in with a much simpler wedge. He’ll have a look from 15 feet ... and he’ll get a read from Fitzpatrick. Not much use if Fitzpatrick makes his putt, but still. Here we go! It all comes down to this!
Up on the green, Jon Rahm concludes his title defence with a par to sign for a deflating final-day 74. He ends the week at +1, and he’ll always have Torrey Pines. A 71 for local lad Keegan Bradley meanwhile, and he finishes in the top ten at -1.
Zalatoris crashes a glorious drive down the left-hand side of the 18th fairway. That’s gone miles, over the bunker and the corner of the slight dogleg. The pressure’s suddenly turned up on Fitzpatrick, who takes 3-wood for safety ... but pulls it into a fairway bunker down the left. Not sure he’s got enough space to get over the lip and onto the green. Wow. This is far from over.
Zalatoris rolls his birdie putt straight at the hole on 17. It stops one turn short. Just the par. Fitzpatrick is faced with a slippery right-to-left curler and tickles it down to tap-in distance. Par for him too. And back to 18, where Scheffler taps in for his par and signs for a 67. Fitzpatrick is one hole away from glory.
-6: Fitzpatrick (17)-5: Scheffler (F), Zalatoris (17)
Scottie Scheffler rolls a gentle downhill left-to-right slider towards the cup on 18. It looks all the world like dropping for birdie, but as it nears the hole, seemingly drifting to its destination on the right, it straightens up. It slides by, and Scheffler’s hand rises to his brow in sorrowful contemplation. So close ... but it might not be enough.
Fitzpatrick sends his second over the flag, landing 12 feet from the hole. He’s hoping the slope of the green will gather his ball back towards the cup, but there’s no real response. Still, he’ll have a look at birdie, albeit a downhill one. Zalatoris is up next, and he lands his ball a lot further back, generating spin and making more use of the slope. It rolls 12 feet past the hole, and he’ll look at birdie coming up the hill. As for where that Rory was earlier on? “Waiting for the wind to leave,” quips Michael Meagher.
Scheffler sends his second at 18 into the heart of the green. He’ll have a look at birdie from 25 feet. Back on 17, Zalatoris and Fitzpatrick whistle careful tee shots down the middle. This is going right to the wire!
Fitzpatrick nearly drains his long uphill birdie putt on 16. A perfect lag, and he taps in for his par. One step closer. But he’s also got one more player on his shoulder, because Zalatoris makes no mistake with his short birdie putt, and he joins Scheffler in second place.
-6: Fitzpatrick (16)-5: Scheffler (17), Zalatoris (16)
Up on 18, McIlroy, having sent his drive into bother on the left for the second day in a row, launches a Hail Mary into the green. Pin high, ten feet away! Where was this Rory earlier on? We’ve asked this question before, haven’t we. Anyway, the birdie putt dies to the left, and it’s a frustrating 69, another frustrating close-but-no-cigar finish at a major. He ends the week at -2. Behind him, Scheffler splits the fairway.
Scottie Scheffler keeps the pressure on Matt Fitzpatrick! In goes the birdie putt on 17, and he’s on Fitzpatrick’s shoulder. Fitzpatrick responds by finding the heart of 16. Zalatoris isn’t quitting yet, either, and uses the camber on the right-hand side of the green to gather his ball to six feet!
-6: Fitzpatrick (15)-5: Scheffler (17)-4: Zalatoris (15)
Will Zalatoris can’t get up and down from the sand at 15. A second bogey in four holes ... and it could be extremely costly, because Matt Fitzpatrick pours in the gentle right-to-left slider for birdie! A huge putt made calmly under so much pressure!
-6: Fitzpatrick (15)-4: Scheffler (16), Zalatoris (15)-3: Matsuyama (F)-2: Morikawa (F), McIlroy (17), Hadwin (17)-1: McCarthy (F)
A sad finish to Denny McCarthy’s round, with bogey at the last. It’s his second 68 of the weekend, though, and at -1, he’s sure of a top-ten finish, by far his best result at a major. Meanwhile back on 17, Scottie Scheffler does exactly what he needs to do, crashing a drive miles down the track, then wedging to five feet to set up a huge birdie opportunity!
Zalatoris didn’t hit a perfect drive either, but it was much better than Fitzpatrick’s wild flay. However it bounced into the thick rough and he ended up with a much worse lie. That’s awful luck, but that’s also golf. He pulls his second into a greenside bunker, and suddenly the stars are aligning for Fitzpatrick. Remember that old pendulum, though. Things can swing back quickly.
McIlroy’s birdie putt at 17 never looks like dropping, always missing to the left. There goes that pipe dream! He remains at -2. Back on 15, it’s a huge break for Matt Fitzpatrick, whose ball rests on grass trampled flat by the gallery. He takes advantage by whip-cracking a long iron from over 200 yards straight at the flag! He’ll have a look at birdie from 20 feet or so, something that would have been beyond his wildest dreams when he was watching his wild drive slice towards bother.
McIlroy takes iron off the tee at 17 for position, then knocks his second pin high to 12 feet. He’ll have a look at that birdie he so desperately needs to keep his slim, slim, slim chances alive. Back on 16, Scheffler prowls the arena like a man who fancies making his long birdie putt from 30 feet. A seven percent chance, according to the stats caption. Scheffler does the 93-percent thing: perfect pace, but always missing on the right. He taps in for a par that keeps him one off at -4.
Scottie Scheffler at 16. He finds the green, but doesn’t get the bounce forward he wants, and so misses the tilt that would gather his ball towards the flag. He’ll have a long two putts for par. Back on the 15th tee, Matt Fitzpatrick sends a big slice towards a cart path on the right, while Will Zalatoris’s ball sinks into the second cut on the right. The pressures of the US Open, right here.
Scheffler lobs back onto 15 with delicate hands. A well-crafted effort, but it’s always dying to the right. Still, he’ll take his par to remain one behind the leaders at -4.
McIlroy plonks his tee shot at 16 into the bunker at the front. His effort to hole out from the sand teases the crowd, but bounds six feet past. He’ll have to make the one coming back if he’s to have any chance of pulling off a sensational smash and grab on the last couple of holes. And in it goes. It’s still not beyond the realms. I mean, we’re kind of dreaming here, but you can bet your bottom dollar McIlroy hasn’t given up hope yet. A birdie-birdie finish would at least ask a question of the leading trio.
Scheffler’s second at 15 flies out of the rough hot and over the back of the green. He’s in the cabbage, but fairly close to the flag, and will fancy his chances of delicately chipping close. Meanwhile back on 14, neither Fitzpatrick nor Zalatoris can make their birdie putts. Fitzpatrick’s effort sails four feet past and he does very well to ram home the par saver with confidence.
Another birdie for Rory McIlroy, this time at 15! This couldn’t be on, could it? No. Surely not. But he is -2, and he’s made some impressive, if ultimately futile, late lunges for the line before. Meanwhile Will Zalatoris screeches his wedge into 14 to ten feet, turning up the matchplayesque pressure on Matt Fitzpatrick again. Fitzpatrick doesn’t respond particularly well, sending a very average third to 25 feet.
Fitzpatrick and Zalatoris take turns to split the 14th fairway, then lay up with 3-wood and long iron respectively. Up on 15, Scheffler sends his tee shot into the second cut on the left. A brief period of calm before the upcoming dramatic storm.
Matthew Fitzpatrick is faced with a downhill left-to-right breaker from the best part of 60 feet. No bother! He smoothly steers the monster into the cup, one of those that looked destined to drop from a fair old way out! That’s a sensational moment, and one which takes this US Open in yet another direction! He punches the air in delight. The gallery roars. Can Will Zalatoris – who had bumped his third to 15 feet, giving himself an outside chance of scrambling par – respond? You bet he can! He rolls in the left-to-right slider, and what a save that is! Roar II. Meanwhile up on 14, Scottie Scheffler misses the shortest putt of the three, and will have to make do with par. The Masters champion looks stunned. The chance of grabbing back a share of the lead goes by.
-5: Fitzpatrick (13), Zalatoris (13)-4: Scheffler (14)-3: Matsuyama (F)
Another clumsy error here, this time by Scottie Scheffler. He’s just playing for position with his second at 14 ... but sends his ball into a patch of rough that splits the fairway. However – shades of playing out of the divot on 1 – he powers out of the cabbage into the heart of the green, his ball rolling serenely up towards the flag, pin high, just six feet to the right! Birdie chance, just as it all threatened to unravel!
Too little, too late for Rory McIlroy, surely, but he wedges to 12 feet on 14 and knocks in the birdie putt. He’s back into red figures at -1. Back on 13, Matt Fitzpatrick finds the green in regulation, but like Scottie Scheffler before him, faces a long two putts for his par. Will Zalatoris meanwhile is forced to take his medicine and hack out sideways ... but he does so clumsily, sending his ball across the fairway and into the second cut on the left. Bye bye spin!
Matt Fitzpatrick splits the 13th fairway ... but Will Zalatoris’s driving mechanism has suddenly deserted him, and he sends another tee shot wide right. Meanwhile up on 14, Scottie Scheffler does what needs to be done on the long par-five, and finds the short stuff off the tee. Denny McCarthy, incidentally, while not troubling the NBC coverage, is still hovering on the fringe of contention. A birdie at 12 brought him up to -2, where he remains through 14.
Zalatoris very nearly makes that putt! He rolls up and over the false front, and keeps it going straight at the flag until the very last turn, when it breaks left. He taps in for a bogey that could have been worse. Fitzpatrick can’t make his birdie, but he tidies up for par and is one closer. Meanwhile it’s a two-putt par for Scheffler up on 13, and par for Hideki Matsuyama on 18. He signs for a best-of-week 65, posting a new clubhouse lead that probably won’t be enough ... but you never know if the leading pack’s knees start to knock. This is the US Open after all.
-5: Zalatoris (12)-4: Scheffler (13), Fitzpatrick (12)-3: Matsuyama (F)
Zalatoris is in tall fescue down the right of 12. All he can do is gouge back out onto the fairway. He completes that task, but leaves the door slightly ajar for Fitzpatrick. He sends his second pin high but 30 feet wide of the flag. He’s got the upper hand, though, with Zalatoris’s third toppling back off the small false front of the green. His ball doesn’t roll all the way to the fringe, which is something, but bogey is likely unless he can rake in the putt coming back up.
That two-shot swing will hurt Matt Fitzpatrick. But the pendulum can swing both ways, and after watching Will Zalatoris send a hysterical slice into bother down the right of 12, he splits the fairway. Meanwhile Scottie Scheffler reaches the 13th green in regulation, though he’s left himself a 30-foot putt with a lot of break. We’ve seen him make those, mind. Plenty of drama yet to unfold.
Hideki Matsuyama makes hard work of 17. He leaves his approach short, and though he gets up and down from an awkward position at the side of a bunker, it’s just a par on a hole that’s been giving up birdies. Meanwhile a huge matchplay-style moment on 11! Will Zalatoris and Matt Fitzpatrick are side by side, facing almost identical 15-feet putts for birdie. Zalatoris is up first, and he drains his. That gives Fitzpatrick the collywobbles. He sends his effort three feet past, then pulls the one coming back to the right. All of a sudden, Zalatoris has a two-stroke lead!
-6: Zalatoris (11)-4: Scheffler (12), Fitzpatrick (11)-3: Matsuyama (17)-2: Morikawa (F), McCarthy (13)
Finally, a birdie for Jon Rahm! He makes it on the short par-three 11th, reward for knocking his tee shot pin high, ten feet right. Keegan Bradley makes one as well, having very nearly aced. The crowd loved watching their local boy go close. Both players move back into red figures at -1, and while it’s a long shot, they aren’t quite kaput yet. Then the final group take to the tee. Both Will Zalatoris and Matt Fitzpatrick send their wedges to Rahm Territory, and both will be thinking about birdie.
Will Zalatoris is one revolution away from draining his left-to-right swinger for birdie on 10. Just the par, although as Matt Fitzpatrick can’t make his par saver, he’s now got a share of the lead. Meanwhile up on 18, it’s par for the Open champion Collin Morikawa, who signs for a final round of 66. A whole 11 shote better than yesterday! He’ll think about Saturday at Brookline for a while. Still, he’s the new clubhouse leader at -2.
-5: Fitzpatrick (10), Zalatoris (10)-4: Scheffler (11)-3: Matsuyama (16)-2: Morikawa (F), McCarthy (13)
Will Zalatoris was in complete control of his game yesterday, and it’s beginning to look like he’s rediscovered that mojo. Three birdies in the last four holes, and now he’s plonked his ball into the heart of two, from where he’ll have an uphill look at another bird. Meanwhile Matt Fitzpatrick pulls his second into sandy trouble. He clips out nicely to six feet, though he’ll be left with a left-to-right tickler to salvage his par. At the moment, all the momentum is with Zalatoris (and Hideki Matsuyama, of course). 
Things started to go wrong for Scottie Scheffler yesterday afternoon at 11. He double bogeyed the hole, then made three further bogeys in a row. These things can get in your head, and today he three putts for his second bogey on the bounce. The old ticker will be going now. Meanwhile Hideki Matsuyama makes yet another birdie putt from distance, this time at 16, and he’s on course to posting something that will give the leaders pause for thought!
-6: Fitzpatrick (9)-5: Zalatoris (9)-4: Scheffler (11)-3: Matsuyama (16)
Welcome to the start of the 2022 US Open! Yep, the last group has hit the turn on Sunday. It’s on!
Will Zalatoris sends his tee shot at 9 into the rough down the right. But he arrows his second into the green, leaving himself an uphill left-to-right swinger from 20 feet. In it goes for his third birdie in four holes! Matt Fitzpatrick meanwhile has to settle for par, despite clipping his second from 170 yards to eight feet. His putt stays stubbornly high on the right, and a chance to put a little daylight between himself and his pursuers goes by. Meanwhile on 17, Collin Morikawa wedges his second to tap-in distance, and he’ll really be cursing yesterday’s 77 now.
-6: Fitzpatrick (9)-5: Scheffler (10), Zalatoris (9)-2: Morikawa (17), Matsuyama (15), McCarthy (12), Dahmen (11)
Scottie Scheffler splashes out of the bunker to the back of 10 delicately indeed. His ball threatens to hit the pin, but rolls by the left-hand side and eight feet past. He can’t make the one coming back, and that’s his first dropped shot of the day. He’s -5, and Matt Fitzpatrick has sole ownership of the lead. Meanwhile a three-putt bogey for Rory McIlroy on 11, and at level par his race is run. And Denny McCarthy moves into a tie for fourth, steering in a left-to-right curler from ten feet on 12. He’s -2.
Potentially some bother for Scottie Scheffler on 10. His tee shot finds the first cut down the right. He lashes his second into the green, but he’s not getting any spin, and the ball bounds through and into a bunker at the back. He’s got a bit of green to play with, but it’s all on the downslope, so it’ll be a delicate splash out. Still, we’ve seen him get out of tighter scrapes before.
Matt Fitzpatrick’s eagle putt, a 25-foot right-to-left slider across 8, briefly considers dropping but doesn’t turn enough. He taps in confidently from a couple of feet for his birdie. Just the par for Will Zalatoris. Meanwhile another birdie effort goes by the hole for Rory McIlroy, this time at 10, then his tee shot at 11 only just finds the fringe. It’s not been his weekend. Next month at St Andrews, where he once shot 63, maybe.
-6: Scheffler (9), Fitzpatrick (8)-4: Zalatoris (8)-2: Matsuyama (14), Dahmen (11)-1: Morikawa (16), McIlroy (10), Hadwin (9), Bradley (8), Rahm (8)
