Linn Grant has become the first female golfer to win an event on the European Tour, making history in amazing style.
The Swede obliterated her opponents at the Scandinavian Mixed event on Sunday, winning by nine strokes after an 8-under 64 in the final round at Halmstad Golf Club and finishing 14 strokes clear of the next best woman, Gabriella Cowley, who was tied for 15th.
Grant started the day with a two-stroke lead and birdied five of her first six holes, demonstrating the brilliant ball-striking and calm temperament she has displayed all week in southern Sweden. She first took a nine-stroke lead after tapping in for birdie at the par-5 11th hole and made eight birdies in total to complete the best week of her career.
It is the second staging of a tournament that started with 78 men and 78 women in the field, playing the same course – albeit from different tees – for one prize fund and trophy.
Asked if she particularly wanted to beat the men this week, Grant told the DP World Tour website: “For sure – the most important thing! It’s a nice feeling. All week I just felt like it’s the girls against the guys, and whoever picks up that trophy represents the field.”
“I just hope that people recognise women’s golf, more sponsors go to the LET [Ladies European Tour], and hopefully this pumps up the women’s game a little bit more,” the 22-year-old added.
Grant’s grandfather, James, was a Scottish golf professional who moved to Sweden from Inverness. Her father, John, played on the Swedish Golf Tour and has seven wins on the Swedish Senior Tour.
Grant turned professional last year and marked herself out as a star in the making by winning events on the Ladies European Tour in March and May. On Sunday Grant said that having those two wins under her belt kept her calm going into the biggest round of her life.
Her boyfriend, Pontus, was her caddie this week and her mother was among those cheering Grant on to each green.
“Pontus has been amazing, keeping me calm and doing everything right,” Grant added. “The crowds are, like always, amazing. Swedish crowds! Just playing at home – my family by my side – it’s crazy and I’m proud of myself.”
The Swedish great Henrik Stenson, who hosted the event with compatriot Annika Sörenstam, shot 70 and was tied for second place with Marc Warren (65).
