The Leinster scrum-half Nick McCarthy has come out as gay, and thanked coaches Leo Cullen and Stuart Lancaster for their “unbelievable” support. McCarthy added that he had previously thought about quitting professional rugby union because of his sexuality.
McCarthy, who shared the news publicly on Monday having already come out to Cullen, Lancaster and his teammates earlier this year, said his experience has been “entirely positive”. The 27-year-old added that he had taken strength from the stories of footballer Josh Cavallo and American footballer Carl Nassib, in addition to his bisexual teammate Jack Dunne.
“I struggled with coming out for a while and it was starting to impact on me and my happiness so it was the right decision,” McCarthy told Leinster’s website. “It affected me so much that I agonised over my future and contemplated walking away from rugby altogether, because I just didn’t think I could come out while playing rugby.
“It’s not common for a male athlete to come out in sport, never mind professional rugby, and it’s probably something that I didn’t want to believe or accept myself either. I needed to accept being gay myself before I could address it with others. I have great friends in rugby but I didn’t know how they would take it.
“My experience, since coming out though has been entirely positive,” added McCarthy, who told Cullen and Lancaster in November of last year before informing his teammates in January. “I have realised that anyone who cares about you, just wants you to be happy.”
The Leinster and Ireland captain, Johnny Sexton, said he was proud of McCarthy and that his teammate will be a role model for others. “I’ve known Nick since his time in the academy so to hear him talk to us so openly about his struggles has been tough but we are now just delighted for Nick and that he can be himself.
“We talk about looking after our brothers a lot in here and the last few months has been about that, looking out for Nick. And that will continue,” Sexton added. “By speaking openly about his sexuality, Nick will be a role model for others and we couldn’t be prouder of him.”
Fellow Leinster player Dunne revealed his bisexuality last year, around the same time Nassib announced he was gay and a few months before Australian Cavallo made headlines across the world by sharing his news. Last month, Blackpool’s Jake Daniels became the first UK-based male footballer to come out as gay since 1990.
“Leinster Rugby is built on brotherhood, and it’s important that we can be open and honest with each other,” continued McCarthy in his statement.
“I was obviously pretty nervous about doing so, but I’m really happy that I did it. They were all delighted for me and it was immediately a weight off my shoulders.
“I felt they understood my situation, added McCarthy, a former Ireland Under-20 international. “It’s hard to perform at your best when you are carrying something, anything, and that’s the same for all the lads. For me it was my sexuality, for others it could be stuff at home, or studies or whatever.”
“In some ways, nothing has changed, which is great,” he continued. “If one other person, one other kid, keeps playing their sport because they see a Leinster Rugby player has come out and is accepted, that would be a great outcome.
“I’d love people to see, from my experience, that coming out has been really positive, and the biggest hurdle may be in your own head. Surround yourself with good people, because anyone that cares for you, wants the best for you.
“Your sexuality is just a part of who you are, and life is so much better when you can be yourself.”
