
Sign In

Manage Newsletters
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Kavanaugh’s Democratic assassins
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
MIAMI — Sandy Alcantara pitched nine scoreless innings, Jesús Aguilar hit a game-ending single in the 10th inning and the Miami Marlins beat the Washington Nationals 2-1 Wednesday night.
Alcantara extended his scoreless string to 18 innings and has completed at least eight innings in four of his past five starts. The 26-year-old allowed six hits and struck out six while lowering his ERA to 1.61.
Aguilar’s smash against reliever Tanner Rainey (1-2) deflected off second base and rolled into center field, scoring Willians Astudillo from second. Astudillo’s run-scoring single to right scored automatic runner Jazz Chisholm Jr. from second to tie it.
Chisholm originally was called out, but the Marlins successfully appealed that he beat right-fielder Juan Soto’s throw.
Keibert Ruiz’s RBI single against Tanner Scott (2-1) in the top half put Washington ahead 1-0.
Nationals starter Josiah Gray pitched five scoreless innings but was lifted after a season-high 101 pitches. Gray allowed six hits, walked one and struck out six.
Miami left fielder Jorge Soler misplayed Soto’s drive to the warning track that fell for a one-out double in the sixth. Soto advanced on Nelson Cruz’s groundout to third, but Alcantara retired Josh Bell on a groundout to second to strand him.
The Marlins loaded the bases with one out in the first, but Gray struck out Avisaíl García and Jon Berti to end the threat.
ADON SENT DOWN
In the aftermath of Joan Adon’s outing of three-plus innings and eight runs allowed Tuesday, the Nationals optioned the 23-year-old right-hander to Triple-A Rochester. Adon made the opening day roster but has struggled to a 1-10 record and 6.95 ERA in 12 starts. LHP Sam Clay was recalled from Triple-A.
TRAINER’S ROOM
Nationals: RHP Joe Ross is scheduled to have Tommy John surgery for a second time Friday. … RHP Victor Arano (left knee bone bruise) is progressing with his rehabilitation
Marlins: OF Jesús Sánchez (right upper back tightness) did not play. Sanchez left in the second inning Tuesday.
UP NEXT
Nationals: Sidelined since June 1, 2021, RHP Stephen Strasburg makes his season debut Thursday, when he starts the series finale. The 33-year-old Strasburg has been sidelined for most of the past two seasons and underwent surgery for thoracic outlet syndrome last summer.
Marlins: LHP Trevor Rogers (2-5, 5.80) will make his fifth career start against Washington Thursday.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
