
Sign In

Manage Newsletters
Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Reparations: The left’s new segregation
In his first rehab start last month, Nationals ace Stephen Strasburg didn’t look like a former World Series MVP pitching against minor leaguers. 
Strasburg struggled in the short outing, allowing three runs and walking four in 2 2/3 innings. But, in reality, no one cared about the results of that start. The only thing that mattered was that Strasburg, who has barely pitched since winning the MVP award after the Nationals’ 2019 World Series victory due to multiple injuries, was healthy. 
Now, Strasburg is more than just healthy. After two dominant outings in the minor leagues, the star right-hander and the Nationals believe he is ready to hop back into Washington’s starting rotation. Manager Dave Martinez told reporters Tuesday that Strasburg’s minor league rehab assignment is over and that he will make his season debut on Thursday.
“I’m not going to put any limitations on him,” Martinez said, according to MLB.com’s Jessica Camerato. “We’ll see how far we can take him. We’ll keep a close eye on him, but this is one of the reasons why we wanted him to go through what he did — to make sure that he’s fully ready.”
The 33-year-old threw a bullpen session Monday in Miami, which put him on track to start Thursday against the Marlins. It will be his first big league outing in more than a year, as his 2021 season was cut short last summer due to thoracic outlet syndrome surgery.
“It’s exciting, and it’s a good thing for the organization,” Nationals general manager Mike Rizzo said last week about Strasburg’s return, per MASN. “When he’s pitching, he’s as good as anybody in baseball. So when we get him healthy and we get him back on the mound, he’ll improve the team and he’ll make us better.”
The news about Strasburg’s return isn’t a surprise.
He allowed just one hit and zero runs across 11 innings in his last two minor league starts. After his rough first start in Fredericksburg, he tossed five no-hit frames with six strikeouts against Single-A hitters in late May. Then, on Friday, Strasburg punched out four in six shutout innings with Triple-A Rochester, bringing his rehab assignment earned-run average to 1.98. 
Martinez said the most important aspect of Strasburg’s start in Triple-A was that he reached 83 pitches and six innings while also averaging 93-94 mph on his fastball. The ace didn’t eclipse 65 pitches in either of his first two minor league starts. 
“It’s great news for us that he’s reached that pinnacle where he’s up at six innings, 83 pitches,” Martinez said. 
Strasburg, a three-time All-Star and former No. 1 overall pick, tossed only 26 2/3 innings in 2020 and 2021, making only seven starts since signing a seven-year, $245 million contract following the 2019 season. He started only two games in the COVID-19 shortened 2020 season before his campaign ended due to carpal tunnel surgery. Then, last year, the 6-foot-5 righty took the ball five times before another season-ending surgery. 
“I told him, for what it’s worth, I’m proud of you,” Martinez said, per MASN. “I know this has been a difficult time for you, but you worked your butt off to get back. Just go out there and have fun.”
Strasburg’s return is welcome news for the Nationals, who entered Tuesday with the highest starting pitcher ERA in the major leagues at 5.88. No team’s starters have taken more losses than the Nationals’ 31, led by Joan Adon’s nine and Patrick Corbin’s eight. 
• Jacob Calvin Meyer can be reached at jmeyer@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
                          Click
                            here for reprint permission.
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
