Both Democrats and Republicans are eyeing New Hampshire as a key battleground in the midterm elections. Wall Street Journal politics reporter Eliza Collins spoke to candidates and voters about abortion, the economy, and other issues driving them, and joins WSJ What’s News host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss. 
This transcript was prepared by a transcription service. This version may not be in its final form and may be updated.
Annmarie Fertoli: New Hampshire is shaping up to become a battleground state in the midterm elections. Republicans think there's a key Senate seat they can flip, which could give them control over the chamber in Washington. Democrats hope the threat of the Supreme Court overturning abortion rights could push votes their way. Meanwhile, independent voters make up the largest share of the electorate.
I'm Annmarie Fertoli from the Wall Street Journal. And I'm joined now by Wall Street Journal politics reporter, Eliza Collins, who went to New Hampshire to talk to candidates and voters. Hi, Eliza, thanks for being here.
Eliza Collins: Thanks for having me.
Annmarie Fertoli: Eliza, a recent Wall Street Journal poll found more than two thirds of Americans do not want Roe v. Wade to be overturned. How does that compare to what you heard on the ground in New Hampshire?
Eliza Collins: I was hearing very similar sentiment from voters in New Hampshire. I talked to voters across the state and found pretty broad support for at least some access to abortion. A University of New Hampshire poll recently came out that said 61% of voters in the state oppose overturning Roe v. Wade, so that's close to what we're seeing nationally. But I also found that for these voters, abortion was not the only issue they were voting on. So I met some people who do feel like it's important to support someone who wants access to abortion, but they also felt conflicted because they're unhappy with how the economy is going right now. The rising gas prices and food costs, people were citing to me.
So I picked New Hampshire because it is a state with competitive races up and down. It's a true battleground state. And Senator Maggie Hassan is one of Republican's top targets. If her seat flips, the US Senate could flip to Republican control. And Hassan is talking about abortion, so I wanted to see how this was playing out with voters.
Annmarie Fertoli: And Democratic Senator Hassan won her last election by just over 1,000 votes. So how is she making her pitch to voters?
Eliza Collins: So Senator Hassan is talking about abortion, access to abortion, the potential of Roe v. Wade being repealed. This was something that she ran on in 2016, her support of Planned Parenthood and access to abortion. But when I was talking to her, she also was very careful to talk about other things that were important to voters, including the economy.
Senator Maggie Hassan: Ultimately, we need to help people lower costs. We need to help people move forward with their lives, get to the other side of the pandemic and rebuild our economy. And make sure people have a chance to thrive.
Eliza Collins: Senator Hassan's first ad of the year is about her effort to repeal the federal gas tax and lower gas prices. Now that idea has not gone anywhere in the Senate, she's running into resistance from Republicans and some Democrats, but she says that's a way forward. And I think that really shows that abortion is not the only issue that she's talking about, even if she hopes that mobilizes voters. She's having to talk about other issues related to the economy.
Annmarie Fertoli: Tell us some more about her opponents and their campaign promises.
Eliza Collins: So she has several opponents that are competing against each other ahead of the September primary, they have a very late primary. But one of her top opponents is Chuck Morse. He's the President of the state Senate right now. And he helped shepherd in a 24 week abortion ban that was passed in the state budget last summer. I went to an event where Senator Morse was speaking and he touted that abortion ban as something that he was very proud of, but he also emphasized fiscal responsibility and the economy.
Chuck Morse: Let me tell you what we've accomplished as Republicans in this state. We built a budget that took down the business taxes in New Hampshire.
Eliza Collins: Both he and Kevin Smith, who is another top opponent ... he's the former town manager of Londonderry. Said that voters were most focused on the economy. And when I talked to Kevin Smith, he mentioned that abortion wasn't coming up when he was talking to voters. Now, both of them say that they do oppose abortion, but they tried to steer clear of that topic. And when I was with Kevin Smith, he was actually having a round table with small business owners where they focused on the issues they were having with the supply chain and inflation. And that's what Smith says that conversation is what can win for Republicans in November.
Annmarie Fertoli: So we heard how the candidates are making their pitches. What are voters telling you, Eliza?
Eliza Collins: There were Independent voters who were really torn on this issue. But of course, there are voters on both sides of the aisle who feel very strongly, they just tended to be people who were going to vote for Democrats or Republicans, regardless. But I met one woman, Laura Weisik, who was a legal assistant and university student, and talking about the potential of Roe v. Wade to be overturned was very emotional for her.
Laura Weisik: I mean, our rights are being taken away. I don't know what other ... is this supposed to be a democracy? I don't know what other countries, comparable that are developed to the US, are doing something like this.
Eliza Collins: And then she said something else. She said that she feels tired of voting, in general. She's feeling really let down, she says. Democrats are in the White House, they're majorities in Congress, and yet she feels like Republicans are still calling the shots. And so she said she plans to vote, but she's really not feeling very optimistic about what her vote will do.
Annmarie Fertoli: So how about Republican voters?
Eliza Collins: So I spoke to another woman named Marie Drurie, who said she was going to vote for Republicans, regardless, because of a host of issues.
Marie Drurie: Definitely inflation, the economy, the border. I mean, just about everything.
Eliza Collins: So she's a Republican regardless of the issue, but she is someone who opposes abortion rights and said it was a bonus to have the potential for the Supreme Court to overturn Roe v. Wade and support candidates who also wanted to limit access to abortion.
Annmarie Fertoli: Eliza, how important is New Hampshire for the final makeup of Congress, and what do you think their voting picture says about the country?
Eliza Collins: So New Hampshire is one of several states that we are watching very closely. And in any one of these states, especially in the US Senate, if they flip, it could determine which party controls the Senate. The Senate currently is split 50-50, but Democrats have the majority because vice president Kamala Harris can be the deciding vote of 51. So Democrats are trying to defend New Hampshire, Nevada, Arizona, and Georgia. Those are the top targets for Republicans. Meanwhile, Republicans are trying to hold on in Wisconsin and Pennsylvania. So it's a competitive map.
In the House, it's also very narrow. Democrats do have a majority there, but just a handful of seats need to flip, and then they would lose that, and New Hampshire has two seats. Right now, the map is still under consideration because of redistricting, but under the current map, both seats are competitive. Republicans are playing in both seats. So we'll be watching New Hampshire closely to see if that's a sign of things to come. Republicans feel like it's a state. They can really make some gains. At the federal level, Democrats control all four seats, but Republicans have the governor's mansion and the whole state legislature. So it's a real battleground state.
Annmarie Fertoli: That's Wall Street Journal politics reporter, Eliza Collins, Eliza, thanks so much for joining me.
Eliza Collins: Thanks for having me.
Annmarie Fertoli: To hear more stories about business and politics from the Wall Street Journal, ask your Google assistant to play WSJ, What's News Podcast.
