Brownies from scratch are easy to master if you keep a few fundamentals in mind (and use really good chocolate). Our baking pro shares her top tips.
Vallery Lomas
June 23, 2022
Terms like ‘refreshing,’ ‘easy drinking,’ ‘crisp’ and ‘light’ have all been offered as synonyms. Our wine columnist dove deep dive into the category and came up with 5 categorically quaffable wines (also great values) to drink right now
Lettie Teague
June 23, 2022
Stuffed zucchini blossoms are always a treat, but a smart chef’s trick—and a drizzle of homemade ranch dressing—make this tempura-fried version utterly irresistible.
Kitty Greenwald
June 23, 2022
Brewers are turning to nonalcoholic morning drinks to give customers extra reasons to visit.
Mike Jordan 
June 20, 2022
Creamy, crunchy, fresh and fun, the Caesar salad is a classic for a reason. And that winning formula is so durable that chefs continue to find new ways to use it, in everything from tacos to tapas.
Kathleen Squires
June 16, 2022
Shelley Lindgren championed southern Italian wines before they were on the radar stateside. Our wine columnist caught up with her to find out what she’s loving now.
Lettie Teague
June 16, 2022
Think of it as a soufflé without the stress. Cornbread’s custardy cousin makes a lovely light meal with a green salad or an ideal accompaniment to the centerpiece protein at a family gathering.
Kitty Greenwald
June 16, 2022
“There is an unprecedented shortage of our products,” Huy Fong Foods said, citing weather-related issues that hurt its chili crops.
Allison Prang and Talal Ansari
June 11, 2022
Nicole A. Taylor literally wrote the book on the holiday. Here she shares tips for joyful eating, plus the potato salad recipe you’ll be making all summer long.
Kayla Stewart
June 10, 2022
In the Rhône, 2020 was a very good year. Our wine columnist tasted her way through this excellent vintage and recommends the best bottles, red and white.
Lettie Teague
June 9, 2022
Do your next cocktail fête a favor and come equipped with a few of these delectable factoids—from the conical bra Jean-Paul Gaultier made for his childhood teddy bear to Marlene Dietrich’s dressing-room-kitchen specialties.
Illustrations: Errata Carmona for The Wall Street Journal 
June 3, 2022
It began with one extraordinary strawberry. Here, the pioneering chef and advocate considers the radical potential of bringing beauty to the act of feeding ourselves and each other.
Alice Waters
June 3, 2022
The emoji resonates for a reason. Acclaimed author Deesha Philyaw examines a singularly juicy symbol and its place in both her writing and her cooking.
Deesha Philyaw 
June 2, 2022
At restaurants around the country, chefs are doing plant-based takes on regional dishes, comfort-food favorites and fine-dining classics with broad appeal.
Julekha Dash
May 27, 2022
This quick recipe for chicken thighs on a bed of mustard greens includes several smart moves that make it a standout. A lemony, deeply savory sauce made with the pan drippings pulls it all together.
Kitty Greenwald
May 25, 2022
When Champagne Louis Roederer set up shop in California’s Anderson Valley four decades ago, it was a bold move. It’s paid off with delicious wines and a bit of a sparkling boomlet in the valley.
Lettie Teague
May 24, 2022
A chef shares his strategies for unlocking a basic ingredient’s infinite potential, in recipes for garlicky fried rice, a luscious tomato-egg curry and the best egg-salad sandwich you’ll ever eat.
Andy Baraghani
May 20, 2022
The answer: at the end of a hair-raising drive in a remote region called Anderson Valley, where the conditions are ideal for producing world-class Pinot. Our wine columnist seeks out the bottles not to be missed.
Lettie Teague
May 19, 2022
Grilling branzino whole helps protect from overcooking. A quick mostarda of fresh lemon and fennel makes a bright, balancing accompaniment.
Kitty Greenwald
May 18, 2022
West Coast IPAs are back, but the bitterness is balanced in fruitier, altogether friendlier brews. These are the beers to try.
Aaron Goldfarb
May 18, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
