
https://www.wsj.com/articles/cfos-provide-outlook-on-consumer-spending-supply-chain-disruptions-11655326767
Finance chiefs continue to reorder their priority lists two years into the pandemic, responding to rapid changes in consumer spending, ongoing supply-chain disruptions and new sustainability reporting requirements.
Chief financial officers discussed these and other challenges during The Wall Street Journal’s virtual CFO Network Summit. The event, hosted on Tuesday, took place as companies weigh the prospect of an economic downturn and keep a close watch on the Federal Reserve’s interest-rate policy.
Attendees from many industries discussed their outlook for the remainder of the year, covering a range of issues, including the impact of pandemic lockdown measures in China and the cost of environmental, social and governance disclosures. Here is an overview of what they said.
Retail finance chiefs looking to get a handle on what consumer spending will look like in the months ahead should look back to prepandemic trends as a guide, Visa Inc. Chief Financial Officer









      
      Vasant Prabhu



      said.
Major retailers, including










            Macy’s Inc.,


      Target Corp. and










            Gap Inc.,


      in recent weeks have said that they were caught off guard by a rapid change in consumer preferences as people pulled back on popular pandemic purchases such as home goods and casual clothing.
Consumers—particularly affluent ones—are spending more on dining, travel and other types of services that they put off early on during the pandemic, Mr. Prabhu said. “We’re seeing a great amount of enthusiasm on the part of affluent consumers to go out and spend money on things they couldn’t do before,” he said.
Buying inventory based on the demand patterns of the past two years could lead companies to order too much of an item or order the wrong things, Mr. Prabhu said. Looking instead at trends that occurred before the pandemic likely provides a better model for what lies ahead, he said. “It has helped us a lot to look at it that way. It’s been a better way to predict the future,” he said.
Intel Corp. is carrying more inventory on its books and is looking to further diversify its supply chain to weather shocks in the supply of its raw materials and components, CFO









      
      David Zinsner



      said.
The Santa Clara, Calif.-based chip maker had $11.9 billion in inventory on its balance sheet as of April 2, up 11% from the end of 2021, according to its latest quarterly earnings report. Intel has struggled to get the components it needs due to pandemic closures in Asia, Mr. Zinsner said. Russia’s war in Ukraine has been less of an issue, he said, “but obviously another major reason why you want to be more diversified.”
Companies across industries have faced shipping difficulties and component shortages in recent months due a monthslong lockdown in Shanghai. While restrictions in the city have been lifted, shutdowns remain a continuing threat to companies with production facilities in the region,









      
      Kenny Wagers,



      finance chief at freight technology company Flexport Inc., said at the summit. “The next two to four weeks will really be telling,” Mr. Wagers said, referring to whether transportation from production facilities to warehouses will become more reliable.
Finance teams have begun testing technology and adding personnel as they prepare to comply with potential climate-change disclosure requirements from the Securities and Exchange Commission. Gathering some of that data and then reporting it may be new territory for some companies and will likely generate adoption costs, said Peggy Smyth, a director at e-commerce company










            Etsy Inc.


      and the former U.S. CFO of










            National Grid


      PLC, a gas and electricity utility.
Businesses could also see benefits—for example, by finding inefficiencies in their operations, Ms. Smyth said. “Companies might say, ‘You know, this doesn’t really make sense and we never really thought about it and maybe we should look at something differently.’”
Asked about the costs associated with disclosing additional environmental, social and governance data, Janine Guillot, chief executive of the Value Reporting Foundation—a nonprofit focused on corporate reporting—said sustainability reporting can generate savings by establishing a common language for companies and investors. “I actually think standards are an efficiency improver because the current situation serves no one,” Ms. Guillot said.
 The Morning Ledger provides daily news and insights on corporate finance from the CFO Journal team. 
The Value Reporting Foundation, which sets industry-specific sustainability accounting standards that many global companies use in their ESG reporting, last year said it would merge with the International Sustainability Standards Board, a group launched in November by the foundation that oversees the International Accounting Standards Board. The board aims to reduce fragmentation in global ESG standards and reduce greenwashing, ISSB Chairman









      
      Emmanuel Faber



      said.
The ISSB has “work to do” to enhance its global disclosure frameworks after it completes its merger with the Value Reporting Foundation on June 30, Mr. Faber said.
—Jennifer Williams-Alvarez contributed to this article.
Write to Kristin Broughton at Kristin.Broughton@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

