Russian missiles hit a shopping mall in central Ukraine on Monday, according to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky. Photo: Anna Voitenko/Reuters
President Biden called the availability of Covid-19 vaccines for young children a “monumental step,” speaking a few days after the CDC recommended that children as young as 6 months receive the newly authorized shots. Photo: Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images
In a televised event Friday, Vice President Mike Pence was administered the Pfizer-BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine. Second lady Karen Pence and Surgeon General Jerome Adams also received the vaccine. Photo: Andrew Harnik/Associated Press
At LinkedIn's new flagship office, desks are no longer the primary focus. With dozens of different work settings and conference room setups, the company is using its office as a hub for its hybrid workforce. WSJ gets an exclusive look inside. Photo: Karl Mollohan for The Wall Street Journal
Journal Editorial Report: The week's best and worst from Kim Strassel, Kyle Peterson, Mene Ukueberuwa and Dan Henninger. Images: AP/Bloomberg Composite: Mark Kelly
Electric-vehicle startups like Rivian, Lucid, Fisker, Canoo and Lordstown are having to adjust to the realities of making vehicles in a harsh economy. WSJ’s George Downs explains some of the challenges they’re facing and why some even risk going out of business. Photo composite: George Downs
WSJ’s Dion Rabouin breaks down how inflation rises and why the Federal Reserve, Congress, the president and large corporations can all be held accountable. Illustration: Ryan Trefes
Electric-scooter rental companies are hitting speed bumps in the U.S. over safety and other concerns. But in Tel Aviv, one in 10 residents has rented a Bird e-scooter, and the city appears to be embracing them. WSJ’s Jason Bellini takes a look at the challenges and potential lessons of the e-scooter craze.

Luxury home tours on YouTube are exploding, and transforming the way high-end real estate is discovered and sometimes sold. YouTube personality Enes Yilmazer walks us through the making of a video for his channel, which gets an average of 15 million views a month. Photo: Michal Czerwonka for The Wall Street Journal
Reggie Fils-Aimé, former president and COO of Nintendo of America, joins Barron's deputy editor Alex Eule to discuss his unlikely rise to the top, and the risks he took once there to beat the odds and achieve success.
