Rachel Feintzeig is the Work & Life columnist at The Wall Street Journal, writing about the intersection of jobs and everything else. From 2013 to 2020, she covered management and career trends as a reporter for the paper's management bureau, writing about everything from dating at work to people who get tattoos of their company's logo. A former bankruptcy reporter, she joined the company in 2008. 
The ticket is booked, the bag packed. Next, craft the magic email to free you from your inbox.
Rachel Feintzeig
June 27, 2022
‘When you do the math, it really hits.’ After two life-changing years, decisions about how we spend our hours feel even weightier.
Rachel Feintzeig | Photo Illustration by Xander Opiyo for The Wall Street Journal 
June 13, 2022
American workers are terrible at taking lunch breaks, but we don’t have to be. 
Rachel Feintzeig
June 6, 2022
Inbox consuming your life? Take a page from the email slackers and naysayers and try declaring email bankruptcy, setting filters—and just letting it go.
Rachel Feintzeig
May 23, 2022
Firmer work-life boundaries, conversations with other humans, the quiet of a commute. Some remote workers are embracing the benefits of their old work lives.
Rachel Feintzeig |Photo Illustrations by Yasara Gunawardena for The Wall Street Journal 
May 16, 2022
At the office, your colleagues’ bad habits may seem worse after spending so much time apart.
Rachel Feintzeig
May 2, 2022
Feel like your whole identity has been distilled down to work responsibilities and kids? Here’s how to rediscover the “I can’t believe I just did that” feeling.
Rachel Feintzeig
April 18, 2022
During months at home, we got comfortable, and said what we wanted—even when it was a four-letter word. Here’s how that’s going back at the office.
Rachel Feintzeig
April 11, 2022
Find your box of stray cables. Untangle your wired headphones. These professionals say the key to reliability is old-school technology.
Rachel Feintzeig
March 28, 2022
At home, we wear what we want—and research suggests that our work benefits.
Rachel Feintzeig | Photo illustrations by Yasara Gunawardena for The Wall Street Journal 
March 21, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
