Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Sun 5 Jun 2022, 11:10 PM Last updated: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 9:39 AM UAE could be the spot where sub-orbital spaceflight services company Blue Origin sets up a second launch site, according to UAE expat Hamish Harding, who has just returned from space as part of the crew on the company’s New Shepard (NS)-21 flight into space. “I do believe there is a chance we may get a space port in the UAE,” he said. “There are discussions going on. This government is more dynamic than every government I have ever come across in the world. They manage to do everything easily and seamlessly. We could use our deserts quite successfully like how Texas has done.” ALSO READ: A business jet pilot, an avid adventurer and chairman of Action Aviation, Hamish has now become only the second person living in the UAE who has gone to space. He believes that space tourism could become the norm in the UAE. “It is right up our street,” he said. “We do spectacular stuff in the UAE. We should be doing even more in space tourism. There has been a huge buzz about it and I think there are a lot more people who will want to do this now. They are now starting to understand that it is possible to go to space as a civilian. It is really the ultimate adventure.” UAE Experts offer advice for runners to stay safe during summer UAE1 day ago UAE Two-week-long workshop trains frontliners from seven MENA countries UAE1 day ago UAE Drive also broadcasts information in Arabic, English and Chinese UAE1 day ago UAE Seek medical intervention if changes last longer than two weeks UAE2 days ago UAE The money will be used to build a mosque and dig wells in a needy country  UAE2 days ago UAE She highlighted her confidence in the capacities of Emirati women UAE2 days ago UAE Job seekers will be able to upgrade their resume and make it application-ready UAE2 days ago UAE Customers lined up at 4am outside stores on Thursday to buy the sneakers for their official price of Dh549 UAE2 days ago 