Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Partner Content By KT Engage 

 Published: Wed 1 Jun 2022, 8:18 AM Last updated: Wed 1 Jun 2022, 8:19 AM Emarat has partnered with KCG, parent company of locally grown PINZA! and Punz by PINZA!, to expand their healthy and nutritious food offering at around 50 Bakeria locations across Dubai and the Northern Emirates, by launching PINZA! this month. KCG will also be supplying their famous Punz by PINZA! hand-shaped, seeded, rye sourdough sandwich bread to Emarat to increase the options available to the customer at Bakeria sandwich counters. Christoph Winkel, Manager at Emarat's Bakeria commented, "As a passionate food and beverage professional, I have always been aware of PINZA! and what they are doing in the industry, so when the opportunity came around to partner with them and serve their incredible product at our locations, I honestly couldn't have been more thrilled. I am excited to offer their deliciously healthy Pinzas at our Bakeria locations across Dubai, Sharjah and the Northern Emirates." Ever more health conscious and discerning, Emarat customers expect nutritious options and excellent service. The corporation is constantly looking for new products and ideas while keeping convenience at the forefront of their minds. The well-stocked Convenience Stores offer are constantly expanding their offerings and the freshly baked, on-site, on demand PINZA! products are both healthy and nutritious. Ali Khalifa Bin Shaheen Ali Al Shamsi, Director General at Emarat, said: "Leading the corporation into exciting times of growth means encouraging our teams to make bold choices while answering to the demands of the market for excellent and honest products. Emarat, as a federal government cooperation, takes pride in finding and empowering sustainable and locally grown ventures as they show that the UAE has some outstanding, homegrown talent." PINZA! is in a class all of its own. Not a pizza and not a flatbread. It is the modern foodie's answer to a wholesome, guilt-free and ridiculously delicious, hand-kneaded crust. The secret is the 80% water to 20% flour, this ensures a crisp, light, easy-to-digest, healthier and tastier base. Experts scoured Italy for the best cured meats such as the bresaola and beef pepperoni, the best Italian tomatoes and cheeses. Vegetables are sourced locally when possible, ensuring that only the freshest GMO-free veggies and herbs are selected for the toppings. Faisal Yabroudi, COO KCG, said: "This is our first big step into a consumer based, grab-and-go retail environment where customers can order, have their PINZA! cooked fresh and handed to them in a matter of minutes. We can't wait for everyone to try PINZA! at its best - fresh from the oven." Emarat is a multi-channel power and energy company with a much-loved network of service stations and fuel depots across Dubai and the Northern Emirates. Bakeria is a food and beverage vendor located across Emarat sites in Dubai and Northern Emirates, providing customers with a wide range of products from hot and cold drinks to hot soups and freshly prepared sandwiches, plus cooked-to-order pizzas. KCG is the parent company behind award winning global food concepts such as PINZA! and By PINZA! brands (as well as many more). Founded in 2015 by high-school friends Tamer Elkhayat and Faisal Yabroudi, who collectively have the same passion, drive and vision - to change the narrative that 'fast food is unhealthy'. It is the modern foodie's answer to a wholesome, guilt-free and ridiculously delicious, hand-kneaded crust. The secret is the 80% water to 20% flour, this ensures a crisp, light, easy-to-digest, healthier and tastier base! Delectable sandwiches, made to order using the freshest ingredients and layered inside our hand-crafted, artisan seeded bread, baked fresh daily, using our unique blend of speciality Pinza flour to be either panini pressed or oven baked. 