Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Fri 3 Jun 2022, 4:40 PM Last updated: Fri 3 Jun 2022, 10:20 PM An inspiring artist from Ethiopia, who suffers from ankylosing spondylitis, has launched an online gallery to raise funds in support of the Reach Campaign’s efforts to eliminate neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) – river blindness and lymphatic filariasis in African countries. Since the age of 17, Brook Yeshtila has had a rare form of arthritis that has immobilised his entire body except his arms. For the past 10 years, he has suffered from this condition. But he has redirected his energy, keeping an optimistic focus on his blessings, to protect others from NTDs through his artwork. Yeshtila is supporting the Reach Campaign by launching a series of paintings under the theme ‘The Sight’ in Dubai. The gallery specifically aims to raise awareness of river blindness – a disease that currently affects over 200 million people worldwide. From the online auction, 10 per cent of all sales will be allocated to the campaign until September 1, 2022. The online gallery was launched with a 49-piece exhibition at the Media One Hotel in Dubai Marina. Yeshtila said: “This showcase was a big challenge for me and it has created an amazing feeling in my heart. It’s been a lot of pain but I hope this inspires people around the world.” The Reach Campaign sought to continue a journey of philanthropy that started with the UAE’s Founding Father, the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, and his vision for the future of this country. Over the past 10 years, President His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan has committed over $350 million to improving health outcomes across the world. In 2017, Sheikh Mohamed launched the Reaching the Last Mile Fund (RLMF), a 10-year initiative aimed at eliminating river blindness and lymphatic filariasis in African countries. Yeshitila’s artworks can be purchased through: https://www.brookandart.com/shop2/. And direct donation to the campaign can be done by texting the word GIVE to 2424 or visiting: https://www.reachtheend.org/ for more information. ALSO READ: Arts and Culture French-German-Belgian limited series — originally Une Mère Parfaite — explores a mother’s dilemma as she grapples with her 20-year-old daughter being accused of a high-profile murder Arts and Culture2 weeks ago Arts and Culture She is amongst the youngest NFT artists and entrepreneurs in the UAE  Arts and Culture2 weeks ago Arts and Culture It recently won the prestigious L’Œil d’or  award at the Cannes Film Festival  Arts and Culture3 weeks ago Arts and Culture Expert explains how phygital art works, and why it brings digital art closer to collectors Arts and Culture3 weeks ago Arts and Culture First International Congress of Arabic Publishing and Creative Industries begins in Abu Dhabi Arts and Culture1 month ago Arts and Culture Lebanese cartoonist Samer Nehme shows how to string together thoughts into a storyline Arts and Culture1 month ago Arts and Culture The oldest car featured was a 100-year-old 1922 Amilcar C4 from Islamabad Arts and Culture1 month ago Arts and Culture 'Femme nue couchée' is a surrealistic depiction of his muse Marie-Thérèse Walter Arts and Culture1 month ago 