Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 10:37 PM Last updated: Tue 7 Jun 2022, 11:15 AM Apple CEO Tim Cook kicked off WWDC with a pre-recorded presentation with execs revealing the latest versions of Apple’s software for iPhone, iPads, Mac and Watch. Apple Inc on Monday announced that its new MacBook Air laptop was "completely redesigned" around its new M2 silicon processor, which it says is 35% faster than the previous M1 chip. The new laptop will be 2.7 pounds (1.2 kg) and have a 1080p high-definition camera to provide better images on video calls. The MacBook Air will start at $1,199. The M2 chip will also power the 13-inch MacBook Pro, which will start at $1,299 and be available next month. Prices are $100 lower for education customers as Apple targets the back-to-school market. Apples says users can now use iPhone as a webcam with their Mac computers. Here’s what Apple has announced so far: Apple also announced that users can buy now and pay later for purchases. Apple Pay Later will be available anywhere that Apple Pay is accepted and managed through the Apple Wallet. Users can make four equal payments with no interest or fees. The tech giant also added an edit button to iMessage for sent messages, beating Twitter to a long-requested feature. ALSO READ: They also unveiled an updated version of its CarPlay software at its annual software developer conference. The new software for the first time will time power the instrument cluster on a car's dashboard showing speed, directions and gas mileage. Apple said that automakers such as Ford Motor Co, Nissan Motor Co and Honda Motor Corp are planning to use the new software and that cars with it will start shipping next year. Apple also introduced tweaks to popular apps including better rendering of landmarks on its Maps software, live sport scores on Apple TV and making the shared video-watching app available in messaging. The tech giant is also adding a tool called "Safety Check" to turn off access to sensitive information for people in abusive situations. Apple introduced a new technology called Passkeys to replace passwords on websites. Apple said Passkeys are safer than traditional passwords because Passkeys are never stored on a web server. The company said it is working to enable the use of Passkeys with non-Apple devices. Tech Musk listed the approval of the deal by shareholders as one of several “unresolved matters” related to the Twitter deal. Tech5 days ago Tech Creators will be able to earn more as tech giant promises to 'hold off on revenue sharing' until 2024 Tech5 days ago Tech Microsoft scaled down support for the once omnipresent Internet Explorer on Wednesday Tech1 week ago Tech They were fired for making other staff feel "uncomfortable, intimidated and bullied" Tech1 week ago Tech Man accuses Tesla and SpaceX of racketeering for touting Dogecoin and driving up its price Tech1 week ago Tech The gaming market in the UAE generated $344 million in 2020, from mobile, consoles, and PC Tech1 week ago Tech Reports say a smaller 12-inch MacBook is also in the works Tech1 week ago Tech Tesla CEO also addressed layoffs saying that 'costs exceed revenue' right now Tech1 week ago 