Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 6:15 PM Elon Musk is threatening to end his $44 billion agreement to buy Twitter, accusing the company of refusing to give him information about its spam bot accounts. Lawyers for the Tesla and SpaceX CEO made the threat in a letter to Twitter dated Monday that the social platform included in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The letter says Musk has repeatedly asked for the information since May 9, about a month after his offer to buy the company, so he could evaluate how many of the company’s 229 million accounts are fake. A message was left early Monday seeking comment from Twitter. The lawyers say in the letter that Twitter has offered only to provide details about the company’s testing methods. But they contend that’s “tantamount to refusing Mr. Musk’s data requests.” Musk wants data so he can do his own verification of what he says are Twitter’s lax methodologies. ALSO READ: The lawyers say that based on Twitter’s latest correspondence, Musk believes the company is resisting and thwarting his information rights under the April merger agreement. “This is a clear material breach of Twitter’s obligations under the merger agreement and Mr. Musk reserves all rights resulting therefrom, including his right not to consummate the transaction and his right to terminate the merger agreement,” the letter says. Tech Musk listed the approval of the deal by shareholders as one of several “unresolved matters” related to the Twitter deal. Tech5 days ago Tech Creators will be able to earn more as tech giant promises to 'hold off on revenue sharing' until 2024 Tech5 days ago Tech Microsoft scaled down support for the once omnipresent Internet Explorer on Wednesday Tech1 week ago Tech They were fired for making other staff feel "uncomfortable, intimidated and bullied" Tech1 week ago Tech Man accuses Tesla and SpaceX of racketeering for touting Dogecoin and driving up its price Tech1 week ago Tech The gaming market in the UAE generated $344 million in 2020, from mobile, consoles, and PC Tech1 week ago Tech Reports say a smaller 12-inch MacBook is also in the works Tech1 week ago Tech Tesla CEO also addressed layoffs saying that 'costs exceed revenue' right now Tech1 week ago 