Emma Raducanu and Andy Murray both progressed safely into the second round on a packed first day of action in SW19
We’ll bring our live Wimbledon coverage to a close for today. It was a fine first day of action and especially for the big home hopes - Emma Raducanu shone on her Centre Court debut before Andy Murray dropped a set but then progressed with relatively little fuss. I say it was a fine first day – there was of course a massive cloudburst and a fairly long rain delay earlier on – but it wouldn’t be Wimbledon without rain, would it? Thanks for reading and we’ll see you tomorrow for more.
Having been 5-2 up and passed up two set points, Watson has just lost the first set to Korpatsch on a tiebreaker. That one will sting a bit ... but can she put that behind her and bounce back in the second set?
Murray speaks to Leigh McKenzie out on Centre Court: “It’s amazing to be back out here again with a full crowd ... amazing atmosphere ... obviously I’m getting on a bit now, I don’t know how many more opportunities I’ll get to play here, so I want to make the most of it every time I’m here.
“He likes playing on the grass ... as the match went on I felt a bit more comfortable ... I did well to get through it.”
“There are always nerves, pressure, butterflies and stress before the first match ... I’ve been at the venue a lot in the last couple of weeks. It’s great to get a win under my belt and hopefully I’ll play better from here on.”
And there it is. There were worrying signs when Murray dropped the first set, and his body language was not looking the best ... but here he is with two match points. He thumps what looks to be a good ace down the middle but it’s checked and called out. On the next point Duckworth challenges a line call, there is a pause as it’s checked by Hawkeye, and it’s shown to be good. Murray is through to the second round! He will face John Isner, the world No 24 with the booming serve.
*Murray 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 5-4 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
The answer is yes, someone can find the break, and it is Murray. He forces it to 15-30 on the Duckworth serve – and a double fault gives him two potentially crucial break points. Duckworth saves the first one but then another nervy double fault allows Murray to serve for the match ...
Murray 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 4-4 *Duckworth (*denotes next server)
It’s still nip and tuck. All square at 4-4. Can someone seize the initiative and find the break?
On Court 1, Heather Watson is engaged in a fierce first-set battle with Tamara Korpatsch of Germany. It’s 6-5 to Watson with Korpatsch serving.
Murray 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 3-3 *Duckworth (*denotes next server)
Duckworth is climbing into his groundstrokes and putting some more power into them, but also mixing it up nicely here and there ... This is showing all the hallmarks of a textbook Murray five-set epic as things stand.
*Murray 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 2-3 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
“Duckworth has regrouped here, and he’s coming at Murray again,” observes John McEnroe on commentary for the BBC. Indeed he has. Murray is being forced on to the back foot a little more. But he remains in control overall.
*Murray 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 1-2 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
A hold of serve apiece and we move deeper into the fourth set. Murray has been in the ascendancy for a while now, but this one is far from over.
“As a six-time champion here, Novak Djokovic has experienced most things it is possible to feel at Wimbledon. But when he stepped on to court today he did so with a little trepidation, unsure what to expect from himself after not playing any grass-court warm-up tournaments and unsure what to expect from the crowd.”
Simon Cambers reports:
*Murray 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, 0-1 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
The roof successfully closed, Murray v Duckworth is back on. The Australian holds serve to open the fourth set. 
The No 10 seed moves into the second round.
Murray wins the third set! Murray 4-6, 6-3, 6-2 Duckworth
Murray wins a cracking point to begin, expertly taking the heat out of a Duckworth smash, and then passing him confidently for 15-0. That sets the tone and Murray, having fallen a set behind, is now a set to the good. 
There will now be a pause while the Centre Court roof is closed.
*Murray 4-6, 6-3, 5-2 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
Duckworth isn’t happy. He is in fact now suggesting to the umpire that had Murray asked for the roof to be closed, it would have happened, while his request was turned down. Whether there is an element of truth there or not, he is not helping himself by getting irritated about it.
Murray 4-6, 6-3, 5-1 *Duckworth (*denotes next server)
Duckworth crushes a couple of forehands and then forces Murray to come into the net, where he puts away a lovely passing shot that sneaks into the corner. Very impressive from Murray. However, Duckworth takes it to deuce, when Murray digs out a big serve and grabs a game point. Duckworth answers straight back, destroying a big backhand down the line to take it back to deuce. A protracted deuce battle ensues but Murray closes it out - and moves a step closer to winning the third set.
*Murray 4-6, 6-3, 4-1 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
Duckworth, having fallen a double break down, seems to want the roof closed, because the natural light is fading and he’s struggling to see the ball. The match supervisor comes over for a chat, but Duckworth does not get his wish. They will play on for the moment but the roof will presumably be closed before too long.
Murray 4-6, 6-3, 3-1 *Duckworth (*denotes next server)
A cheeky underarm serve from Murray appears on the second point of the game. He wins the point, but it goes to 30-30, and then deuce. Ultimately Murray holds – and opens up a two-game lead.
A break for Murray! That will make him feel better after he missed an opportunity earlier in the set. He is in control of this third set ...
Meanwhile, Jannik Sinner (10) is two sets up on Wawrinka on Court 2.
The German No 15 seed makes serene progress into the second round.
Murray 4-6, 6-3, 1-1 *Duckworth (*denotes next server)
Another strong service game from Murray and we’re all square in the second set.
*Murray 4-6, 6-3, 0-1 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
It’s deuce on Duckworth’s serve. Murray can’t get a big first serve back and he roars with frustration. He had his opponent at 15-40 before that, and it’s a missed opportunity. On the plus side he is creating opportunities for himself.
Hurkacz, having fallen at the first hurdle today against Davidovich-Fokina, is already looking forward to next year.
Rollercoaster with no happy ending. Thank you @Wimbledon See you next year! pic.twitter.com/fGGEJkKMkk
Murray wins the second set! Murray 4-6, 6-3 Duckworth
Murray can serve for the set. Duckworth dumps one in the net for 15-0, then cannot control a return and hits long for 30-0. Murray belts another big wide serve which proves to be unreturnable – 40-0. Duckworth misjudges a drop shot, it falls short of the net, and that’s the second set for Murray!
On Court 1 in the women’s singles, Angelique Kerber (15) took the first set 6-0 against Kristina Mladenovic, and they’re now locked at 4-4 in the second set.
Murray 4-6, 5-2 *Duckworth (*denotes next server)
Duckworth can only muster a solitary point as Murray holds again, ending it with a booming wide serve.
*Murray 4-6, 4-2 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
There it is! Duckworth hits wide and the Scot has the breakthrough in the second set. “He looks like he’s on his last legs,” observes Cotter on commentary, despite that success for Murray, and he has a point. He is moving fairly well during the points but when he’s walking around the court, he looks like he barely has the energy to walk.
On Court 2 in the men’s singles, Jannik Sinner (10) and Stan Wawrinka have a set each: 7-5, 4-6.
Murray 4-6, 3-2 Duckworth (*denotes next server)
Murray edges in front again with another hold of serve. He doesn’t look wholly comfortable, though, and at times is slumping his shoulders and trudging around the court with seemingly little energy.
The 19-year-old Spaniard has enough, in the end, to make his way past the tall German and he is into the second round.
