Elisa Longo Borghini won a hilltop finish on Black Mountain to win stage five of the Women’s Tour in Carmarthenshire and set up a grandstand finale for the overall title in Oxford on Saturday.
The Italian, riding for Trek-Segafredo, held off the challenge of Australia’s Grace Brown (FDJ Nouvelle-Aquitaine Futuroscope), who retained her overall lead. Brown picked up vital bonus seconds by finishing third, behind her fellow contender Kasia Niewiadoma (Canyon/SRAM).
After the top three’s podium finish on Friday, there is nothing to separate Brown and Longo Borghini at the top of the leaderboard, while Poland’s Niewiadoma is just two seconds behind in third place. Saturday’s final stage starts in Chipping Norton and finishes in Oxford city centre, with a total of 16 bonus seconds available.
On Friday’s 106.6-km stage, which began at Pembrey country park, the early leader, Joss Lowden, was caught by 11 chasers after 43km, with the peloton, led by Brown’s FDJ teammates, just over a minute behind.
Colombia's Juan Sebastián Molano was disqualified from the Critérium du Dauphiné on Friday after the UAE-Emirates cyclist hit another rider twice in the sixth stage.
Molano was spotted arguing with Hugo Page (Intermarche-Wanty-Gobert) late in the sixth stage before shaking his bike and striking him on the helmet. The 27-year-old then raced to Page's team bus to angrily remonstrate further, before striking him on the head again.
'On the run-in to the finish it was fast and tense, and in the heat of the moment I made a dangerous mistake," Molano said in a statement. 'I'd like to apologise to Hugo Page and to all the riders for what happened. I understand why I was disqualified and can only say I regret it.'
In quotes reported by VeloNews, Page said: 'he wasn't happy and he gave me a good whack on the head. I didn't react because it's not in the spirit of the sport. What he did is unacceptable. He insulted me, but it's not my problem. I'm only interested in my own sprint.'
France's Valentin Ferron (Total Energies) won Friday's stage in Gap after a successful breakaway. Belgium's Wout van Aert is the overall leader, with Mattia Cattaneo and Primoz Roglic just over a minute behind.
The leading group, which also included Shari Bossuyt, Christine Majerus, Krista Doebel-Hickok, Mikayla Harvey and Ellen van Dijk, extended the gap to one minute and 20 seconds with 50km to go. But the breakaway group with 23km remaining as the pack approached the foot of Black Mountain.
Van Dijk set the pace up the long climb to the summit to stretch out the peloton, with all the contenders still in the group with three kilometres remaining. Longo Borghini emerged strongest in the final push for the finish, with general classification rivals Brown and Niewiadoma close behind.
“I feel like I won already a stage when we won with Lizzie [Deignan] in 2019 but it’s a very nice feeling,” Longo Borghini told the tour’s website. “It was very windy up the climb – mostly a head wind, so it was really hard. In the end, I just trusted my sprint and I went full gas at 150m to go.
“I just wanted to win because I wanted to pay off all the work that my team did – we were really committed from the very beginning of the race. At the moment I want to to relax and enjoy the victory, and then tomorrow is tomorrow. We will think about it tomorrow.”
Brown, who keeps the leader’s jersey going into the final stage, said: “I knew that if I wanted to stay ahead in time then I needed to come second on Elisa’s wheel, but then it worked out that if I came third we were equal.
“The Cotswolds are almost a second home, because my husband’s family are from the area, so I’m going to have a lot of support out on the road and it will be special to be in the leader’s jersey.”
