New Zealand end day three with a 137-run lead and five wickets in hand at Headingley
Here’s the report.
Burnton and beer snakes.
The game is finely poised after three days. You’d imagine England are a Mitchell and a Blundell away from forcing a 3-0 win in this series. New Zealand have a lead of 137 runs and will need their two batting stalwarts to put on another hefty-ish partnership to set England a challenging target. No matter what they post this amped up England side will go for, be in no doubt about that. It’s all simmering nicely for the final couple of days in LS6. 
I’m going to take advantage of the slightly early finish and head off for bath time. I can hear my 14 month old sploshing away down the hall which I’ll take as my cue to bid farewell. 
Thanks for your company as ever, I’ll be back tomorrow with Daniel Harris. Until then, goodbye!
It’s dark and grimy in Leeds and that’s yer lot. 
Proper pantomime. Potts is pinged through mid-wicket by Blundell as he searches for that full yorker. Next ball, Potts very nearly has his man, a toe cruncher and a huge appeal but England know it was just sliding down leg and opt not to review. The rain starts to fall and Potts tries to gee up the crowd for what will be the last ball before the umpires take them off - as the crowd reach the apex of their wooaaahhhs and Potts enters his gather, Blundell plays the role of the villain and steps away from his crease. Boooooooo! Potts has a word but it is all good natured. Sure enough, Umpire Marias Erasmus sends for the covers. A riveting couple of hours of play, England have grabbed hold of this game. 
50th over: New Zealand 164-5 (Mitchell 3, Blundell 0) Just a couple off Leach. Dark clouds looming. England rushing between overs to get another from Potts before the wet stuff arrives. 
50th over: New Zealand 162-5 (Mitchell 3, Blundell 0) Very tidy again from Potts, he doesn’t have the wicket but I’d argue this has been Potts’ most impressive Test performance so far. 
49th over: New Zealand 161-5 (Mitchell 2, Blundell 0) Leach finishes a tidy, wicket-taking over and returns to fine leg to a huge ovation. He’s having an excellent game, fair play to him too - if ever a cricketer deserved a run of good karma, it’s Leach. 
A reminder of how Henry Nicholls was dismissed in the first innings... 🙃📲 Watch Today at the Test on @BBCiPlayer at 19:00 BST#BBCCricket #ENGvNZ pic.twitter.com/SgQLNfLixo
No sooner are Nicholls’ damning statistics against left-arm spin reeled off (they are bad) he spoons a simple catch back to Leach. Good again from Stokes too, who must surely have been made aware. This has been an excellent hour for England, the New Zealand lead stands at a very gettable 130 runs. Mitchell and Blundell come together at 161-5. Timestamp this post for posterity...
48th over: New Zealand 160-4 ( Nicholls 7, Mitchell 1) Potts is right on the button again, he rasps one past Mitchell’s outside edge and follows it up with two balls aimed right in at the toes. Mitchell finally gets a full one away to get off the mark. 
Thanks for sending in your collective nouns for umpires: 
John Starbuck: “In baseball, it’s ‘a crew’ of umpires. Possible alternatives include ‘a blind’ which seems rather harsh. It ought to be ‘a decision’” 
John Burton suggests a ‘grumble’ - at his club on a Saturday evening anyway. 
A hungover Aled Walker summons up enough energy to suggest a ‘mull’ of umpires. Well done Aled, solidarity. 
47th over: New Zealand 159-4 ( Nicholls 7, Mitchell 0) This is a gripping passage of play, the game in the balance - England, Broad and the crowd throwing everything at New Zealand who have their ‘Moose in shining armour’ at the crease in the form of Daryl Mitchell. The lead is 128 runs. Don’t go anywhere. 
46th over: New Zealand 155-4 (Nicholls 3, Mitchell 0) Good stuff from Matt Potts who is trying to zero in on Daryl Mitchell’s shin. Potts had him in that fashion in the first innings remember, if only England had gone for a review. 
45th over: New Zealand 154-4 (Nicholls 1, Mitchell) “Stuart Broad is doing his best Andre Previn” notes Mark Butcher as Broad begins to conduct the crowd into a frenzy. Stokes, Root and Bairstow all join in and just as the delirium reaches fever pitch... new batter Mitchell steps away. Great drama. Well doused by Mitchell. 
44th over: New Zealand 153-4 ( Nicholls 1, Mitchell) Potts completes a wicket maiden. 
Potts has Williamson AGAIN! Fine captaincy by Stokes who whips Root out of the attack and brings on his Durham tyro to have a dart at Williamson. Potts must see bunny ears poking out of Kane’s helmet, he nicks him off and gives out a huge roar! Williamson was forcing at a back of a length delivery that just held its line. The Kiwi captain throws his eyes to the heavens as he drags himself from the field. 
43rd over: New Zealand 153-3 (Williamson 48, Nicholls 1) Broad is nagging and it is another maiden. England sniff an opportunity to get into the Kiwi engine room here. We all know who is in next... 
42nd over: New Zealand 153-3 (Williamson 48, Nicholls 1) Henry Nicholls is the new man and is off the mark straight away with a single. 
GoldenArm strikes! Joe Root picks up Conway with the first ball after the rain break! Conway gets an inside edge on a stock delivery and Ollie Pope takes a brilliant catch at bat-pad, his knuckles grazing the turf as he scoops up the ball. Root was ticking earlier after his dropped catch but the impish smile is back after that crucial wicket. 
Joe Root has the ball and three balls left in the over. The sun is out, PLAY!
The covers are coming off! The sun is out, fickle Yorkshire weather. What’s the collective noun for Umpires? There’s a huddle of them on the outfield overseeing the tarpaulin removal. We’ll have play at 5.10pm all being well. 
41st over: New Zealand 147-2 (Williamson 47, Conway 11) Leach back into the attack and he is accurate, hitting the same spot six balls in a row. Three maidens on the trot. It is blowing a gale now at Headingley and very dark. The umpires get together and tell Stokes that he needs to bowl spin so Root is called for. He only manages three balls before the rains come and the players scurry off. 
RAIN. 
40th over: New Zealand 147-2 (Williamson 47, Conway 11) England beginning to build pressure. Overton sends down a maiden. 
Rain incoming… pic.twitter.com/nvUZBtGJKS
Something else building too...
39th over: New Zealand 147-2 (Williamson 47, Conway 11) Broad has packed the off-side field and hangs the ball outside Conway’s off stump. The Kiwi is not for biting though. A maiden. 
38th over: New Zealand 147-2 (Williamson 47, Conway 11) Stokes nearly pulls off a spectacular diving catch off a full-blooded pull from Conway! Fingertips only I think but he did well to get anywhere in the same postcode as the ball fizzed to the fence. Williamson heads towards fifty, a fine glance brings him four off the last ball. 
37th over: New Zealand 141-2 (Williamson 43, Conway 10) Williamson and Broad continue their tussle, Broad beats his edge again but Kane hits back with a glide for four off a ball on fifth stump. 
36th over: New Zealand 137-2 (Williamson 39, Conway 10) Overton is enjoying his work here. Shirt untucked and smeared with cherry marks, he resembles a menacing butcher. Conway fences another short one away for four. 
Sun out again at Headingley and Azeem Rafiq is in attendance: 
35th over: New Zealand 132-2 (Williamson 38, Conway 6) Broad again after tea and he shows his cunning - bowling a cutter that beats Williamson’s outside edge. A single brings Conway on strike and he looks ill at ease against a back of the length ball. England trying to prise open the door. 
34th over: New Zealand 131-2 (Williamson 37, Conway 6) Crunch! Devon Conway is felled by a Jamie Overton bouncer, a vicious delivery to get first up. He seems to be ok, concussion test and new helmet called for. After the delay the batter takes one straight in the mid-riff too. Overton has his dander up here. Conway fences at the next which brings him a somewhat spawny four. A nudge into the covers brings two off the last ball and the twelve minute over to a close. 
First ball after tea and Jamie Overton does the business! Latham had played wonderfully this afternoon but the break has done him no good at all as he nibbles at a length ball and Bairstow pouches the catch. 
Tone White parps up amusingly from somewhere near Narbonne:
“Mr. Wallace, comforting to know that your treasured OBOing is coming from Sarf Lunnon. As an Essex boy (Chumf’d) who moved to South London, I’m always wary of anything from the Norf, the locations remind me of ailments :
‘my dad’s wearing a truss until they can operate on his Finchley’‘Have you anything for Pinner’s worms, please?’‘I think my Camden’s burst!’Tony, ex Blackheath, now Peyriac de Mer, get out of that!”
Shades of Pete n Dud, Tone. BTW... have you heard about Mr Totteridge’s Whetstone’s? ‘Orrible.
33rd over: New Zealand 125-1 (Latham 76, Williamson 37) Williamson drives Broad’s first ball of the over away for four, just to help the bowler’s FANTASTIC mood... it’s the only action of the over, five dots and the umpires call TEA. 
New Zealand’s session. They lead by 94 runs and have nine wickets in the hutch. 
Time for a brew, back soon. 
32nd over: New Zealand 121-1 (Latham 76, Williamson 33) Immediate penance? Root is brought on to bowl the next over and chunters away throughout. Broad is stood at mid-on and it is noted that the two men don’t catch each others eye. Latham gets a sweep away fine for four. 
Do we have any Glastonbury revellers tuning into the OBO? Having a breather in a shady/dry spot somewhere on Worthy Farm? 
31st over: New Zealand 116-1 (Latham 72, Williamson 32) Broad replaces Stokes but it seemingly makes no odds to Latham who drives him the bandana’d one through the same mid-wicket area for four more. DROP! Gah! Root spills a simple chance at first slip, Broad turns and walks back to his mark in disgust. Root is livid with himself, it was a regulation chance and would have been Broad’s 550th Test scalp. Awkward.
30th over: New Zealand 110-1 (Latham 66, Williamson 32) Leach is quietly impressive. He joins the dots and sends down back to back maidens. 
29th over: New Zealand 110-1 (Latham 66, Williamson 32) Stokes is going at 8s an over from his short spell here. Latham drives him through mid-on for another four. Athers on comms reckons that this match is right in the balance, right here, right now. 
Have you tried this yet? 😉(via @leicsccc) pic.twitter.com/qr776dKTMB
Root > Kohli empirical proof. 
28th over: New Zealand 106-1 (Latham 62, Williamson 32) A maiden from Leach keeps Williamson honest. 
27th over: New Zealand 106-1 (Latham 62, Williamson 32) Double purr! Latham plays identical on-side drives off Stokes and both go to almost exactly the same spot on the mid-wicket boundary. Effortless from the left-hander. Nasser reckons England have to drag their length back as the ball is doing nada. 
26th over: New Zealand 98-1 (Latham 54, Williamson 32) Williamson light on his feet once more, rocking back to scythe Leach away to the point boundary. Grey clouds roll in but this pitch looks flat as owt oif you’re asking me, which you weren’t. Good absorbing Test match cricket though. Let’s hope the rain stays away. 
25th over: New Zealand 92-1 (Latham 54, Williamson 26) More accurate from Stokes, Williamson leans on a full one to pick up three down the ground. 
Ben Foakes has back stiffness and has returned to the team hotel, he’ll not be back on the pitch today. Pass the Voltarol and get well soon.
24th over: New Zealand 89-1 (Latham 54, Williamson 23) Leach twirls, Latham sweeps for four. 
Jeremy Boyce emails in from (Sunny?) Southern France: 
“Get it up there! I was saying the same thing for 2 days now, first about young Pottsy/Potty/Pottsdam when he was bowling too short on day 1, then about the Kiwis when they had England at 56 - 6. this is ‘Eadingley, it’s made for crikkit. Old school. if your technique is good enough, you can bat or bowl as you like oop ‘ere. there are rewards for all.”
23rd over: New Zealand 85-1 (Latham 50, Williamson 23) Hmmm Stokes not quite at the races. His first ball is too full and driven away deliciously by Williamson. Four of the most graceful runs you’ll see. Kane then flicks a length ball away to the midwicket fence for four more. Stokes does the teapot. A no-ball is followed by a single and then Latham gets in on the act, a back foot punch from his tippy-toes goes to the rope. More teapotting. Latham brings up his FIFTY next ball with a quick single. Well ‘badded’ as they say these days. 
22nd over: New Zealand 70-1 (Latham 45, Williamson 14) Eight off Leach’s over as Latham sweeps him away for a couple and then pokes a single. Williamson, who looks to be rediscovering his touch, rocks back to glide The Nut away for a four through point. A warm cheer rumbles around the ground as it is announced Captain Stokes is coming on for a first bowl in this Test match. 
21st over: New Zealand 62-1 (Latham 42, Williamson 9) JOverton is very enamoured with the middle of the wicket as he bangs down ball after ball into the guts of the pitch. One is short enough to be called wide. Get eeeet up there lad. 
20th over: New Zealand 61-1 (Latham 42, Williamson 9)
Thanks Niall and hello OBO. Jim here in a balmy south London. What have we here? A sedate passage of play? All the better for a couple of OBO riffs. Do get in touch on the emails or the twitters. 
Yorkshire looks a picture under bright blue skies, I used to live a bread cake’s (bread roll, bap, cob, barm... other names for bread products are available) chuck from Headingley and today my 10 year old nephew Alfie, his bezza Thomas and a gaggle of their teammates from Adel CC under 11s are watching their first Test match. Lovely stuff... though I’ve just had a text off my brother to say they’ve all headed down under the Howard Stand to play an impromptu match! Too slow this passage for the youth of today eh, they demand ‘Baz Ball’ at all times.
Leach twirls a maiden in the sun. Bliss. 
