Ilkay Gündogan and Josh Kimmich were outstanding for Germany while Kyle Walker stood out for his defensive timing
Manuel Neuer Sensational save denied Kane an equaliser and rendered his earlier error, which the England captain did not punish, a distant memory. 7
Lukas Klostermann Might have expected a tougher night against Sterling but stood up to the challenge well and was rarely outdone for speed or ingenuity. 6
Antonio Rüdiger Made a couple of well-timed interventions and his raking passes out wide started a number of threatening attacks. 7
Nico Schlotterbeck Clumsy penalty concession marred an otherwise sound night from the new Borussia Dortmund signing, who looked classy on the ball. 6
David Raum Impressive showing from the Hoffenheim left-back, who provided good support on the overlap and dealt well with the threat of Saka. 7
Joshua Kimmich Makes every element of midfield play look easy, including the kind of visionary pass that created Hofmann’s goal. A class apart, in tandem with Gündogan. 8
Ilkay Gündogan Probably the slickest player on the pitch. Classy operator who set a brisk tempo early on and barely wasted a pass all night. 8
Jonas Hofmann First-half strike was correctly disallowed for offside but he produced one that counted soon enough. Just reward for his exploitation of space. 7
Thomas Müller Denied by what turned out to be a crucial Pickford save at 1-0. Movement and combinations customarily clever. 7
Jamal Musiala Showed England what they are missing with some sublime footwork in the first half and was perceptive in possession too. Shot half-chance straight at Pickford. 8
Kai Havertz Intelligent movement pulled England’s defence around and contributed to Hofmann’s strike. Such a graceful player to watch but direct goal threat limited. 7
Substitutes: Werner (for Musiala 65) Pickford was out quickly when his chance for glory arrived, 6; Gnabry (for Hofmann 65) A threat on the counter but could not make an impact, 6; Goretzka (for Müller 76) Arrived as England began to grasp the initiative, 6; Sané (for Gündogan, 83) Too late to make a meaningful contribution, 6.
Jordan Pickford Unconvincing behind a stretched defence. Early fumble, iffy distribution and might have done better for goal. Saves from Müller and Werner partly atoned. 5
Kyle Walker The best of England’s starting players. Few chances to shine going forward but his defensive timing and recovery were exceptional. 7
John Stones Largely stood firm at the back and might have fared better in possession if there had been more midfield movement ahead of him. 6
Harry Maguire A shaky night, although made some good clearances. Got lucky with disallowed goal, less so when Havertz dragged him out of position for the one that counted. 5
Kieran Trippier Ran off first-half knock and performed solidly on his wrong side. Hofmann asked questions throughout but he was not the main culprit for Germany’s goal. 6
Declan Rice Kept busy by Germany’s movement, Musiala outfoxing him on one occasion, and struggled to help England progress in possession, but workrate unquestionable. 6
Kalvin Phillips Tried to run off a heavy early knock, but night ended prematurely and he hobbled off to be replaced by Bellingham. 6
Bukayo Saka Flickered into life just before half-time with a shot that was beaten away and another that flew wide, but otherwise a quiet night. 6
Mason Mount Did well to set up Saka for first-half chance and pressed smartly at times, but rarely imposed himself on the game. 6
Raheem Sterling Quiet night for the returning forward, who passed up an early chance to shoot and ballooned over in the second half. 5
Harry Kane Buried the penalty, having been denied brilliantly by Neuer earlier. Also missed golden chance, although it may not have counted, and was not at his sharpest. 6
Substitutes: Bellingham (for Phillips, 14) Dortmund factor meant a hostile reception for the midfielder – some good defensive work but a tough night against fine opponents, 6; Grealish (for Mount, 73) Gave England some badly needed impetus and deserved an assist for Kane, 7; Bowen (for Saka, 80) One fizzing late cross almost produced an equaliser, 6.
