An amazing knock of 150 from Marizanne Kapp rescued South Africa, who slumped to 89-5 before they were eventually bowled out for 284
Righto, that’s us done for today – but join us again tomorrow from 10am BST, for England’s reply. It promises to be another ripper, but in the meantime check back for our report, which’ll be up shortly. 
Oh, and...
A bit of reading for you:
When all’s said and done – when this match is long forgotten - we’ll still be talking about Marizanne Kapp’s immense knock of 150 off 213 – to do that, from the position she was in, is extremely special. “Absolutely brilliant,” Kate Cross tells Sky, noting how well she manouevered the ball and how hard she and her mates had to work for their wickets. They’ve not used the duke’s ball for long, but have worked out that there’s always a good delivery in it, so there’s no need to search for it. She also mentions the weirdness of being out there without Shrubsole and Brunt, whose emotional speech before play got the team going. 
We were meant to have a hundred overs today, but maybe because it’s past 6pm, they’ve ended a brilliant first day right as we’re buzzing for the end of it. But worry not: tomorrow soon come. 
Full, straight, timber. 
92nd over: South Africa 284-9 (Sekhukhune 9, Mlaba 8) Finally, Cross gets her go with the newish ball, and deploying a lesson she might’ve learnt from her captain, Mlaba frees arms to swipe a wide one, going hard enough so that he thick edge zooms over the cordon and to the fence for four. 
91st over: South Africa 280-9 (Sekhukhune 9, Mlaba 4) There’s not much happening off the pitch here, which I guess is good news for England given they’ll soon be batting on it. The sun and wind have helped, drying out the square and the outfield, but there might be rain this time tomorrow – let’s hope not. Anyhow, Sciver, who’s bowled well today, ploughs through another maiden, her sixth, and almost snags Sekhukhune with a fuller one, but an inside edge does just enough to prevent both bowled and lb. 
90th over: South Africa 280-9 (Sekhukhune 9, Mlaba 4) Bell finds some inswing, then Mlaba’s pad; there’s an appeal, but also an inside edge. So next, Bell tries for the corridor, only for Mlaba to greet her with an extra cover drive for four; that’s a lovely shot. 
89th over: South Africa 276-9 (Sekhukhune 9, Mlaba 0) Sciver replaces Wong and is immediately into her groove before switching to around with two slips, a gully and a short leg. We then cut to Brunt in the crowd, hollering advice with another fresh pint in hand, while our commentators wonder if South Africa will fancy a go at England’s openers tonight; if so, they’ll have to lose this last wicket soon, because there are only 11 overs left in the day. Maiden. 
88th over: South Africa 276-9 (Sekhukhune 9, Mlaba 0) My system crashed while I was describing that wicket, but Mlaba sees out a wicket maiden – though she survives an appeal for lb, the ball again going down. 
WHAT A GRAB! Kapp drives, looking to go over the infield, but Beaumont leaps right to snaffle a screamer, two-handed an in mid-air. Kapp, though, is furious with her paltry total, offering instruction to Sekhukhune before stalking off playing the shot over the top for four that she intended. That was an astounding innings, and it took an astounding catch to finish it. 
87th over: South Africa 276-8 (Kapp 150, Sekhukhune 9) Kapp strokes the first ball to the cover sweeper, opting not to expose Sekhukhune to five balls of Wong by taking a single. But when she does similar, she raises her 150– oof madone, this is an innings – because there might be two on; there are not. We learn from our commentators that Mithali Raj was the last women to score a Test 150 against England, and that was in 2002, which tells you just what a ridiculous effort this is. 
86th over: South Africa 275-8 (Kapp 149, Sekhukhune 9) That was a better over from Bell, and a maiden. 
Missing the top of leg - you could see off stump on impact.
I’d be shocked if this is out. 
86th over: South Africa 275-8 (Kapp 149, Sekhukhune 9) Knight opted to bowl cross just before the new ball, meaning she’s schlepped through 17 overs today. However I don’t think it’ll be long before we see her again because this pair are ensconced and England haven’t looked especially like dismissing them. You can see by her increasingly animated gestures and leaves that Sekhukhune is enjoying herself, but when Bell goes around, she wears one on the pad. It looked like it was going well down to me, and the umpire rejects the eventuating appeal. 
85th over: South Africa 275-8 (Kapp 149, Sekhukhune 9) Wong tries going fuller and finds a little bit of swing in the process, Kapp opting to leave alone one just outside off, then going at a wider one and missing before ignoring one you expect her to smash. But when one appears on her stumps, forcing her to play, she shimmies feet out of the road to drive four through mid off. Can Bell now make the most of an over at Sekhukhune? 
84th over: South Africa 271-8 (Kapp 145, Sekhukhune 9) Kapp is looking to score, picking out fielders at the start of the over before getting just part of a straight drive; the ball drops safe, they run one, and are negotiating the new rambutan pretty well. England need something.
83rd over: South Africa 270-8 (Kapp 144, Sekhukhune 9) In all the rhapsodising of Kapp – believe, she’s earned it – I’ve not noted Sekhukhune’s solidity, which has been impressive. And have a lool! As I type that, Wong slings down another full toss that looks to have slipped out of the hand but was probably an attempted yorker – she’s got to stop that – Sekhukhune simply opens the face, using the pace to eases four through point. The partnership is now 43 off 53. 
82nd over: South Africa 266-8 (Kapp 144, Sekhukhune 5) Lauren Bell takes the new ball from the other end, and after a decent start delivers one directly into the slot, Kapp hitting with the line over midwicket for four. Then, when Bell does similarly – it’s another half-volley, a bit straight but still eminently cartable, she smites four more over the same area. 
81st over: South Africa 258-8 (Kapp 136, Sekhukhune 5) It’s Wong who gets the new ball, and that’s a nice, positive decision from Knight – she’s quick and on a debut buzz, augmented by the belting catch she just held, plus she’s also the kind of personality who makes things happen. And she starts with a jaffa, jagging away from Kapp’s forward push and only just clearing the stumps. Two more dots follow, then a single to square leg gives Sekhukhune two balls to survive; the first is leg-side so she goes to pull, missing but gloving four to finest leg – Jones should’ve stopped that, I think – then does really well to dig out a yorker. That had a bit of tail on it too, I think, and Kapp v Wong sounds like the duel we all need to schlep us through the end of our working days. 
80th over: South Africa 253-8 (Kapp 135, Sekhukhune 1) What I’ve especially enjoyed about Kapp’s innings is how comfortable she looks hitting wherever the gap is. She prefers the off side, but when Ecclestone directs one towards her pads, she glances it away for four to deep backward square with minimum fuss and maximum prejudice. A single follows, Sekhukhune sees away two dots, and South Africa are cruising ... but here comes the new stone. 
79th over: South Africa 248-8 (Kapp 130, Sekhukhune 1) Lamb flights one that Kapp drags to deep square; they run one. The new ball is due on one more over, and I’m sure England will take it. 
78th over: South Africa 247-8 (Kapp 129, Sekhukhune 1) Ecclestone offers air, so Kapp drops into the offside and runs; this is great stuff, especially given South Africa were 84-4 at lunch. With Sekhukhune on strike, England put in a silly point, a short leg and a short midwicket, and she splices the first ball she faces in the over, but it misses short leg, then the final delivery is defended well enough/ 
77th over: South Africa 246-8 (Kapp 128, Sekhukhune 1) Lamb into the attack, and after Sekhukhune gets off the back with a square drive for one, she again zetzes down the ground, this time over the bowler’s head, for four. A single follows, and an acceptable total is slowly turning into a more than useful one. 
76th over: South Africa 240-8 (Kapp 123, Sekhukhune 0) Ecclestone, who I thought would bowl until the new globule, returns; I wonder if she’ll try and tempt Kapp out. She was tossing them up in her previous spell and starts this doing the same, then she tries a drag down dart ... and Kapp goes at it, edging hard for four. So Ecclestone slights another ... and Kapp goes down on one knee to launch a brilliant slog-sweep towards wide long-on for a one-bounce four. What a knock this is – and it’s getting better! 
75th over: South Africa 232-8 (Kapp 115, Sekhukhune 0) Oooh yeah, Kapp absolutely cleanses the first ball of Cross’ over through cover for four, a serious statement of superiority. A single to square leg follows, and whatever happens from here – the new ball is due in five overs – she’s taken her team from disaster to competitive. 
“@DanielHarris: @GregHerbert @danbrettig Most of the best catches originate from classic misjudgment #heartinmouth boundary catches
So many of the best catches from misjudgements, and when Jafta goes to work Cross to leg, she instead imparts a leading edge that soars towards cover. Wong looks to have walked past it, but just as it seems that the chance is gone, she arches her back, hurls back a hand, and catches superbly. 
74th over: South Africa 227-7 (Kapp 110, Jafta 4) Cross offers width so Kapp flashes, edging just clear of Sciver in the gully. Kapp looks like she’ll take on anything outside a fifth-stump line and England’s field now reflects that, two slips, a gully, cover and mid off. 
73rd over: South Africa 226-7 (Kapp 109, Jafta 4) Kapp turns around the corner for one, giving Jafta four balls to face – perhaps the solid and composed way she’s played since coming in has convinced her captain she can be trusted. And, shonuff, she sees out the over. 
72nd over: South Africa 225-7 (Kapp 108, Jafta 4) Cross has two slips as she tears in at Jafta, then we cut to the great Katherine Brunt, chilling in the stands with her mates, pint in hand. It’s lovely to see – not many have done more to earn their retirement. I daresay she’d fancy a go at Jafta were she not otherwise engaged, but again, the batter plays out a maiden comfortably enough.
71st over: South Africa 225-7 (Kapp 108, Jafta 4) Davidson-Richards is bowling better now than she did this morning, cracking Jafta on the knee a second time. But when the appeal’s rejected, there’s no review because, like the overturned dismissal, the ball was going down. Jafta then drives nicely through the covers for three, and when Kapp defends a dot, prepares to face another over. 
70th over: South Africa 222-7 (Kapp 108, Jafta 1) This is such an innings, the captain rescuing her team from embarrassment with an absolutely sensational performance. She gets there from the first ball of the over, Cross replacing Ecclestone and offering width ... which sees hands thrown and ball flying over slip. Kapp raises her bat, salutes the dressing room and smiles as you might, then clatters four more through backward point by way of celebration ... then goes again, edging an attempted cut to the fence at third man! She’s played some lovely drives today, but this over, from which she scored 12, was all about backing your eye to go hard enough so that if you don’t middle it, it flies to the rope anyway. 
69th over: South Africa 210-7 (Kapp 96, Jafta 1) Misfield! And it takes Kapp to 95! She drives elegantly to cover, but straight to Lamb ... who allows it through her legs for four! Eeesh, I feel for you old mate, we’ve all been there. A single follows, then Jafta, squared up by Davidson-Richardcs, edges to second slip where Ecclestone either drops it or can’t get hand underneath it because it’s just shy of her. Her reaction tells us she thinks it was a drop, but looking at a replay, I think she did everything she could. 
68th over: South Africa 205-7 (Kapp 91, Jafta 1) Jafta sees this over away pretty well, getting well down the track when she can as Ecclestone twirls through a second straight maiden; after a loose – for her – period after tea, she’s back on her game now. 
67th over: South Africa 205-7 (Kapp 91, Jafta 1) I’m not sure Kapp thinks much of Jafta’s batting because she’s trying to force things now, chasing a wide one as per De Klerk, but missing. So she pulls to deep square, where Cross times her dive well to field – they run one – then we learn that Jafta rates herself more than does her captain, turning to the on side for the single that retains the strike. 
66th over: South Africa 203-7 (Kapp 90, Jafta 0) Ecclestone gets a full over at Jafta, who’s not played for a while. She looks comfy enough, though, until the final ball of the over which is tossed up; it dips, Jafta misses, and wears it on the pad, but after a conference, there’s no review when the eventuating appeal is rejected. Maiden. 
65th over: South Africa 203-7 (Kapp 90, Jafta 0) That’s a very good over, the ball moving both ways, and Davidson-Richards fully deserved her debut wicket, in the process justifying her captain’s decision to use her at so crucial a juncture. She’ll feel like a Test player now. 
Yup, it was going down leg, narrowly missing the top corner of the leg bail. 
The kneroll hit is a false friend, I think, because Jafta isn’t a tall woman, but was the ball going down?
Two in two and a golden on Test debut for Jafta! She’s pinned in front, hit on the kneeroll, and eventually the finger goes up. 
Goodness me, it’s going to be a long night of the soul for Nadine de Klerk who, on debut, has ended a useful stay at the crease by chasing a wide one – if we’re being generous, there was a hint of away-swing – and edging behind. 
65th over: South Africa 202-6 (Kapp 90, De Klerk 9) Better from Davidson-Richards, who goes for stumps, finds pad ... but too high up. 
64th over: South Africa 202-6 (Kapp 90, De Klerk 9) Kapp really is a serious player, and when Ecclestone overpitches – so many of South Africa’s runs today have come because of such infraction – she’s absolutely mullered through extra cover for four, moving into the 90s in the process. 
63rd over: South Africa 198-6 (Kapp 86, De Klerk 9) It’s Davidson-Richards, who tries a bouncer that Kapp pulls. It’s not a great shot, but there’s no one underneath it so it drops safe at deep midwicket and they run one, then De Klerk hits to a similar area only this time they run two – that’s excellent from the new batter hauling her tired captain through. 
62nd over: South Africa 195-6 (Kapp 85, De Klerk 7) This is a colossal session and England start it with their best bowler, but it’s an expensive one by Ecclestone’s august standards, three singles coming from it. But who will get the sphere at the other end? 
