Advertisement
Supported by
Abortion will remain legal in about half of states, but the rest will probably ban it. The number of abortions will probably fall, particularly among poor women in the South and Midwest.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Claire Cain Miller and Margot Sanger-Katz
Follow our live updates on the Supreme Court decision to overturn Roe v. Wade.
Friday’s Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade will usher in a United States not seen in half a century, in which the legal status of abortion is entirely up to the states. Now that the law has changed, reproductive rights will be rewritten almost immediately.
No. Individual states will decide whether and when abortions will be legal. Many states will continue to allow them, and some have even begun making provisions to help serve women who live in states that are likely to restrict abortion.
Abortion will probably become illegal in about half of states, although forecasts differ.
According to the Center for Reproductive Rights, a group that fights abortion restrictions in court and closely tracks state laws, 25 states are likely to ban abortion. Those states are: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Georgia, Idaho, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, West Virginia, Wisconsin and Wyoming.
The Guttmacher Institute, a research group focused on reproductive health care, says a slightly different group of states is likely to substantially limit abortion access: Its list of 26 states excludes North Carolina and Pennsylvania, but includes Florida, Iowa and Montana.
Thirteen states have so-called trigger laws, which make abortion illegal after Roe’s fall. Some have old abortion laws on the books that were invalidated by the Roe decision but could be enforced again. Still other states, like Oklahoma, have abortion bans that were passed during this legislative session, despite the Roe precedent.
Some women seeking abortions could obtain them in other ways, including traveling to a state where abortion is legal or ordering pills online from outside the country. Texas provides an example. In September, a law went into effect banning abortion after fetal cardiac activity is detected, around six weeks. Abortions at Texas clinics fell by half. But many women were able to obtain abortions in neighboring states or by ordering pills, resulting in an overall decline of only around 10 percent.
Without Roe, abortion will probably decline more because women will have to travel farther to reach a state where it’s legal. Many women who get abortions are poor, and long travel distances can be insurmountable. The states likely to ban abortion are concentrated in the South, Midwest and Great Plains. Because of the expected increase in interstate travel, remaining clinics will most likely have less capacity to treat the women who are able to reach them.
Research from December on the estimated changes in distances to clinics found that, if Roe were overturned, the number of legal abortions would be likely to fall by around 14 percent (updated to 13 percent in more recent research). Our article from December explained that research and offered a map of where abortions were likely to decline the most.
Under Roe, around one in four American women would have been expected to obtain an abortion at some point, according to research from the Guttmacher Institute.
That includes women from all backgrounds. But statistics show women who receive abortions in the United States are more likely to be unmarried; to be in their 20s; to have low incomes; and to already have a child. They are disproportionately likely to be Black. They are more likely to live in a Democratic-leaning state.
The typical patient is already a mother; is poor; is unmarried and in her late 20s; and has some college education.
Our article from December describes the demographics of the typical abortion patient.
The United States now joins a very small group of countries that has tightened abortion laws in recent years, as opposed to loosening them. Three countries have done so since 1994: Poland, El Salvador and Nicaragua. In that period, 59 countries have expanded access, according to the Center for Reproductive Rights.
Under Roe, the United States has been unusual in allowing abortion for any reason until around 23 weeks. Yet in many countries with earlier cutoffs, abortion is allowed for a wide variety of reasons, according to the center.
Sixty-six countries — home to about a quarter of women of reproductive age — prohibit abortion or allow it only if a woman’s life is in danger. Without Roe, certain states will align with these countries.
Our article from January explains international approaches to abortion law.
Quickly, and then slowly.
Several states have already stopped providing abortions in anticipation of this ruling.
Because of the wording of trigger laws, clinics in more states will most likely begin closing right away. In other states, the laws will activate in about a month.
There are also many states where abortion law may get caught up in court, or where legislatures will make legal changes in the coming days, weeks and months. Abortion will become a subject of active political debate in many parts of the country for years to come.
Advertisement
