Advertisement
Newsletter
Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Nancy Wartik and Daniel E. Slotnik
(Want to get this newsletter in your inbox? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest at the end of Monday.
1. Partisan resistance is growing in Russian-held parts of Ukraine.
Recent attacks on city officials and Russian trains may suggest an intensifying response to Russian repression. One expert says that while special forces may have carried out some of the actions, the total number “is impressive and bespeaks a trend.”
Britain joined the U.S. to provide Ukraine with advanced long-range artillery to battle Russia in the east, though training Ukrainian soldiers how to use unfamiliar, complex weaponry has been a challenge.
Also in eastern Ukraine, monks and nuns sheltering in a Russian Orthodox monastery are in the line of fire. Some have been wounded or killed, but the group remains loyal to the church and its pro-Putin leader.
In other war news, the U.S. warned that Russia might try to sell stolen Ukrainian grain to nations, mostly in Africa, that are facing food shortages, posing a dilemma to leaders whose people are starving.
2. Boris Johnson survived a no-confidence vote by fellow Conservatives.
The tally was 211 to 148, leaving Johnson politically wounded and possibly shepherding in a volatile period in British politics. The vote came in the wake of revelations that Johnson and his aides threw parties at 10 Downing Street during lockdown for Covid-19, in violation of the rules.
Before the vote, Johnson told Conservatives that he would cut taxes, focus on Britain’s problems and “lead you to victory again.” But in the recent past, Conservative prime ministers subjected to no-confidence votes have resigned or lost badly at the polls.
3. Mayors of big cities in the U.S. fear new gun regulations may be impossible.
Outrage over recent mass shootings was ubiquitous at a gathering of the United States Conference of Mayors over the weekend. There was a sense of resignation that lawmakers might do little in response to the violence, given almost universal Republican opposition to new restrictions.
“There’s actions that could be taken at the federal level or state level in many of our cases,” said Mayor Greg Fischer, Democrat of Louisville, Ky. “But for those of us in red states, we’ve almost given up on state action.”
Over the weekend, mass shootings occurred in Philadelphia; Phoenix; Chattanooga, Tenn.; Chester, Va.; and Summerton, S.C.
Learn more about the lives of the 19 children and two teachers who were killed on May 24 in the mass shooting in Uvalde, Texas.
4. Elon Musk threatened to pull out of his Twitter deal, citing lack of information on fake accounts.
Musk’s lawyers wrote in a letter to Twitter and the Securities and Exchange Commission that the social media company had not provided him with information about how it measured spam and fake accounts.
Musk’s discontent with Twitter’s method of tracking its fake accounts coincides with a nosedive in the market that has driven down the company’s stock price. The letter featured the most direct words yet about Musk’s potential scrapping of the $44 billion deal.
In other tech news, Apple unveiled its updates for iOS 16 and OpenSea, the world’s largest NFT marketplace, faces concerns about theft and fraud.
5. The former leader of the Proud Boys was charged with sedition.
Enrique Tarrio, the former chairman of the Proud Boys, and four other members of the far-right group were indicted today for seditious conspiracy for their role in the attack on the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021. 
The men had already been charged with conspiring to obstruct the certification of the 2020 election, and it was not immediately clear what evidence led to the new charges. Members of the Oath Keepers, a far-right militia, also face sedition charges for their part in the assault.
In other political news, Congressional redistricting is drawing to a close, and many involved in replacing gerrymanders with competitive districts think voters may have lost. Soaring gas prices are infuriating California voters. President Biden’s visit to Saudi Arabia might not do much to lower those prices.
6. A drug trial unexpectedly obliterated rectal cancer in every single patient.
A small study of patients with rectal cancer yielded an astonishing result: All of the participants completed the trial with their cancer being undetectable by any kind of exam or scan. None of them had significant side effects. “I believe this is the first time this has happened in the history of cancer,” one of the study’s authors said.
The patients in the study took a drug called dostarlimab, which unmasked cancer cells and allowed the immune system to identify and destroy them. The research will need to be replicated, and it’s unclear how long remission will last.
In other health news, the latest coronavirus wave seems to be ebbing in the Northeast.
7. Throwing a dart through the glass ceiling.
Fallon Sherrock of Britain is the only woman to regularly beat men at the biggest events in darts. Recognizable to fans by her black-framed glasses, Sherrock became a darts sensation after defeating two high-ranked men at the 2020 world championships. Last fall, she became the first woman to make the final of a men’s tour event.
Sherrock said she got into male opponents’ heads by bantering with them: “You end up winding them up because they don’t want to lose to a girl.”
In other sports news, Rafael Nadal won his 14th French Open title, and the Golden State Warriors won Game 2 of the N.B.A. finals against the Boston Celtics.
8. The new Gerber baby is cute — and controversial.
The results of the annual Gerber Photo Search contest were announced last month. The 8-month-old winner, Isa Slish, chosen out of more than 225,000 entries, was born with no femur or fibula in one leg. Her mother plans to use the $25,000 prize money for corrective surgeries.
After Gerber announced Isa as the winner, the grumbles began. Some parents found it fishy that the selection only took a month, rather than the normal two to five. Others complained that toddlers, while eligible, never seemed to win. (Perhaps the difficulties of being a parent during the pandemic, including a formula shortage, put everyone on edge.) Gerber tried to calm the fuss: “Rest assured — we did not miss a single smile.”
Ann Turner Cook, the original Gerber baby whose charcoal portrait is still on the logo, died last Friday at 95.
And if you wonder whether you have parental burnout, take our quiz.
9. Being fashionably late has fallen out of fashion.
Years of pandemic living have apparently made promptness a trend. More people are arriving on time, whether for work meetings, cocktail parties or restaurant reservations, in a way that many were not before everything shut down.
“Punctuality is paramount as we are going through a re-evaluation of our relationship to time,” said Linda Ong, the chief executive officer of Cultique, a consulting firm that advises companies on changing cultural norms. “There has been less tolerance for lateness because there is expectation that you have more control over your time and so you should be on time.”
10. And finally, do you see the darkness growing?
It could be your brain, just trying to help you out. Psychologists tested the static image above on participants with normal vision, and found that the perception that the oval in the center darkened was enough to make most subjects’ pupils dilate to capture more light.
The researchers hypothesize that the illusion works because the gradient on the oval makes it feel as though the viewer is entering a dark hole or tunnel. The brain expects things to get darker and adjusts the eyes in anticipation. Images like the expanding hole feed into the debate over whether all perception is, fundamentally, an illusion.
Have a phantasmagorical evening.
Eve Edelheit and Anna Ruch compiled photos for this briefing. 
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
Here are today’s Mini Crossword, Spelling Bee and Wordle. If you’re in the mood to play more, find all our games here.
Advertisement
