Advertisement
Supported by
Three million acres have already burned in the West.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Ashley Wu and Matthew Cullen
The American West is burning more quickly than it has in a decade. New Mexico has been fighting its two biggest wildfires on record for more than a month. About 3 million acres of U.S. land — almost the size of Connecticut — have already burned this year. And with summer starting tomorrow and a widespread heat wave already in place, the burning is likely to get worse.
The changing climate has created a troubling reality, ecologists and foresters said: Wildfire seasons have turned into wildfire years, starting earlier in the spring and sometimes lasting well into the following winter.
Consider the number of wildfires that have occurred between January and mid-June over the past 10 years:
30,449
30,000 wildfires
20,000
10,000
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
30,449
30,000 wildfires
20,000
10,000
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Note: Data until June 17 of each year.
Source: National Interagency Fire Center
By The New York Times
These fires have also gotten more severe. California experienced two of its largest in the past two years: The Dixie Fire in 2021 burned almost a million acres, and the August Complex fire in 2020 surpassed a million acres.
More frequent and intense fires are dangerous. They emit smoke that can damage the lungs of people who live hundreds or even thousands of miles away. They burn through homes, crops and even centuries-old cultures, causing tens of billions of dollars in economic damage.
Today’s newsletter will explain why these large blazes have become so prevalent and what experts think it will take to reverse the trend.
Wildfires have burned the West for thousands of years, but they’ve become far more hazardous because of human activity.
People cause the vast majority of wildfires (about 96 percent so far this year), and people have also gone to great lengths to fight them, only to set the table for more fires. Paul Hessburg, an ecologist with the U.S. Forest Service, explained that the nation’s well-intentioned strategy of suppressing fires over the past century has created an unnatural buildup of materials that act as kindling for wildfires: twigs, grasses, shrubs, trees, even houses.
Humans have also spent decades emitting planet-warming gases into the atmosphere, rapidly warming the climate and helping wildfires become hotter, bigger and faster.
+3˚F from average
+2
+1
0
−1
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
+3˚F from average
+2
+1
0
−1
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
Note: Data until 2021 for lower 48 U.S. states. Baseline is the 1901–2000 average.
Source: NOAA
By The New York Times
Fires early in the year have become increasingly common as the American West has dried out and temperatures have risen. Winters are warmer, providing less relief from heat.
On mountaintops, winter snow, which can slow down wildfires by adding moisture to forest wood, has begun to melt earlier in the spring and more quickly. High winds have further dried out kindling and sped up wildfire movement.
The years of warming, droughts and high winds in the West have worked in tandem with forest fuel buildup, Hessburg said, to “set the dining room table for the situation we have right now.”
Removing a wildfire’s fuel source ahead of time is the main way to prevent or reduce its impact, experts said. One option is to manually thin forests with saws, rakes and bulldozers. Another is prescribed fires, which are intentionally set to consume dead brush and small trees at a much lower intensity.
These two methods can also be combined, but both take planning and technical know-how. Manual thinning can be slow and laborious. Prescribed burnings must happen under the right weather and fuel conditions (made rarer by climate change) to limit the risk of an out-of-control burn.
And there are challenges with public trust. Local residents who fear smoke-filled air have fought more prescribed burning. And occasionally, as happened in New Mexico this spring, erratic winds can propel a prescribed fire beyond firefighters’ control.
Experts agree that wildfire management should be far more proactive. They offer a number of ideas: easing restrictions on prescribed burnings, increasing prescribed burnings or even letting wildfires burn for a while when they’re not threatening lives or livelihoods.
The experts acknowledge that their suggestions would have to overcome residents’ fears and political challenges. But they warn that if nothing is done and landscapes full of trees, leaves and brush go untreated, wildfires will only get worse.
A large swath of the U.S. population was under an extreme heat warning this past week.
In Arizona, wildfires have moved perilously close to a major astronomical observatory.
Wildfire threats to properties across the country are rising.
See active fires in The Times’s wildfire tracker.
On the first Father’s Day since the war, families grieved for the dads-turned-soldiers who have been killed.
Ukraine rushed reinforcements to its last strongholds in Luhansk province, but its defenses are faltering.
“No one told me I would never go back home.” Thousands of Ukrainian refugees have been forcibly resettled in Russia. Some have escaped to Estonia.
Germany will restart coal-fired power plants, amid concerns that losing Russia’s natural gas supply could bring about an energy shortage.
In one Florida clinic, the signs of vanishing abortion access.
The Supreme Court may soon limit the government’s authority to reduce carbon dioxide from power plants. Conservatives have been building the case for years.
More than a year after President Biden made Juneteenth a federal holiday, only 24 states let state employees take the day off.
Uvalde, Texas, planned to cancel its Little League all-star tournament. Then, the town reconsidered: “You want to see children happy again.”
The Senate’s proposed gun safety bill could fall victim to the limitations of the federal background check system.
Colombia elected Gustavo Petro, a former rebel, as president. He will be the country’s first leftist leader.
In French parliamentary elections, President Emanuel Macron’s centrist coalition came out ahead but lost its outright majority. The far right won a record number of seats.
The bullet that killed a Palestinian-American journalist last month was fired from the location of an Israeli military convoy, a Times investigation found.
An Ethiopian rebel group massacred more than 200 people.
The international swimming federation, FINA, will bar trans women from elite women’s competition if they went through male puberty.
Two cast members of the Netflix show “The Chosen One” died in a crash in Mexico.
At the U.S. Open, the British golfer Matt Fitzpatrick bested two rising American stars to win his first major championship.
A bipartisan bill to protect endangered species proves we don’t have to play politics with nature, Margaret Renkl argues.
From U.F.O. reports to A.I. technology, we’re living in a weird moment, Ezra Klein writes.
Celebrity feminism has failed us, Susan Faludi says.
Gail Collins and Bret Stephens discuss Mike Pence’s role in the Jan. 6 riot on the Capitol.
Heirlooms: See the treasured items that connect Black families with their history.
‘Face like a half-sucked mango’: Inside the Australian National Dictionary Center.
From Oxford to Starbucks: Why a Rhodes scholar became a barista.
Iconic: Meet the man behind Anna Wintour’s bob.
Quiz time: The average score on our latest news quiz was 9.2. See if you can top it.
A Times classic: Can you call a 9-year-old a psychopath?
Advice from Wirecutter: Don’t settle for a leaky air mattress.
Metropolitan Diary: Overheard on a Broadway bus, a visit to doughnut heaven and more tales of New York City.
Lives Lived: Mark Shields was a former campaign strategist who became a fixture in American political journalism and punditry. He died at 85.
Rosé has become synonymous with fun summer drinking. But as Eric Asimov, The Times’s wine critic, says, you can open a bottle long after Labor Day. “I’m a firm believer in drinking rosé all year round,” he told us. “Being fun doesn’t equate to being low quality.”
If you think you don’t like rosé, explore different types, especially if you’ve only had the very pale rosés that are in vogue or tasted ones that seemed insipid or too sweet. “You might find that, actually, you’ve been missing something all these years that’s quite delicious,” Eric says.
Head to a serious, independently owned wine shop, and ask for help, he says. “What’s imperative is to actually talk to the people at the store, who tend to really care about what they sell and who want to make people happy.”
And here are Eric’s picks of 12 exceptional rosés from $13 to $35. — Natasha Frost, a Briefings writer
Flavors of Caprese salad transform chicken cutlets into something special.
On his surprise seventh album, Drake opts for a new direction: nightclub abandon.
Four strategies to feel better naked.
The pangram from yesterday’s Spelling Bee was menacing. Here is today’s puzzle.
Here’s today’s Mini Crossword and a clue: French article (three letters).
And here’s today’s Wordle. After, use our bot to get better.
Thanks for spending part of your morning with The Times. See you tomorrow.
P.S. On this day 20 years ago, the Supreme Court ruled that executing criminals with intellectual disabilities was unconstitutional.
Here’s today’s front page. 
There is no new episode of “The Daily” today. “Sway” features Senator Raphael Warnock.
Natasha Frost, Ian Prasad Philbrick and Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to The Morning. You can reach the team at themorning@nytimes.com.
Sign up here to get this newsletter in your inbox.
Advertisement
