Katie Britt easily beat Representative Mo Brooks in the Republican primary runoff for Alabama’s open Senate seat. In Georgia, two Trump-backed Republicans lost House primaries to rivals who embraced the former president nonetheless.
Source: A.P.
 Shane Goldmacher
Katie Britt, a former chief of staff to the retiring Senator Richard C. Shelby of Alabama, won the Republican nomination to replace her onetime boss on Tuesday, comfortably defeating a right-wing rival in a race that puts the 40-year-old on track to become the youngest woman in the United States Senate.
The Alabama Senate primary was the marquee contest on Tuesday as a handful of states across the South held primaries or runoffs, and a House race in Texas last month that went to a recount gave a moderate Democratic incumbent a victory. 
The Senate race in Alabama took a number of twisting turns involving former President Donald J. Trump, who has made the 2022 primary season into a rolling referendum on his influence. Mr. Trump has carefully guarded his record in picking Republican primary winners, and his shifting allegiances in Alabama were among the best examples of his obsession with scoring wins — and avoiding losses — ahead of a 2024 presidential run that he continues to loudly tease.
But in Georgia, where Mr. Trump last month suffered his most serious political setbacks of 2022, the former president continued to rack up losses, as two congressional candidates he supported lost their runoffs on Tuesday. 
Yet even in races where Mr. Trump’s handpicked candidates have faltered this year, those who defeated them in primaries have rarely broken with the former president. Many have run as Trump allies even without his formal support.
In Alabama, Mr. Trump had initially offered his “complete and total endorsement” to Representative Mo Brooks, a congressional ally who spearheaded efforts to overturn the 2020 election and who spoke at the Jan. 6, 2021, rally near the White House that preceded the riot at the Capitol. 
But when Mr. Brooks sank in the polls, Mr. Trump rescinded that endorsement leading up to the first round of voting in May. The former president claimed it was because Mr. Brooks had stopped fully embracing his falsehoods about the 2020 election. In the end, Mr. Trump backed Ms. Britt, who cuts a more traditional Republican profile as a former congressional staffer, lobbyist and past president of the Business Council of Alabama.
Ms. Britt, who lobbied privately for the endorsement, finished far ahead in the May primary, with almost 45 percent, nearly enough to avoid a runoff. She was a heavy front-runner in polls when Mr. Trump endorsed her earlier this month.
“Alabama has spoken,” Ms. Britt declared in a victory speech in Montgomery, Ala., on Tuesday evening. “We want new blood.”
Ms. Britt added that she entered the race despite naysayers telling her: “You’re too young. Wait your turn.” 
Mr. Trump has scored a number of decisive wins in 2022 Senate primary races: Dr. Mehmet Oz in Pennsylvania, J.D. Vance in Ohio, Herschel Walker in Georgia and Representative Ted Budd in North Carolina. He has fared more poorly in governor’s races, losing in Georgia, Idaho and Nebraska. In the Pennsylvania governor’s race, like in the Alabama Senate contest, Mr. Trump made a late endorsement of a front-runner to claim a political victory.
More than $41 million was spent on television advertising in the Alabama race, with about twice as much spent on ads backing Ms. Britt as Mr. Brooks, according to AdImpact, a firm that tracks ad spending.
Ms. Britt ran as a Christian conservative, with the cross on her necklace clearly visible in a number of her television ads, including one she filmed at the border as she pledged to “fight to finish President Trump’s wall.”
Without Mr. Trump’s backing, Mr. Brooks campaigned against Senator Mitch McConnell, the Senate Republican leader, saying Mr. Trump was “conned” by the Kentucky Republican and accusing Mr. Trump of disloyalty. He held his election-night party at an indoor shooting range in Huntsville, Ala., on Tuesday and he was not in a charitable mood.
“The voters have spoken, but not spoken wisely,” Mr. Brooks said, adding of the groups that spent money for Ms. Britt, “I’m not pleased about congratulating these special interests but they rule Montgomery. They rule Washington, D.C. They rule the policy debate.”
In Georgia and Virginia, voters helped determine the Republican Party’s direction in a number of key congressional contests, setting up closely watched matchups for November. And in Washington, D.C., Mayor Muriel Bowser defeated three primary opponents in her bid to become the first mayor in the nation’s capital since Marion Barry in the 1990s to win three consecutive terms.
In Texas, a fierce Democratic clash in the border region of Laredo was called on Tuesday nearly a month after the May 24 runoff, as Representative Henry Cuellar, a moderate, survived a second consecutive primary challenge from Jessica Cisneros, a lawyer who was once his intern. A recount by the Texas Democratic Party found Mr. Cuellar won by 289 votes.
For Mr. Trump, Georgia has proved to be his most challenging state in 2022.
Gov. Brian Kemp, a Republican whom Mr. Trump had made a top target for defeat because he certified the 2020 election, won renomination in a landslide last month, easily dispatching a Trump-backed challenger. That same night, the former president saw his choices for secretary of state, insurance commissioner and attorney general in Georgia all defeated by Republican incumbents aligned with Mr. Kemp. Mr. Trump’s picks for lieutenant governor and U.S. Senate did win open races in May.
But on Tuesday, two of Mr. Trump’s picks for House races lost in Georgia.
In Georgia’s 10th District, Vernon Jones — a longtime Democrat who endorsed Mr. Trump in 2020, became a Republican and now calls himself a “Black Donald Trump” — lost to Mike Collins, the son of a former congressman, in a contest that became notably nasty. 
The Collins campaign handed out rape whistles with Mr. Jones’s name on them to draw attention to a specific 2005 allegation and a history of misconduct with women. Mr. Jones filed a police report against Mr. Collins, claiming a tweet was threatening.
Mr. Jones initially ran for governor but switched to the House race at the direction of Mr. Trump, who had endorsed him. Mr. Kemp had endorsed Mr. Collins, putting the Georgia governor again at odds with the former president.
In the redrawn Sixth District, which is currently held by a Democrat but was redrawn into a Republican seat, Jake Evans, a lawyer, lost to Rich McCormick, a physician. Mr. Trump backed Mr. Evans, the son of a former ambassador appointed by Mr. Trump.
But Mr. Trump’s personal defeats were not necessarily a sign that the party base was in any way ready to break from his broader movement. Mr. Collins, for instance, ran as a “pro-Trump” Republican and a McCormick ad called him an “always America First” candidate.
The former president chose to stay out of a closely watched third Republican primary in the southwest corner of Georgia. Jeremy Hunt, a 28-year-old veteran who has drawn national support as a young Black Republican, conceded late Tuesday to Chris West, a member of the Georgia Air National Guard. The result was seen as an upset, after Mr. Hunt had raised 10 times as much as Mr. West and had finished in first place in the first round of balloting last month.
Mr. West will now face Representative Sanford Bishop Jr., a Democrat whom Republicans see as vulnerable this fall.
Also in Georgia, State Representative Bee Nguyen won the Democratic nomination for secretary of state over Dee Dawkins-Haigler, a former state lawmaker. Ms. Nguyen had finished first in the primary and had since secured the endorsement of Stacey Abrams, the Democratic nominee for governor.
Ms. Nguyen will face Georgia’s Republican secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger, who turned back a Trump-inspired primary challenge in May and was a star witness at the Jan. 6 hearing in Washington on Tuesday as he testified about his role opposing Mr. Trump’s efforts to overturn the 2020 election. Despite his actions refusing to bend to Mr. Trump, Democrats are targeting Mr. Raffensperger in the fall for his support of more restrictive voting laws in the state.
In Virginia, Republicans picked their nominees in two House races where the incumbent Democrats — Representatives Abigail Spanberger and Elaine Luria — are vulnerable because of the national political environment and new district lines.
In Ms. Luria’s seat, which is based in Virginia Beach and became less Democratic in the remapping, national Republicans backed State Senator Jen Kiggans, who defeated Jarome Bell, a Navy veteran. Mr. Bell had received a late boost from an ad that appears to be a Democratic-backed effort to elevate a nominee whom Democrats believe could be more easily defeated in November.
Mr. Bell, who has denied the legitimacy of the 2020 election, called for audits of all 50 states and to “execute all involved” in election fraud.
In Ms. Spanberger’s seat, Yesli Vega, a Prince William County supervisor who was endorsed by Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, finished first in a six-way primary, setting up what is expected to be a hotly contested race this fall.
Ms. Spanberger and Ms. Luria, who sits on the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack, were elected in 2018, the first midterm election under Mr. Trump, when Democrats were swept into power. Now they are seeking to survive in 2022, as polls point to signs of backlash against Democrats and President Biden.
Glenny Brock and Deborah Storey contributed reporting.
 Azi Paybarah
Voters in Alabama, Georgia, Virginia and Washington, D.C., weighed in on elections for the Senate, House and other offices on Tuesday. And officials in Texas announced the results of a recount in a closely watched Democratic primary for the House.
Here is a rundown of some of the most notable wins and losses:
Katie Britt, a former lobbyist and chief of staff to Senator Richard Shelby, convincingly defeated Representative Mo Brooks in a runoff for the Republican nomination for Senate. Former President Donald J. Trump had initially endorsed Mr. Brooks, but he withdrew that support in March as the congressman’s poll numbers sagged. This month, in the race’s final days, Mr. Trump endorsed Ms. Britt.
Mike Collins, the owner of a trucking company, easily captured the Republican runoff in Georgia’s 10th Congressional District, brushing aside Vernon Jones, a former state lawmaker who had the backing of Mr. Trump.
Rich McCormick, a physician and retired Marine, defeated Jake Evans, the former chair of Georgia’s ethics commission and the son of a Trump administration ambassador, in the Republican primary runoff for Georgia’s Sixth Congressional District. Mr. Evans had been endorsed by Mr. Trump.
Bee Nguyen, a state representative, won the Democratic nomination for secretary of state. She will face the Republican incumbent, Brad Raffensperger, who resisted Mr. Trump’s demands to “find” additional votes that would help him overturn the 2020 presidential contest in the state.
Jeremy Hunt, a well-funded retired Army captain backed by top Republican leaders, was defeated by Chris West, a lawyer and Air National Guard officer, in the Republican primary in the Second Congressional District. Mr. West will face Representative Sanford Bishop Jr., a moderate Democrat.
Jen Kiggans, a state senator, picked up the Republican nomination in the Second Congressional District, handily beating Jarome Bell, who had called for the execution of people convicted of voter fraud. Ms. Kiggans will face Representative Elaine Luria, a Democrat, in what is expected to be a highly competitive House race in the fall.
Yesli Vega, a sheriff’s deputy on the Prince William County Board of Supervisors, prevailed in the Republican primary in the state’s Seventh Congressional District. She will take on Representative Abigail Spanberger, an embattled Democrat.
Mayor Muriel Bowser, who is seeking a third term, won her Democratic primary.
Representative Henry Cuellar, the nine-term congressman from South Texas, has defeated his progressive challenger, Jessica Cisneros, a lawyer, according to a recount of ballots from their May 24 runoff. In November, Mr. Cuellar will face Cassy Garcia, a former aide to Senator Ted Cruz who won the Republican nomination.
Maya King and Jazmine Ulloa contributed reporting.
 Maya King
ATLANTA — Chris West, an Air Force officer and lawyer, narrowly won the Republican nomination for Georgia’s Second Congressional District, springing him toward one of the most competitive general election matchups in the state.
Mr. West defeated Jeremy Hunt, a law school student and retired Army captain, in a runoff after Mr. Hunt conceded the race just before 10:30 p.m. Eastern time, according to a top campaign consultant to Mr. Hunt. 
Mr. West now moves on to try to unseat Representative Sanford Bishop Jr., a Democrat whose rural, agricultural district was redrawn to be slightly more favorable to Republicans this year.
Mr. West’s candidacy is Georgia Republicans’ best bet at flipping a long-held Democratic seat in November. Mr. Bishop has represented a large area of the state’s southwest region, from the Alabama state line to the city of Columbus, for nearly three decades.
But the combination of the new district map adding more areas favorable to the G.O.P. and a tough electoral climate for Democrats has Republicans hopeful.
Mr. West bested Mr. Hunt against considerable odds: Mr. Hunt raised 10 times as much money as Mr. West, and he benefited from endorsements from a handful of high-profile Republicans, including former Gov. Nikki Haley of South Carolina; Senator Josh Hawley of Missouri; and former Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. Mr. West finished seven percentage points behind Mr. Hunt in the May 24 primary.
Mr. West painted Mr. Hunt as an out-of-touch candidate with the bulk of his money and support coming from outside of the district. He claimed to be the most pro-Trump candidate in one of the few House races in the state where the former president did not make an endorsement in the primary.
In an interview ahead of the runoff election, Mr. West pointed out the large sums of fund-raising dollars that Mr. Hunt had received throughout the primary.
“I have not taken P.A.C. money yet. I might in order to beat Sanford, but it’s going to be on my terms,” Mr. West said. “I don’t know that it’s the same with Jeremy Hunt.”
 Jazmine Ulloa and Blake Hounshell
At a gathering of Alabama Republicans last year, Katie Britt and her husband strategically positioned themselves at the end of a receiving line to shake hands with former President Donald J. Trump.
Ms. Britt, a lawyer and former chief of staff for Senator Richard Shelby, had recently announced her campaign to fill the seat being vacated by her former boss, who is retiring. Mr. Trump had already endorsed her opponent, Representative Mo Brooks — but the couple hoped to sow some doubt in Mr. Trump’s mind, according to four people familiar with the encounter.
As the couple greeted Mr. Trump, Ms. Britt’s husband, Wesley Britt — a burly retired N.F.L. lineman — mentioned to the former president that he had once played for the New England Patriots. “The only time you’ve met me, I think I was wrapped in a towel in the Patriots locker room,” Mr. Britt was said to have told Mr. Trump, who found it hilarious and replied that Robert K. Kraft, the team’s billionaire owner, “likes me very much.”
From then on, Ms. Britt positioned herself as a formidable competitor with savvy political skills who persistently tried to convince Mr. Trump that she deserved his endorsement instead.
In March, Mr. Trump gave Ms. Britt half of what she wanted, withdrawing his endorsement of Mr. Brooks — at that point far behind in the polls — because, he said, the far-right congressman had gone “woke.” Then, this month, with Ms. Britt clearly on track to prevail, the former president backed her, seemingly in an attempt to pad his endorsement record.
Ten months after her brief exchange with Mr. Trump last August, Ms. Britt claimed victory in the Republican primary runoff for Alabama’s open Senate seat on Tuesday, capping a hard-fought campaign for her party’s nomination against Mr. Brooks. In a state with a deep-seated conservative bent, she is all but assured of winning in the general election in November.
Ms. Britt is also one step closer to making history as the first woman in Alabama to be elected to the Senate. Her Democratic opponent is a pastor, Will Boyd, who has made unsuccessful runs for Senate, House and lieutenant governor.
Shortly after the polls closed Tuesday, Mr. Shelby, who has known Ms. Britt since the days when she was an intern in his office, said he was overjoyed for her.
“She is an outstanding person — she has got the brains, the drive and the compassion,” he said.
Ms. Britt, 40, is seen as part of a younger generation of pro-Trump Republicans, and her husband’s banter with Mr. Trump was viewed by those familiar with the encounter as an astute move that proved essential to her nomination.
Ms. Britt entered the primary with little name recognition and long odds against Mr. Brooks, who boasted more than a decade of experience in the House and gained Mr. Trump’s backing after he riled up the crowd at the former president’s rally before the attack on the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.
But Mr. Trump rescinded his support for Mr. Brooks in March as Mr. Brooks struggled to gain traction under an avalanche of attack ads and criticism of his decision to urge an audience at a Trump rally to leave the 2020 election behind. “Katie Britt, on the other hand, is a fearless America First Warrior,” Mr. Trump said in a statement this month as he endorsed Ms. Britt.
That move did not completely wipe out Mr. Brooks, who still managed to clinch a second-place finish in Alabama’s May 24 primary, garnering 29 percent of the vote. Ms. Britt pulled in 45 percent, short of the majority that would have avoided a runoff between the two top vote-getters.
Ms. Britt fashioned herself as an “Alabama First” candidate, playing off Mr. Trump’s “America First” presidential campaign slogan, and centered her run on her Christian faith, hard-line border enforcement policies and ties to the business community.
As an aide for Mr. Shelby, one of the Senate’s most senior members, she worked on some of his signature issues, including a sweeping Republican package of tax cuts in 2017, confirmation of conservative judges and a push for a border wall along the U.S.-Mexico border.
She most recently served as the head of the Business Council of Alabama, a powerful lobbying group, and led a “Keep Alabama Open” campaign in November 2020 against coronavirus pandemic restrictions that required nonessential businesses to close or limit services. She also opened the council’s resources, typically reserved to paying members, to all small businesses amid the health crisis.
On policy, Ms. Britt and Mr. Brooks had ideological differences: He represented a more aggressive brand of arch conservatism as a founding member of the Freedom Caucus while Ms. Britt, like Mr. Shelby, was seen as more focused on economic development. But in oratorical style, she echoed the hard-right talking points that have become commonplace messaging in the Republican Party.
“When I look at what’s happening in Washington, I don’t recognize our country,” Ms. Britt said in a video introducing herself to voters. “The leftists are attacking our religious freedoms and advancing a socialist agenda. In Joe Biden’s America, people can collect more money staying at home than they can earn on the job.”
The campaigns and supporters of Ms. Britt, Mr. Brooks and a third top competitor in the race, Mike Durant, a former Army pilot, spent millions of dollars on negative ads.
Mr. Brooks and his supporters tried to paint Ms. Britt as a lobbyist and a RINO — a favored insult used by Trump supporters for politicians they believe are Republicans in name only.
She shot back with attacks portraying Mr. Brooks as a career politician. It also helped that Mr. Brooks had a poor showing at Mr. Trump’s Alabama rally last August, just after Ms. Britt began her quiet campaign to sway the former president to her cause. What started as an enthusiastic response for Mr. Brooks that night turned to boos when he urged those in the audience to put the 2020 presidential election behind them and focus on 2022 and 2024.
Mr. Trump called him back onstage for a second appearance, calling him “a fearless warrior for your sacred right to vote.”
Later, when the former president took back his endorsement of Mr. Brooks, he said the congressman had made a “horrible mistake” with his comments at that fateful rally.
 Deborah Storey
“The voters have spoken, but not spoken wisely,” said Representative Mo Brooks of his loss to Katie Britt. “I will no longer be the target of assassins’ bullets. That’s a big win,” said Mr. Brooks, who was at the 2017 congressional baseball practice targeted by a gunman.
 Glenny Brock
“The people of Alabama have spoken. They want new blood. They want fresh blood,” said Katie Britt after she was declared the winner of the Alabama Senate primary.
 Jonathan Weisman
Jeremy Hunt’s Achilles' heel was always the sense in his Georgia House district that he was really an Atlantan, parachuted in by Republican leaders. Chris West’s appeal was always that he was a true native of Southwestern Georgia.
 Katie Glueck
Yesli Vega, the Republican challenger who will take on Representative Abigail Spanberger in Virginia, was the chair of Latinos for Glenn Youngkin in the governor’s race last year.
 Blake Hounshell
Yesli Vega was endorsed by a woman whose name has been in the news fairly often of late: Ginni Thomas, the wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas.
 Jazmine Ulloa
Yesli Vega, a sheriff’s deputy on the Prince William County Board of Supervisors, has won the Republican primary to take on Representative Abigail Spanberger, an embattled Democrat, in what is expected to be a highly competitive November election.
Ms. Vega defeated five Republican opponents in the race to represent Virginia’s Seventh Congressional District, which includes parts of Prince William County and several other counties in Northern Virginia. The results were called by The Associated Press. 
Her opponents included Bryce Reeves, a Virginia state senator and insurance agent; Crystal Vanuch, the chairwoman of the Stafford County Board of Supervisors; and Derrick Anderson, a combat veteran and retired Green Beret.
Ms. Vega led a Latino voter outreach group last year for Gov. Glenn Youngkin. She has made her personal story as the daughter of parents who fled El Salvador amid a civil war central to her campaign. The assault of her brother, who was nearly killed by MS-13 gang members, inspired her to pursue a career in law enforcement, she has said.
The district’s new boundaries have turned what was a Republican-leaning seat into a slightly Democratic-leaning one. But Ms. Spanberger still faces a battle in a traditional swing state where conditions have not favored Democrats.
Mr. Youngkin’s victory in last year’s governor’s race was seen as a harbinger of the challenges confronting Democrats in Virginia and nationally, as Mr. Youngkin assailed rising gas prices, pledged to reduce taxes and relax vaccine mandates, and stoked anger over public school curriculums on race and history.
Ms. Spanberger, a former C.I.A. operations officer who flipped the seat in 2018, won re-election in 2020 by just 1.8 percentage points. A member of the Blue Dog Coalition, a group of conservative House Democrats, she has focused on health care and lowering prescription drug costs.
She has also criticized fellow Democrats for talking about “socialism” and “defunding the police,” saying doing so was putting the party at risk of losing swing districts like her own.
 Maya King
Katie Britt, a former lobbyist and chief of staff to Senator Richard Shelby, has defeated Representative Mo Brooks in a runoff for the Republican nomination in the open Senate race in Alabama, according to The Associated Press.
Ms. Britt, 40, a first-time candidate, had the support of the Republican establishment, Mr. Shelby and several outside groups that shelled out millions to bolster her campaign. In Republican-dominated Alabama, Ms. Britt is now heavily favored to win the seat Mr. Shelby, who is retiring, has held since 1987.
The primary had initially promised to be a showdown between the party’s old guard and its insurgent Trump wing. But the clash never quite materialized. Mr. Brooks, a conservative firebrand who embraced falsehoods about the 2020 presidential election, was lifted by an early endorsement from former President Donald J. Trump, only to see Mr. Trump pull his support as Mr. Brooks’s campaign flagged.
Ms. Britt raised nearly twice as much money as her runoff opponent and saturated the Alabama news media with her message throughout the primary season. Her campaign spent more than $4 million on advertisements, according to the advertising data tracker AdImpact.
In the race’s final days, her ads carried an “Alabama First” slogan, echoing Mr. Trump’s rallying cry, and focused on base-pleasing talking points on border security, abortion and inflation.
Ms. Britt nearly avoided a runoff in the May 24 primary election, garnering 45 percent of the vote and finishing well ahead of Mr. Brooks, who trailed her by more than 15 points. But her campaign’s biggest boost came in its final weeks, when Mr. Trump threw his support her way.
In his statement announcing his endorsement, Mr. Trump called Ms. Britt “a fearless America First Warrior,” trying to burnish her credentials with the Trump-aligned wing of the party. He also railed against Mr. Brooks, noting that the congressman, who fired up protesters before the Capitol attack on Jan. 6, had since told his supporters it was time to put the 2020 election “behind you.”
Mr. Trump pulled his endorsement several months after that, when Mr. Brooks’s standing in the polls began to lag, and accused him of “going woke.”
Mr. Brooks responded to the former president’s condemnation with criticisms of his own, telling Al.com last week, “It’s quite clear that Donald Trump has no loyalty to anyone or anything but himself.”
Ms. Britt will face Will Boyd, a Democratic pastor from northern Alabama, in November.
 Blake Hounshell
Representative Elaine Luria of Virginia, one of the most endangered Democrats in the House this year, now has her Republican opponent: Jen Kiggans, a former Navy helicopter pilot who is currently a state senator. Luria, below, for what it’s worth, was a Navy officer who retired with a rank of commander. Both women are seeking to represent Virginia’s newly redrawn Second Congressional District, which no longer includes Norfolk, home to the world’s largest naval base and, it so happens, Elaine Luria.
 Katie Glueck
Cuellar’s victory in Texas has stoked a fresh round of Democratic recriminations as some on the left criticize national party leaders for backing the most staunchly anti-abortion Democrat in the House.
 Katie Glueck
It also brings attention back to the state, where Democratic House members have expressed frustration with the national party over a special election loss there last week.
 Shane Goldmacher
Mayor Muriel Bowser of Washington, D.C., who is seeking a third term, won her Democratic primary, according to The Associated Press.
 Maya King
It looks like an upset is possible in the Second Congressional District runoff in Georgia. Jeremy Hunt, the well-funded Army captain backed by top Republican leaders, is trailing Chris West, a lawyer and former Air Force officer. Hunt outspent West 10-to-1 in this primary.
 Blake Hounshell
Turnout in Alabama appears to be lower than usual, Republican political consultants tell me — the result, most likely, of holding a runoff in the heat of June, a time when many in state head to the beach or elsewhere. It’s not clear whether that helps Katie Britt, who is now the overwhelming favorite, or Mo Brooks, the underdog.
 Deborah Storey
Representative Mo Brooks is all smiles as he arrives at his campaign watch party at a shooting range in Huntsville. He said he is “cautiously optimistic” about the results, adding that it all depends on voter turnout. “We’ll see how it plays out,” he said. “Sometimes you win, sometimes you lose.”
 Glenny Brock
Around 300 supporters of Katie Britt had gathered at her election night party in downtown Montgomery, Ala. Most of the early crowd arrived all at once from a private reception held earlier this evening for donors and campaign volunteers.
 Maya King and Azi Paybarah
ATLANTA — Rich McCormick, a retired Marine and a physician, defeated Jake Evans, the former chair of Georgia’s ethics commission and the son of a Trump administration ambassador, in the Republican primary runoff for Georgia’s Sixth Congressional District. The Associated Press called the race.
The seat represents one of a remaining handful of tests of former President Donald J. Trump’s power to elevate his preferred candidates in contested primaries against well-funded and well-organized rivals.
For Mr. Evans, that rival was Mr. McCormick, who out-raised him and finished more than 20 percentage points ahead in the primary, but without the majority necessary to avoid Tuesday’s runoff.
Mr. Evans — whose father, Randy, was a major donor to Mr. Trump and served as the former president’s ambassador to Luxembourg — faced attacks over his past comments describing Mr. Trump as polarizing and “the lesser of two evils.”
Still, Mr. Evans received the backing of the former president and his supporters: He was endorsed by Sean Hannity, the Fox News host, and Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker who represented the district years ago. Mr. Trump endorsed Mr. Evans in May, less than three weeks before the primary election.
The Sixth District is just north of Atlanta and was redrawn by Republicans this year in hopes of ensuring their victory in November. Mr. Evans had been planning to run for a different seat, in the Seventh District, but the new boundaries left that seat safely blue. Representative Lucy McBath, a Democrat who currently represents the Sixth District, is now running in the Seventh.
For Mr. McCormick, the race is something of a do over. He narrowly lost — and never conceded — a 2020 House race to Carolyn Bourdeaux, who lost to Ms. McBath in a primary last month. Mr. McCormick is supported by the Club for Growth, the influential anti-tax organization that has at times supported rivals to Mr. Trump’s preferred candidates.
Mr. McCormick will face Bob Christian, a Democrat and the founder of a nonprofit, in November.
 Shane Goldmacher
Mike Collins, who won the G.O.P. nomination in Georgia’s 10th district, is the son of a former congressman. Yet he ran as a “conservative outsider,” which says a lot about what sells in the Republican Party in 2022.
 Shane Goldmacher
Georgia has been a no good, very bad state for Trump’s endorsements this year. So far tonight one House candidate he backed there, Vernon Jones, has lost. The other, Jake Evans, is far behind in the early counting.
 Trip Gabriel
Trump’s endorsements in Alabama's Senate primaries are a road map of personal grudges. In 2020, he backed Tommy Tuberville over his ex-Attorney General Jeff Sessions. In 2022, he first backed his election denial ally, Mo Brooks, below, then un-endorsed him when Brooks sunk in the polls. He has now backed Brooks's rival, Katie Britt, who is everything Trump usually opposes: the Chamber of Commerce wing of the G.O.P. and loyal to Mitch McConnell.
 Azi Paybarah
The polls are now closed in Alabama. Voters who are currently in line to vote will be permitted to do so.
 Maya King and Jazmine Ulloa
ATLANTA — Mike Collins, the owner of a trucking company, easily won the Republican runoff election on Tuesday for Georgia’s 10th Congressional District, knocking out Vernon Jones, a former state lawmaker and Democrat-turned-Republican who had the backing of former President Donald J. Trump. 
Mr. Collins’s victory was called by The Associated Press. If he wins the general election in November, he will represent a solidly conservative district that stretches from suburban Atlanta to Augusta. 
Mr. Collins benefited from name recognition within the district — he ran for the seat in 2014 and narrowly lost to Jody Hice — and higher fund-raising than the rest of the primary field. He received an endorsement from Gov. Brian Kemp in the final week of the runoff campaign, marking the governor’s first and only endorsement in a primary. 
Mr. Jones initially jumped into the Republican primary for governor, challenging Mr. Kemp. But Mr. Trump persuaded him to switch to the House race in an effort to clear the field for his preferred candidate, former Senator David Perdue, who lost last month. Mr. Jones, a former DeKalb County executive, struggled to raise money and earn the trust of some voters in light of his past in Democratic politics. He also faced accusations of misconduct toward women, which he denied. 
But he leaned into his endorsement from Mr. Trump, fashioning himself as a Black conservative in the former president’s mold. In fiery speeches and public statements, Mr. Jones repeatedly lobbed insults at both Mr. Kemp and prominent Democrats while echoing Mr. Trump’s false claims of election fraud. 
The runoff campaign between Mr. Jones and Mr. Collins turned personal in its final weeks. Mr. Collins, whose father represented the area in Congress, described Mr. Jones as an outsider and opportunist. Mr. Collins’s campaign distributed rape whistles with Mr. Jones’s name on it, alluding to the accusations of misconduct. 
Mr. Collins took the stunt further, writing on Twitter that a handgun was a more effective method of self-defense against sexual assault. Mr. Jones then filed a police report claiming Mr. Collins was encouraging violence. 
 Trip Gabriel
In Alabama, Mo Brooks’s watch party at an indoor gun range tonight reminds me of being in Huntsville for the May 24 primary, the day of the Uvalde mass shooting. In four weeks, broad national outrage has produced a limited bipartisan gun safety bill in Congress, but little retreat by most Republican candidates from using gun imagery to telegraph a cultural message.
 Jazmine Ulloa
Jen Kiggans, a Virginia state lawmaker and Navy veteran, has won the Republican nomination to take on Representative Elaine Luria, a vulnerable Democrat, according to The Associated Press, setting the stage for what is expected to be one of the country’s most competitive House races this fall.
Ms. Kiggans, who had the backing of Republican leaders in Washington and focused her campaign on the economy, defeated three G.O.P. rivals, including a right-wing contender, Jarome Bell, who had called for the executions of people convicted of voter fraud.
Ms. Kiggans, 51, a former Navy helicopter pilot who works as an adult-geriatric nurse practitioner, campaigned on creating jobs, controlling health care costs and reducing government spending.
She has called Jan. 6, 2021, “a dark day for our country and a stain on our democracy,” but has also declined to say whether she believes President Biden is the nation’s legitimate leader. She has accused Ms. Luria of focusing on the Capitol siege at the expense of the economy.
Virginia’s Second Congressional District is dominated by the Navy’s largest base and was carried by Donald J. Trump in 2016.
Ms. Luria, 46, a moderate Democrat who spent 20 years in the Navy herself, narrowly defeated a Republican incumbent, Scott Taylor, in 2018, and then beat him again in 2020.
The newly redrawn district has taken on redder hues since then, however, with the addition of Republican rural areas and the subtraction of parts of Norfolk, including Ms. Luria’s own home.
Ms. Luria’s position has also grown more tenuous because of her work on the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol — an assignment even she has described as a political liability.
Ms. Kiggans has cited Ms. Luria’s successful 2018 campaign as her own inspiration for entering politics the next year, with a successful race for an open State Senate seat.
Ms. Kiggans’s most attention-getting Republican opponent, Mr. Bell, who called himself “ultra-MAGA,” centered his campaign on his hard-right positions on abortion, gun rights and border enforcement, and called Mr. Biden’s election victory a “coup.”
Mr. Bell had the backing of Representative Bob Good of Virginia, one of the most conservative lawmakers in Congress, as well as many supporters of Mr. Trump.
 Maya King
ATLANTA — Bee Nguyen, a Democratic state representative, has won the party’s nomination for Georgia secretary of state, setting up a closely watched race for an office that served as a bulwark against former President Donald J. Trump’s attempt to subvert the 2020 election.
Ms. Nguyen, a 40-year-old nonprofit executive, will face off against Georgia’s current secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger, in the November general election. Mr. Raffensperger is perhaps best known for resisting pressure from Mr. Trump to “find” enough votes to reverse Mr. Trump’s defeat in the state. Mr. Raffensperger testified on Tuesday at a hearing of the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol, telling the panel: “There were no votes to find.”
Although Mr. Raffensperger has been praised by some Democrats for standing up to Mr. Trump, he is still a top target for Georgia Democrats.
In advertisements and conversations with voters, Ms. Nguyen has argued that the Republican Party cannot be trusted to fairly oversee elections or to pass laws that would expand access to the ballot. She has noted that Mr. Raffensperger has supported his party’s efforts to tighten voting laws in Georgia in response to the false claims of fraud and irregularities.
“When our voting rights are attacked, we all lose,” Ms. Nguyen said in one ad, promising viewers that she would aim to preserve voting rights if elected.
Ms. Nguyen raised more money than any other Democrat in the primary. She currently serves in the State House seat once occupied by Stacey Abrams, the Democratic nominee for governor. She received Ms. Abrams’s endorsement, although only after she failed to garner more than 50 percent of the vote and was forced into a runoff against her top opponent, former State Representative Dee Dawkins-Haigler.
First elected to the State House in 2017, Ms. Nguyen was the first Vietnamese American elected to Georgia’s General Assembly. Should she prevail in November, she would be the first Asian American elected to statewide office. The growing population of Asian Americans in the Atlanta area has helped power Democrats’ electoral gains in the 2020 presidential election and in U.S. Senate runoffs.
 Jazmine Ulloa
Katie Britt, a lawyer who is running to fill the seat vacated by her old boss, Senator Richard Shelby, went into tonight with a commanding lead over Representative Mo Brooks — a testament to her political skills, her supporters say. She persistently tried to convince Mr. Trump she deserved his endorsement instead. In the end, she got it.
 Katie Glueck
Representative Don Beyer, Democrat of Virginia, has won his primary. 
 Maya King
Turnout in Georgia for the runoff elections was a fraction of the record highs seen during last month’s primary. That may be partly because of the state’s new election law, S.B. 202, which shortened the runoff period for elections statewide.
 Azi Paybarah
The polls are now closed in Georgia and Virginia. Voters who are currently in line to vote will be permitted to do so.
 Deborah Storey
Supporters of Representative Mo Brooks are setting up for his campaign watch party this evening at an indoor shooting range in Huntsville, Ala. He is facing Katie Britt in a runoff for the Republican nomination for Senate. Light turnout is being reported in the state.
 Azi Paybarah
The drama in the Republican primary runoff for the U.S. Senate in Alabama — between Representative Mo Brooks and Katie Britt — does not seem to have translated to a high turnout among voters Tuesday. Cameron Mixon, a spokesman for Alabama’s secretary of state, said on Tuesday that based on anecdotal reports he had received, turnout had been “light.”
Mr. Brooks’s early endorsement from former President Donald J. Trump was rescinded when he began sagging in the polls. Mr. Trump then endorsed Ms. Britt, a former chief of staff for Senator Richard Shelby, in her campaign’s final weeks.
The Alabama secretary of state, John H. Merrill, has said that he expected voter turnout in the runoff to be around 10 to 15 percent, down from the 23 percent reported in the May 24 primary.
In Georgia, Republican voters are weighing in on three congressional runoffs, and, for Democrats, there is a statewide runoff to nominate a candidate for secretary of state.
“Turnout is about as would be expected with regional high-profile Congressional runoffs and down-ballot statewide Democratic Party races,” according to a statement from the Georgia secretary of state’s office, provided by a spokesman, Walter Jones. “Election Day has been a little lighter than previous elections, but we’ve seen a healthy amount of early voting. No unusual or notable trends otherwise.”
In Virginia, where there are primary contests in three congressional districts, Andrea Gaines, an official with the state’s Department of Elections, was unable to provide information about turnout. 
 Jazmine Ulloa
Henry Cuellar, the embattled nine-term congressman from South Texas in the political fight of his career, won his Democratic primary runoff against a young progressive opponent, overcoming fierce attacks on his record and an F.B.I. investigation with a last-minute push from top national Democrats.
Mr. Cuellar, whose victory was called by The Associated Press after a nail-bitingly close May 24 runoff led to a recount, defeated Jessica Cisneros, a lawyer who was once an intern for the congressman. Unofficial results released by the Texas Democratic Party showed he clinched the nomination by only 289 votes. 
His survival in a rare primary runoff for the House seat representing Texas’ 28th Congressional District notched a narrow win for moderate Democrats who had viewed his race as a proxy battle for a broader direction for the party. 
The two candidates were backed by Democratic stars from their respective centrist and progressive corners, and they drew sharp ideological distinctions between each other on many of their party’s top issues, including abortion, immigration, the energy industry and the environment.
Soon after the recount totals were released, Alexandra Rojas, executive director of Justice Democrats, a progressive political action committee, expressed anger with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and top Democratic leaders for refusing to support Ms. Cisneros.
“The party establishment would rather protect one of their own than deliver results for Democratic voters and South Texas families,” Ms. Rojas said in a statement. “It’s disgraceful and I am deeply worried about November.”
Mr. Cuellar, 66, the last anti-abortion Democrat in the House, represented the old guard. He emphasized the federal dollars he had brought to the area, his efforts to harden border security and his firm stance against abortion, citing his Catholic faith and the role it plays in his border region. 
Mr. Cuellar once held an “A” rating from the N.R.A., but that dropped in 2020 after he voted in favor of expanded background checks. The runoff was held the same day that a gunman killed 19 children and two adults at a school in Uvalde, Texas, which lies in a bordering district.
He has supported more oil drilling and often votes with Republicans on energy policy. His tough talk on immigration sparked anger and concern among immigrant-rights activists, who said he was playing into dangerous right-wing characterizations about immigrants and the border.
Earlier this year, the F.B.I. raided Mr. Cuellar’s home in the border city of Laredo as part of an ongoing investigation that appears to be tied to a probe into the political influence of Azerbaijan, the former Soviet republic.
Ms. Cisneros, 28, like Mr. Cuellar, is a Laredo native and the child of Mexican immigrants. She first challenged the longtime congressman in 2020 when she was fresh out of law school, and came within 3.6 percentage points of pushing him out. In March, Ms. Cisneros fell fewer than 1,000 votes short of Mr. Cuellar’s total, forcing the two into a runoff.
Ms. Cisneros, who has worked with asylum-seeking migrant families, approached immigration and border policy from a humanitarian perspective. She framed abortion as a health care issue, and championed progressive causes such as Medicare for All, a $15 minimum wage and the Green New Deal.
In early May, the leaked Supreme Court draft opinion overturning Roe v. Wade, which established a constitutional right to abortion, appeared to give Ms. Cisneros a bump of momentum late in the race. Mr. Cuellar was the only House Democrat to vote against the Women’s Health Protection Act, which would have guaranteed the right to abortion through federal law.
Mr. Cuellar’s district runs from Laredo to San Antonio, and redistricting changes made it slightly more Democratic, with more voters from Bexar County. The district dropped from 76.9 percent Hispanic to 75.3 percent, but a slight rise in white voters was expected to help Ms. Cisneros if those new voters were San Antonio liberals.
Ms. Cisneros stumped with progressive firebrands — Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, and Senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts. Like Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, Ms. Cisneros was recruited by the Justice Democrats, a progressive political action committee that had placed a full-page ad in a local newspaper looking for candidates. Laredo community leaders submitted her name.
Mr. Cuellar received the endorsements of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who recorded robocalls for him, as well as Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, the House majority whip, and Representative Hakeem Jeffries of New York, the chairman of the House Democratic Caucus.
The race was contentious at times.
Ms. Cisneros criticized Mr. Cuellar as a corrupt politician. In the final stretch of the contest, billboards appeared in Laredo that made allegations about Ms. Cisneros’s policy stances as well as her personal life, calling her a “home wrecker.” Mr. Cuellar denied he had anything to do with the billboards and said he did not condone them.
 Neil Vigdor
The television ad’s script gives the appearance of a Good Housekeeping seal of approval, but from MAGA: The far-right Virginia House candidate Jarome Bell is zeroed in on for his support of election audits in all 50 states and his efforts to outlaw abortion.
“He’s running for Congress to carry the Donald J. Trump torch to make America great again,” the ad’s narrator says of Mr. Bell, phrasing that seems designed to catch the attention of Republican primary voters. “If Jarome Bell wins, Donald Trump wins, too.”
But the 30-second spot for Mr. Bell, who previously made headlines when he made false claims of election fraud after the 2020 presidential election and called for the execution of “all involved,” was not furnished by Mr. Bell or anyone affiliated with Mr. Trump.
An outside Democratic group called Patriot Majority PAC paid for the ad and aired it more than 400 times in recent weeks, according to the ad-tracking firm AdImpact, as the group sought to influence the outcome of the closely watched, four-way primary in Virginia’s Second District.
In the ad’s closing seconds, the group’s name is mentioned by the narrator and appears in small text beneath a caption that suggests Mr. Bell is “TOO CONSERVATIVE FOR VIRGINIA.”
The winner of Tuesday’s primary will face Representative Elaine Luria, a vulnerable Democrat and Navy veteran who serves on the Jan. 6 committee and whose military-centric district in the Tidewater region is getting redder. The contest is rated as a tossup by the nonpartisan Cook Political Report.
The meddling of Democrats in G.O.P. nominating contests is certainly not an isolated phenomenon during these midterm elections. Across the nation, Democratic allies have sought to prop up Republican extremists in primaries, gambling that those candidates will be less appealing to the general electorate.
Mr. Bell, a Navy veteran like Ms. Luria, said in an interview on Tuesday that the ad’s focus on him was a sign of his strength as a candidate, not of his weakness.
“They don’t want to see me,” said Mr. Bell, a second-time candidate for Congress. “They fear Donald Trump, and they fear me. That’s why they’re trying to tie us together.”
Craig Varoga, a longtime Democratic operative who was listed as the treasurer of Patriot Majority PAC, did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Tuesday.
Republican leaders in Washington have coalesced around Jen Kiggans, a state senator and another Navy veteran, in the Republican primary, while Mr. Bell has the backing of some of Mr. Trump’s staunchest allies, including Bob Good, the state congressional delegation’s most conservative member.
The television ad shows a photograph of Mr. Bell with Mr. Trump and its narrator mentions that Mr. Bell was endorsed by Thomas D. Homan, who was Mr. Trump’s acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, as well as Michael T. Flynn, Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser, whom the former president pardoned after he twice pleaded guilty to lying to investigators about his conversations with Russia’s ambassador.
When Mr. Bell was asked on Tuesday whether he stood by his comments promoting executions in connection with the 2020 election, he said he did. Mr. Bell equated election fraud to treason, but he stopped short of using the word “execution.” He said anyone who engaged in election fraud should be arrested and convicted, with the ultimate punishment imposed for treason.
“We’re talking about the rule of law here,” he said.
 Deborah Storey
Mo Brooks lost the endorsement of former President Donald J. Trump, but that hasn’t stopped him from casting himself as the MAGA candidate. Here’s a sign from a street in Huntsville, where Brooks will have his watch party tonight.
 Neil Vigdor
Al Gross, who spent nearly a half-million dollars trying to differentiate himself from a large field of candidates in a special election for Alaska’s lone House seat, suspended his campaign on Monday and endorsed two of his opponents — though not the race’s headliner, former Gov. Sarah Palin.
Mr. Gross, a surgeon and commercial fisherman, had advanced to next month’s special election by finishing third in the June 11 open primary for the seat of Representative Don Young, a Republican who died in March. Mr. Young had held the seat since he was first elected to the House in 1973.
The other top-four finishers earning a spot in the Aug. 16 special election were Ms. Palin, the Republican vice-presidential nominee in 2008, who had received the most votes; Nick Begich, a Republican and the scion of an Alaskan political dynasty, who had finished second; and the Democrat Mary S. Peltola, a former state legislator, who had finished fourth.
Mr. Gross, who was not affiliated with a political party, endorsed Ms. Peltola and the Republican Tara Sweeney, his campaign told The Anchorage Daily News. Ms. Sweeney, a former assistant secretary of Indian Affairs in the U.S. Interior Department during the Trump administration, was in fifth place.
“It is with great hope for Alaska’s future that I have decided to end my campaign to become our state’s next congressman,” Mr. Gross said in a statement. “There are two outstanding Alaska Native women in this race who would both serve our state well, and I encourage my supporters to stay engaged and consider giving their first-place vote to whichever of them best matches their own values.”
It is unclear if Ms. Sweeney will now move into the fourth position, The Anchorage Daily News reported, but a final round of ballot counting will take place Tuesday.
Voters in Alaska will also make their selection in the state’s regular primary for the House seat in August, setting the field for the November general election to decide who will represent the state for a full two-year term starting in January.
 Azi Paybarah
Of the roughly 200 candidates endorsed by former President Donald J. Trump in the 2022 midterm elections, many are running unopposed or face little-known, poorly funded opponents. But in contested races, those endorsed by Mr. Trump have won more times than they have lost.
Mr. Trump’s endorsement has helped propel some candidates to victory, like J.D. Vance in Ohio and Bo Hines in North Carolina. His picks also won critical primaries in Pennsylvania and West Virginia. But in Georgia, several of his candidates were resoundingly defeated, and he had mixed success in states like South Carolina and North Carolina.
Here is a look at his endorsement record in some of the most closely watched primaries.
Gov. Brian Kemp easily defeated former Senator David Perdue, Mr. Trump’s handpicked candidate, in the Republican primary for governor. Mr. Kemp was a Trump target after he refused to overturn the president’s re-election loss there in 2020. He will face the Democratic nominee, Stacey Abrams, whom he narrowly defeated four years ago.
Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, who refused Mr. Trump’s demand that he “find” additional votes after his 2020 loss, defeated a Trump-backed challenger, Representative Jody Hice, in the Republican primary.
Attorney General Chris Carr defeated John Gordon, a Trump-backed opponent, with more than 73 percent of the vote.
In the Republican primary for an open seat in Georgia’s Sixth Congressional District, the Trump-backed candidate, Jake Evans, qualified for the June 21 runoff, though he was a distant second to the top vote-getter, Rich McCormick.
The former professional football star Herschel Walker, who was endorsed by Mr. Trump, dominated the Republican primary for Senate. He will face Senator Raphael Warnock, a Democrat and prolific fund-raiser, in the general election.
After a close race that prompted a recount, Dr. Mehmet Oz, Mr. Trump’s choice, won the state’s critical Republican Senate primary, narrowly defeating David McCormick.
Doug Mastriano, a state senator and retired Army colonel who has propagated myriad false claims about the 2020 election and attended the protest leading up to the Capitol riot, won the Republican nomination for governor. Mr. Trump endorsed him just a few days before the May 17 primary.
Representative Ted Budd, who was endorsed by Mr. Trump, won the Republican nomination for Senate, and Bo Hines, a 26-year-old political novice who enthralled Mr. Trump, was catapulted to victory in his Republican primary for a House seat outside Raleigh.
But Representative Madison Cawthorn crumbled under the weight of repeated scandals and blunders. He was ousted in his May 17 primary, a stinging rejection of a Trump-endorsed candidate. Voters chose Chuck Edwards, a state senator.
Representative Tom Rice, one of 10 House Republicans who voted to impeach Mr. Trump after the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol, was ousted by his Trump-backed challenger, State Representative Russell Fry, in the Republican primary in the Seventh Congressional District.
But Representative Nancy Mace defeated her Trump-backed challenger, the former state lawmaker Katie Arrington, in the First Congressional District primary. Ms. Mace had said that Mr. Trump bore responsibility for the Jan. 6 attack, but she did not vote to impeach him. She had support from Nikki Haley and Mick Mulvaney, who both held office in the state before working in the Trump administration.
In the June 7 Republican Senate primary, Adam Laxalt won the nomination and will face the incumbent, Senator Catherine Cortez Masto, who is seen as one of the most vulnerable Democrats this fall. Mr. Laxalt, a former attorney general, was endorsed by Mr. Trump and had helped lead his efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election results in Nevada.
Joseph Lombardo, the Las Vegas sheriff who was backed by Mr. Trump, won the Republican nomination for governor and will face the Democratic incumbent, Gov. Steve Sisolak.
Jim Marchant did not garner a formal endorsement, but his win in the secretary of state primary may well be considered a victory for Mr. Trump: Mr. Marchant is a Trump loyalist who helped organize a slate of “America First” candidates for election posts who question the legitimacy of the 2020 election. He will face Cisco Aguilar, a Democratic lawyer.
The Senate candidate J.D. Vance defeated a field of well-funded candidates, nearly all of whom pitched themselves as Trump-like Republicans. Mr. Vance, an author and venture capitalist, had transformed himself from a self-described “never Trump guy” in 2016 to an “America First” candidate in 2022.
Max Miller, a former Trump aide who denied assault allegations from an ex-girlfriend and was later endorsed by Mr. Trump, won his House primary after two other Republican incumbents there opted not to run.
Mr. Trump also endorsed Madison Gesiotto Gilbert, a lawyer and former beauty queen who had been a surrogate for his presidential campaign. She won a seven-way primary for an open congressional seat being vacated by Representative Tim Ryan, a Democrat running for Senate.
Representative Alex Mooney prevailed over Representative David McKinley in a newly drawn congressional district. Mr. Trump’s endorsement was seen as the decisive factor in the race.
Kevin Kiley, a Republican state lawmaker endorsed by Mr. Trump, advanced to the November general election after his second-place finish in an open primary for an open seat in California’s Third Congressional District. He will face Kermit Jones, a Democrat who is a doctor and Navy veteran and was the top vote-getter.
Ryan Zinke had been Montana’s at-large congressman before serving in the Trump administration. Now Mr. Zinke is looking to return to Congress. Mr. Trump endorsed him, but he only narrowly won his Republican primary for the seat.
Charles W. Herbster, a wealthy agribusiness executive, lost his three-way primary to Jim Pillen, a University of Nebraska regent who was supported by Gov. Pete Ricketts, who had long clashed with Mr. Trump and is term-limited. Late in the campaign, Mr. Herbster was accused of groping several women. He denied the accusations.
Gov. Brad Little of Idaho overcame Mr. Trump’s endorsement of the state’s lieutenant governor, Janice McGeachin, who was challenging him in the Republican primary.
Alyce McFadden contributed research.
An earlier version of this story misspelled the surname of a Democratic senator in Nevada. She is Catherine Cortez Masto, not Mastro.
 Jonathan Weisman
Voters in Alabama and Georgia will make their final selections on Tuesday in congressional runoffs — including a particularly hard-fought battle for the Senate in Alabama — and Virginia primary voters will select party nominees for two of the most closely watched House races in the country.
Here is what to watch for on a Southern-accented Primary Day.
Republican voters in Alabama could be forgiven for their confusion over their party’s nominee for an open Senate seat. Former President Donald J. Trump, a popular figure in the state, endorsed Representative Mo Brooks for the job after he emerged as an unwavering acolyte and a stalwart supporter of Mr. Trump’s election falsehoods.
The former president then withdrew his endorsement as Mr. Brooks lagged in the polls, and finally threw his support to Katie Britt, a former chief of staff for Senator Richard Shelby, who is retiring.
On Tuesday, Ms. Britt and Mr. Brooks meet in a runoff that will determine the prohibitive favorite to become Alabama’s next senator. Recent polling indicated Ms. Britt has a commanding lead.
The special masters who drew up Virginia’s new House districts dealt a very bad hand to one incumbent: Representative Elaine Luria, a Democrat. Her home in Norfolk was removed from her Tidewater district, and a good deal of rural terrain was added to the seat. Once slightly Republican, her district, Virginia’s Second, became considerably more so.
The two main Republicans vying to take her on are State Senator Jen Kiggans, who has the backing of Republican leadership in Washington, and Jarome Bell, who has the backing of the state congressional delegation’s most conservative Republican, Bob Good, and members of the Trump world.
Ms. Kiggans, Mr. Bell and Ms. Luria are all Navy veterans in a district where one in five voters are on active duty in the military or are veterans. What separates the three is ideology, with Mr. Bell campaigning on Mr. Trump’s false claims of election fraud.
Democrats are quietly hoping a Bell victory on Tuesday will make a Luria win more likely in November.
In another year, the new boundaries of Representative Abigail Spanberger’s Seventh District would be seen as shoring up her standing as the incumbent Democrat, shifting her from a Republican-leaning map to a slightly Democratic one. But this isn’t another year, and six Republicans are lined up to take advantage of the conditions favoring their party nationally and take a crack at her.
Bryce Reeves, a state senator and former narcotics officer and Army veteran, calls himself the front-runner, but he has plenty of competition. Crystal Vanuch, chairwoman of the Stafford County Board of Supervisors, has latched onto the winning social themes of Gov. Glenn Youngkin’s race in 2021: parental control of education and barring critical race theory from schools. Derrick Anderson is a combat veteran and former Green Beret, and Yesli Vega, a sheriff’s deputy, headed Latinos for Youngkin last year.
Runoffs in Georgia for Republican nominees for House seats feature two Black candidates with different prospects and different stories.
In Southwest Georgia’s new Second District, Republican leaders would very much like Jeremy Hunt, a moderate-sounding political newcomer, to take on the endangered, longtime incumbent Black Democrat, Sanford Bishop.
But first, Mr. Hunt, a West Point graduate and former Army captain who served at Fort Benning, must get past Chris West, an Air National Guard officer who is white and running on photos showing him with Mr. Trump.
In Georgia’s 10th District, meanwhile, Vernon Jones, a longtime Democratic politician who endorsed Mr. Trump in 2020 and then became a Republican, is running with Mr. Trump’s backing after being pushed out of the primary for Senate.
But in something of a rerun proxy war between Mr. Trump and Georgia’s Republican establishment, Gov. Brian Kemp — who defied Mr. Trump and overcame a primary challenge from former Senator David Perdue that the former president engineered — has backed the other Republican in the runoff, Mike Collins, as have most of the Republicans who helped Mr. Kemp win his primary in a landslide.
Mr. Collins has also brought up a 2004 claim that Mr. Jones sexually assaulted a woman, a charge that the woman dropped although never recanted. Mr. Jones has said the encounter was consensual, and in a statement after Mr. Kemp sided with his rival he boasted of his outsider status.
“I’m not running for Congress to join the establishment,” he said. “I’m running for Congress to destroy it.”
In Georgia’s Sixth Congressional District, which was redrawn to be overwhelmingly Republican, another candidate endorsed by Mr. Trump, Jake Evans, faces possible defeat.
Mr. Evans, a lawyer who stepped down last year as chairman of the Georgia ethics commission, barely made the runoff against Rich McCormick, a Marine pilot and emergency-room doctor who was by far the top vote-getter on May 24.
Dr. McCormick may not be Mr. Trump’s choice, but he is no moderate: He has campaigned against what he calls President Biden’s “unrelenting assault on our core values.” He has the backing of the House’s No. 2 Republican, Representative Steve Scalise of Louisiana.
