Outside experts will meet next week to decide whether to recommend that the agency authorize the vaccine for kids 6 months and older.
By Sharon LaFraniere
Moderna’s coronavirus vaccine for children under 6 is effective in preventing symptomatic infection without causing worrisome side effects, the Food and Drug Administration said on Friday night.
Advisers to the F.D.A. are scheduled to meet next week to decide whether to recommend that the agency grant Moderna’s request for emergency authorization of its vaccine for children ages 6 months to 17 years. They will also consider an application from Pfizer and its German partner, BioNTech, to clear its pediatric vaccine for children under 5. The F.D.A. is expected to release its analysis of Pfizer’s application on Monday.
The F.D.A. cautioned that estimates of the efficacy of Moderna’s two-dose pediatric vaccine were based on relatively few cases of Covid-19. The agency also said that, like adults, pediatric recipients would probably require a booster shot to counteract the vaccine’s waning potency over time.
But the agency said that two shots of Moderna’s vaccine triggered an immune response in clinical trial participants comparable to that of young adults, meeting the criterion set for effectiveness. The results were measured by the level of neutralizing antibodies, which work to block the virus, in the children’s blood.
Children 11 and younger generally experienced fewer side effects from the vaccine than adolescents, probably because their doses were weaker, the F.D.A. said. Although fevers were more frequent in children under 6, the rates were not substantially different from those produced by other routine childhood vaccines, the agency said.
There were no cases of myocarditis or pericarditis, conditions involving inflammation of the heart muscle and surrounding tissue that are known risks for young men who receive Moderna or Pfizer coronavirus vaccines.
The roughly 18 million children under 5 are the only group in the United States not eligible for Covid shots. Those 5 or over are covered by the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine.
Moderna and Pfizer are proposing different regimens to cover the youngest children. Pfizer is seeking authorization for a three-dose regimen with doses one-tenth the strength of adult shots. Moderna has proposed two doses at one-quarter the strength of adult doses.
Moderna’s vaccine was 51 percent effective in preventing symptomatic infection in children 6 months to 2 years old and 37 percent effective in children 2 to 5 years old. Pfizer said its clinical trial suggested that its vaccine was 80 percent effective, but the trial was based on 10 cases. More than twice that number is required to assess the efficacy of the shots.
Anticipating regulatory authorization of one or both vaccines, the White House outlined this week its initial plan to make shots available for children under 5, starting the week of June 19. Biden administration officials said that the government had made 10 million doses available to states and health providers.
By Ceylan Yeginsu, Maria Cramer, Noah Weiland and Michael D. Shear
As coronavirus policies and masking rules around the world faded away in recent months, one major mandate remained in place: Travelers flying to the United States had to provide a negative test result before boarding their plane. 
As of Sunday morning, that, too, will be gone. On Friday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that it was going to lift the requirement on Sunday at 12:01 a.m. after officials determined that the widespread adoption of vaccines and treatments for Covid-19 no longer make it necessary.
In an agency release explaining her decision, Dr. Rochelle P. Walensky, the C.D.C. director, also cited booster shots and the milder Omicron variant, which she said had “generally caused less severe disease among those who are infected.”
The decision was met with joy in the travel industry, which for months has been lobbying the administration hard to get rid of the testing rule.
“It’s a Friday miracle,” said Marc Casto, chairman of the board of the American Society of Travel Advisors, a trade group. “It’s huge. It’s monumental.” 
The hard-hit travel industry is already in the middle of a comeback, but Mr. Casto said he believed dropping the mandate would lead to double-digit percentage increases in the number of people flying and staying in hotels abroad. American travelers had held off on overseas vacation plans because of the mandate, worried that they would be stuck in foreign countries if they discovered they were infected and would be forced to pay thousands of dollars in hotel fees and other expenses, he said. Conversely, international travelers to the United States faced the uncertainty of testing positive before their trips began. (International travelers to the United States will still be required to be fully vaccinated.)
The U.S. Travel Association, a trade group, projects that dropping the testing requirement will bring 5.4 million additional international visitors to the United States and $9 billion in additional travel spending through the end of the year. 
The testing requirement was first introduced in January 2021, when fewer than 10 percent of Americans were vaccinated and new infections were reaching record levels. In December 2021, amid heightened concerns about the Omicron variant, the C.D.C. tightened the rule by requiring that travelers present a negative test taken within 24 hours of departure. Previously, a test taken within three days was required.
The administration’s mask mandate, which required all passengers on planes and other forms of public transport to wear masks, was struck down by a federal judge appointed by President Trump in April. 
The testing requirement was also unpopular with many travelers, who faced the prospect of getting stuck overseas after testing positive. The C.D.C. recommends travelers isolate and delay travel for 10 days regardless of symptoms or a negative test taken within the isolation period. Some people who did not want to wait that long used a “backdoor” route, returning home via land borders with Canada and Mexico, which do not require a coronavirus test.
For Mr. Biden, the decision to drop the requirement is welcome news at a time when the administration is struggling on a series of fronts. The White House and top federal officials described the decision as a validation of the president’s efforts to aggressively combat the virus.
“This step is possible because of the progress we’ve made in our fight against Covid-19,” Xavier Becerra, the health and human services secretary, said in a statement Friday evening, adding that the administration “will not hesitate to reinstate a pre-departure testing requirement, if needed later.”
New confirmed cases in the United States have been roughly flat at around 110,000 a day on average as of Thursday over the past two weeks, according to a New York Times database, after rising from lower than 30,000 a few months ago. Infections, though, are thought to be widely undercounted as at-home test results are often not officially reported and many people with no or mild symptoms may not test at all. Death counts have been volatile in recent weeks but remain below 400 per day on average.
This chart shows how three key metrics compare to the corresponding peak per capita level reached nationwide in January 2021.
The C.D.C. decision was important and overdue, said Dr. Luciana Borio, a former acting chief scientist at the Food and Drug Administration who also oversaw public health preparedness for the National Security Council. She said that federal scientists had to continue considering the goals of the pandemic response and how effective certain interventions are. Most transmission, she said, was occurring domestically.
“If the idea is to minimize the number of Covid cases in this country, the impact of entrance screening is negligible,” she said. “We are at a point where we have the tools to minimize morbidity and mortality associated with the virus..”
But the decision provoked criticism and alarm from other corners of the public health field.
Meegan Zikus, a bioethicist at Grand Valley State University in Michigan who is immunocompromised, said lifting the mandate “completely disregards the safety and well-being of people who are at high risk.”
“Lifting Covid testing for international travel entirely negates that there remains a worldwide pandemic,” she said. “The world is exhausted by the pandemic. Trying to pretend that it is over is destructive, ignorant, and hurts those least able to protect themselves.”
But William Hanage, an epidemiologist at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, said that while the change could lead to some new infections in the United States, it would have a considerably smaller effect than other policy decisions, such as lifting mask mandates.
“Travel restrictions make sense when there is a big difference between prevalence and risk when you’re going between points A and B. If there isn’t a big difference, then they are not particularly valuable,” he said. “In many parts of the world, there is now less infection than in the U.S. and you are vastly more likely to be infected in a bar in New York City or elsewhere than you are in most random places overseas.”
The C.D.C. continus to recommend testing for travel.
Some American travelers currently on trips abroad breathed a sigh of relief on Friday. Lucia Torres, 39, who is booked to fly home to Florida from Spain on Tuesday with her husband said she canceled some activities planned for the last days of her vacation because she was worried she would test positive before her flight home. She and her husband are vaccinated and boosted.
“When we booked our vacation we decided to take the risk, but we haven’t been able to completely relax because it’s always in our heads,” she said. “Now we don’t have to worry, I can book a massage, go to a party, do whatever people do on vacation.”
 Sarah Cahalan contributed reporting.
By Maria Cramer
For months, travel industry leaders have heavily lobbied Congress and the Biden administration to lift a mandate that required international travelers to show a negative coronavirus test before flying back to the United States.
The American Society of Travel Advisors, a trade group, held more than a hundred meetings with members of Congress, sent thousands of emails to the Biden administration and wrote thousands of letters to local newspapers, arguing that the mandate created a burden on travelers who could remain stranded abroad if they tested positive for the virus, said Kareem George, principal of Culture Traveler and an A.S.T.A. board member.
On Friday, the industry got its wish when the Biden administration announced the mandate will be lifted this weekend.
“For the entire industry, this is a huge step forward,” said Isis Ruiz, chief commercial officer at American Queen Voyages, a cruise line that organizes expeditions in the Pacific Northwest. “There have been a lot of folks who have been cheering all day today.”
Mr. George said the industry should still advise travelers to take precautions like wearing masks on planes, isolating for two weeks before traveling abroad and testing themselves if they feel sick. Still, it was pointless to keep a mandate in place when the virus remains widespread, he said.
“This is not something that’s going to go away,” Mr. George said. “It’s going to be with us for a while. And these are necessary steps to get back to traveling.”
But Dr. Seema Yasmin, director of the Stanford Health Communication Initiative, said the decision comes at a time when there are more cases than in March and the number of hospitalizations are rising.
“What this lifting of the pre-departure mandate shows is the administration capitulating to the airline and travel industry,” Dr. Yasmin said.
Anne Rimoin, an epidemiologist at the University of California in Los Angeles, said the decision will put greater responsibility on individual travelers to take protective measures and increase the probability of transmission of the coronavirus.
“Wear a high-quality mask when you’re traveling because the chances of being in close proximity to someone with Covid will be greater as we pull these restrictions,” she said.
But Dr. David N. Fisman, a professor in the division of epidemiology at the University of Toronto, said ending the mandate was “a good decision by the Biden administration.”
Imposing restrictions on people crossing borders makes sense in countries where the number of cases has been lower, like New Zealand or Japan, he said.
In the United States, where cases remain high, “it doesn’t make sense to do universal testing on incoming travelers” and impose financial burdens on people who may find themselves stranded abroad, he said.
Those travelers, even if they are infected, are “not going to move the needle,” Dr. Fisman said.
Noah Weiland contributed reporting.
By Johnny Diaz and Christine Chung
The three sizable urban centers in the United States where the coronavirus is spreading fastest right now have something in common: They are major warm-weather tourist destinations.
Miami-Dade County, Fla., Honolulu County, Hawaii, and San Juan, P.R., are all averaging at least 85 new cases a day per 100,000 residents, with test positivity rates above 20 percent, according to a New York Times database. By contrast, the nation as a whole is averaging 34 newly reported cases a day per 100,000 residents, with a positivity rate of 13 percent.
As of Wednesday, new confirmed cases in the United States have been roughly flat at around 110,000 a day on average over the past two weeks, according to a New York Times database, after rising from lower than 30,000 a few months ago. And those are just the reported cases; widespread use of at-home testing means that many positive test results never make it into official tallies, experts say, and many people with mild or no symptoms may never be tested at all.
“Much of the U.S. is experiencing summer weather, yet Covid-19 cases are surging,” said Dr. Sandra Albrecht, an assistant professor of epidemiology at Columbia University. “So I wouldn’t expect to see this pattern look any different for warm weather destinations.”
The only places in the country with higher recent figures than those three urban centers are smaller communities in Puerto Rico or Hawaii and a few isolated rural counties elsewhere.
Some U.S. regions that were hit early by the latest surge, like the Northeast, have been showing signs of improvement lately. But Miami-Dade has gotten steadily worse since early April, with its daily new-case average rising more than tenfold, hospitalizations more than tripling and deaths ticking upward.
The C.D.C. now considers it, along with much of Florida, to be a high-virus-level area where extra precautions are recommended, including wearing masks on public transportation and in indoor public spaces.
Dr. Mary Jo Trepka, who heads the epidemiology department at Florida International University, pointed to several factors that could be driving the surge, including flocks of spring-break tourists, recent big events like the Miami Grand Prix race, and widening public apathy about the pandemic.
“I think people are no longer taking precautions as they did before,” Dr. Trepka said. “People were masking more here in the county, and we are seeing less of that. People are being less careful, because they are tired.”
Mayor Daniella Levine Cava dropped all of Miami-Dade’s pandemic safety mandates in February, around the time the C.D.C. shifted its strategy on measures such as masks and social distancing. At the time, the federal agency said, many such restrictions were no longer needed in most of the country, although counties should calculate their own risk as conditions change.
When the latest surge took hold in April, Ms. Levine Cava urged residents to get vaccinated, wear masks, disinfect surfaces and maintain social distance, but the county has not made any of those measures mandatory.
In a statement on Wednesday, Ms. Levine Cava once again called on residents to take precautions on their own: get vaccinated and boosted, get tested if they show symptoms, and stay home if they feel sick. “The best tools to fight the virus are the same ones we know and continue to use,” she wrote.
Ms. Levine Cava noted that Miami-Dade was “the most vaccinated county in Florida: and those efforts have paid off with fewer hospitalizations than in past surges. But caution was still warranted.
“We have not beaten this virus, but we know how to control it,” she wrote.
Mayor Rick Blangiardi of Honolulu County has taken a similar approach.
“Coronavirus is not going away,” he wrote in a statement on Wednesday. “I encourage everyone to continue to demonstrate personal responsibility and wear your masks when around others, get tested if you are not feeling well and please make sure to get your booster.”
Mr. Blangiardi said his administration was not considering reinstating mask mandates or other restrictions but that it would “consider all possible solutions to any situation that warrants a response.”
The county, which includes all of the island of Oahu and some outlying islands, has experienced a significant surge akin to Miami-Dade’s since early April, but in Honolulu’s case there are signs that it may have peaked. New virus cases have declined slightly over the past two weeks to 85 cases a day per 100,000 residents, and the positivity rate stopped climbing in mid-May.
Hawaii had some of the strictest travel restrictions in the country, requiring everyone arriving to the state to complete a 14-day quarantine. In March, it lifted its travel restrictions, allowing travelers from the continental United States to enter without testing and became the last state in the nation to remove its indoor masking requirement.
A month later, the state’s tourism industry recorded its highest traffic figures since the beginning of the pandemic, with more than 800,000 visitors arriving in the Hawaiian Islands, according to the state’s Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism.
Mike McCartney, the department’s director, said in a statement that the tourism sector was “showing strong recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic.” He said he expected a gradual resumption of international travel by Japanese citizens — typically a major share of visitors to Hawaii — to strengthen the rebound.
In Puerto Rico, Gov. Pedro Pierluisi lifted nearly all pandemic restrictions in March, and new confirmed cases soon started rising. But tourism to the island has bounced back: Though arrivals from cruise ships had not yet reached prepandemic levels, business travel for meetings and conventions was improving, Discover Puerto Rico, the island’s official tourism website, said in late April.
Kenira Thompson, president of the coalition of scientists and vice president for research at Ponce Health Sciences University in Puerto Rico, said that older and immunocompromised people there should consider continuing to wear masks in crowded places, and that those who are eligible for booster shots should seek them out.
Dr. Alain Labrique, the director of the Johns Hopkins University Global Health Initiative, said the summer tourism season meant large gatherings and increased contacts between people, a recipe for the easy spread of infection, even if fewer people are experiencing serious illness.
“Covid-19 hasn’t disappeared as much as our patience for precautions has,” he said.
Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this item referred incorrectly to Honolulu County. It includes the island of Oahu and a number of outlying islands; it does not include Molokai or Lanai.
An earlier version of this item misstated the surname of the director of the Hawaii Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism. He is Mike McCartney, not McCarthy.
By John Liu
Officials in Shanghai are ordering some districts back into lockdown while the city carries out mass coronavirus testing, less than two weeks after it emerged from a two-month quarantine.
Authorities have detected a small but sustained spread of infections in the city of 25 million in recent days. Reported cases have not surpassed a few dozen on any given day, but China’s government is sticking with a “zero Covid” policy intended to eliminate all cases.
Residents in at least 13 of Shanghai’s 16 districts, comprising more than 21 million people, will be subject to mandatory testing over the weekend, according to statements from Shanghai health authorities and local officials in different districts. Authorities in several of those districts said that residents would have to stay inside their residential compounds while the testing is carried out, the statements said.
How Shanghai officials handle the new outbreak could offer clues to how the central government intends to contain Covid while taking into account the economy, which has been badly damaged by shutdowns across the country.
Shanghai residents rushed to supermarkets to stock up to prepare for the shutdown, according to people in the city. Before the lockdown that began in March, officials had said people would have to stay in their buildings for several days. Instead, it was eight weeks.
Distrust in the government remains high. In the earlier, citywide lockdown, thousands of people were taken to isolation centers, children were separated from their parents and Shanghai’s economy was decimated. Some residents said online that the country’s zero-tolerance approach to the coronavirus was worse than contracting the virus.
On social media platform Weibo, memes termed the new restrictions the “second round” or “Season 2” of the Shanghai lockdown. One user, writing under the handle RaviJiang, said nobody believed that the lockdown would be lifted after testing, and that people had lost trust in the government.
“It feels like a wolf is coming,” RaviJiang said. “People are still panicking; it’s endless.”
Shanghai’s government had sought to restore the city’s normal function beginning June 1, but several measures intended to eliminate the highly transmissible Omicron variant of the virus remained. Since then, some residential compounds have reimposed lockdowns for up to 14 days after finding a single case in a building. Some have locked residents inside after cases were found in adjacent complexes.
On Friday, health authorities in Shanghai reported 11 new coronavirus cases. The list of close contacts has grown to 500 for three cases that emerged from a beauty salon.
With more cities and provinces carrying out regular mass testing, national health authorities reiterated that there was no need for frequent testing in low-risk areas or places without an outbreak.
“Blindly expanding the scope of testing should be avoided,” said He Qinghua, a National Health Commission official.
By Emily Anthes
A veterinarian in Thailand likely contracted the coronavirus from an infected pet cat last year, researchers concluded in a new study. It is the first documented case of suspected cat-to-human transmission, although experts stress that the risk of cats infecting humans with the virus remains low overall.
One of the cat’s two owners, who both had Covid-19, probably passed the virus to the cat, which then sneezed in the veterinarian’s face, according to the paper, which was written by scientists at Thailand’s Prince of Songkla University. Genomic sequencing confirmed that the cat and all three people were infected with an identical version of the virus, which was not widespread in the local population at the time.
Cats are far more likely to catch the virus from people than to transmit it to them, scientists say. But the case is a reminder that people who are infected with the virus should take precautions around their pets — and that veterinarians and shelter workers who may come into contact with infected animals should do the same, said Dr. Scott Weese, an infectious diseases veterinarian at the University of Guelph in Ontario.
“When things become human diseases, we too often forget everything else,” he said. “I think it’s important for us to recognize this virus still can move between species.”
Previous research has shown that pet owners can infect their cats and that, in certain conditions, cats can transmit the virus to each other. But it has been difficult to prove that cat-to-human transmission happens in natural settings. (Mink, hamsters and deer have been reported to spread the virus to humans.)
The new paper appeared this week in the journal Emerging Infectious Diseases, which is published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. It makes a strong case for cat-to-human transmission, Dr. Weese said: “They’ve got a pretty good story here.”
On Aug. 4, a father and son in Bangkok developed symptoms of Covid-19 and subsequently tested positive for the virus. Because of a shortage of hospital beds in Bangkok, the two men were transported on Aug. 8 to a hospital in Songkhla, a province in southern Thailand, via a 20-hour ambulance ride. For reasons that are unclear, they brought their pet cat.
When the men were admitted to the hospital, the cat was sent to a veterinary hospital for an exam. Although the cat appeared to be healthy, the veterinarian, a 32-year-old woman, collected nasal and rectal swabs, which tested positive for the virus. While the veterinarian was swabbing the cat’s nose, the animal sneezed in her face. (The veterinarian was wearing gloves and a mask during the exam, but no face shield or eye protection.)
On Aug. 13, the veterinarian developed Covid-19 symptoms, including a fever and a cough. Shortly thereafter, she tested positive for the virus.
Genomic sequencing revealed that the cat’s owners, the cat and the veterinarian were all infected with the same version of the Delta variant, which was distinct from viral samples taken from other patients in Songkhla at the time.
P.C.R. testing suggests that the cat had a high viral load at the time of its veterinary exam. None of the veterinarian’s close contacts are known to have had Covid-19 at the time, and she had no prior encounters with the pet’s owners, adding support to the theory that the cat was the source of the veterinarian’s infection. (It was not clear whether she met with the owners later.)
The C.D.C. recommends that people who are infected with the virus avoid contact with their pets. “If you’re trying to stay away from people because you’re potentially infectious,” Dr. Weese said, “just try to stay away from animals at the same time.”
By Benjamin Mueller and Carl Zimmer
In its first report, a team of international scientists assembled by the World Health Organization to advise on the origins of the coronavirus said on Thursday that bats likely carried an ancestor of the coronavirus that may have then spilled over into a mammal sold at a wildlife market. But the team said that more Chinese data was needed to study how the virus spread to people, including the possibility that a lab leak played a role.
The team, appointed by the W.H.O. in October as the organization tried to reset its approach to studying the pandemic’s origins, said that Chinese scientists had shared information with them, including from unpublished studies, on two occasions. But gaps in Chinese reports made it difficult to determine when and where the outbreak emerged, the report said.
Independent experts said it was unclear how the team, comprising scientists from the United States, China and two dozen other countries, could help the W.H.O. break through the political barriers in China that have stalled the publication of most information that would place the virus’s emergence within the country’s borders.
“The lack of political cooperation from China continues to stifle any meaningful progress,” said Lawrence Gostin, who directs the O’Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law at Georgetown University. He said that the report offered a road map for investigating future pandemics in less secretive countries.
The W.H.O. asked the group for advice not only on studying the coronavirus’s origins, but also on examining the emergence of future pathogens. The team, known as the Scientific Advisory Group for the Origins of Novel Pathogens, has no authority to undertake inquiries in China or elsewhere.
Maria Van Kerkhove, the W.H.O.’s Covid-19 technical lead, said the report was “just the start of their work.”
The group was expected to indicate more openness to a lab leak than a previous team that the W.H.O. sent to China in early 2021. That earlier team’s joint report with China said that a lab leak, while possible, was “extremely unlikely.” The W.H.O.’s director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, called that assessment premature.
The latest report said that no new data pointed to a lab leak. But leaders of the group said that they wanted to evaluate any evidence that emerges in the future.
“We haven’t received any reports that really indicate that there is a lab leak that we feel is strong to follow up on,” said Marietjie Venter, the team’s chairwoman and a professor of medical virology at the University of Pretoria in South Africa.
Efforts to study a lab leak met resistance from team members from China, Russia and Brazil, who did not see the need for such investigations, the report said.
The report mentioned a number of studies into the potential role of animals in the emergence of the coronavirus that had been published since the previous W.H.O. team’s work. For example, a survey of a live animal market in Wuhan, China, indicated that several species known to be susceptible to the coronavirus were present in the fall of 2019.
Once people linked to that market started becoming sick, the police shut down and disinfected the facility, making it more difficult for scientists to identify potential intermediate animal hosts for the virus.
The latest report said that it was focusing on published, peer-reviewed studies, though it acknowledged a number of unpublished studies posted online as “pre-prints.” Among them were two papers released this year, in which a team of scientists argued that the pandemic arose when a bat infected a wild animal, such as a raccoon dog, which was then sold at the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan.
Michael Worobey, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Arizona who helped carry out those studies, said it was unfortunate that the W.H.O. team did not look closely at the unpublished research.
“I think if you read our pre-prints and understand the evidence,” he said, “actually there’s very strong evidence that the pandemic emerged through wildlife at the Huanan market.”
Dr. Worobey and other researchers said that a vital opportunity was lost in January 2020 to focus a search for the coronavirus on wildlife farms that supplied markets like Huanan. Instead, millions of animals were reportedly culled.
Filippa Lentzos, a biosecurity researcher at King’s College London, praised the latest report for noting the lack of published findings from China’s own origin studies. But she said that its proposals for future pandemic origin studies did not adequately account for investigations into “accidental or deliberate events,” which she said would require expertise outside of public health.
Jesse Bloom, a virologist at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, said that the report made clear that mitigating future pandemic threats required considering both animal and laboratory origins.
“Both of these things are sufficiently serious possibilities that they need to be thought about together,” he said.
The report recommended studies of blood samples from workers at wildlife farms and live animal markets and of genomic data from early viral samples. But the previous W.H.O. team had proposed some similar studies, to no avail.
The latest report said that Dr. Tedros wrote Chinese officials twice in February requesting information on the status of those studies as well as information on a potential lab leak. But there was no indication that the W.H.O. would be able to persuade China to share the results of any such work.
Despite the difficulties, however, some information from China has trickled out.
Last week, Chinese researchers published a small study on raccoon dogs and bats collected in the Wuhan region in January 2020. In 15 raccoon dogs, the researchers found a new species of coronavirus related to one that infects dogs. In 334 bats, the researchers found coronaviruses that appear to be a mix of viruses, some related to the one that caused Covid, and others related to the one that caused SARS in 2003.
“These sample sizes are not large enough,” said Maciej Boni, a virologist at Penn State University. “We need sampling done on the scale of tens of thousands of bats to get a complete picture.”
By Noah Weiland
WASHINGTON — The White House on Thursday outlined the early stages of its plan for making coronavirus vaccines available this month to roughly 18 million children younger than 5, should the doses be cleared by federal regulators for the last group of Americans yet to be eligible.
With the goal of the first shots being given the week of June 19, the Biden administration has already made 10 million doses available to states and health providers, with roughly 85 percent of children in that age group living within five miles of possible vaccination sites, according to White House estimates shared with reporters.
Half of the 10 million doses were made available for order last week, the other half this week, with equal numbers of Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines, the two that federal regulators are reviewing and could authorize as soon as next week.
“Let’s actually take a moment to understand what a historic moment this is,” said Dr. Ashish K. Jha, President Biden’s coronavirus response coordinator. “It would mean that for the first time, essentially every American from our oldest to our youngest would be eligible for the protection that vaccines provide.”
Health officials may confront a complicated persuasion campaign in many parts of the country, after an initial wave of vaccinations among eager families who have waited much longer than families of older children.
Uptake of the vaccine in other age groups offers a discouraging suggestion: Just over a third of children ages 5 to 11 have received at least one dose of a vaccine, a number that some health experts worry could forecast even lower interest among parents of younger children.
Orders from states have been somewhat tepid so far, according to data that senior administration officials provided to reporters in a briefing on Wednesday evening. Of the five million doses offered last week, 58 percent of those made by Pfizer-BioNTech have been ordered, as have roughly a third of those made by Moderna.
The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to preview the formal announcement on Thursday, said the initial orders were typical of Covid-19 vaccination campaigns thus far, as states typically increase their orders over time.
A Kaiser Family Foundation survey conducted in April found that just 18 percent of parents with children under 5 said they would get them vaccinated right away, while 38 percent said they would wait and see. Their hesitation could be at least partly due to the fact that the virus is typically less risky for young children.
But Dr. Vivek H. Murthy, the surgeon general, said the risks were still significant. More than 30,000 children under 5 have been hospitalized with the virus, and almost 500 have died, outcomes he said could be prevented by vaccination.
As of Wednesday, new confirmed cases in the United States have been roughly flat at around 110,000 a day on average over the past two weeks, according to a New York Times database, after rising from lower than 30,000 a few months ago. Infections, though, are thought to be widely underestimated. Death counts have been volatile in recent weeks but remain below 400 per day on average.
“We are not done with the pandemic. The virus is still here,” Dr. Murthy said. “We’re still losing several hundred people a day to this virus.”
He warned parents of a possible glut of misinformation targeting the shot for younger kids, the subject of an advisory his office issued last year.
“Please make sure the information you are relying on is coming from trusted sources like your doctor, your local children’s hospital, your department of health, medical associations like the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the F.D.A. and C.D.C.,” he said, referring to the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Dr. Jha said on Thursday that health officials expected many children under 5 to be vaccinated by pediatricians and primary care physicians, a contrast to other age groups. But he and other officials on Thursday said they had organized a network of other locations that would work to get shots to families, including pharmacies and children’s hospitals.
To reach smaller pediatric offices and rural providers, the White House said Thursday, doses are being packaged by the hundred.
Government programs such as Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program, and the Women, Infants and Children Program will work with families to encourage vaccination. Other groups, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, the Association of Children’s Museums and the National Diaper Bank Network, will provide educational materials.
Delivery of the vaccines is contingent on the F.D.A. authorizing pediatric doses — a step that could take place as soon as next week — and the C.D.C. recommending them, which would formally initiate the campaign. The F.D.A. and its outside panel of vaccine advisers are set to meet Wednesday to discuss the shots for young children; the C.D.C.’s own expert committee is scheduled to meet days later.
Dr. Rochelle P. Walensky, the C.D.C. director, would be the last to sign off.
Dr. Jha said he expected vaccinations to begin in earnest the following week, but suggested it could take time for some families to gain access.
“Realistically, it means we could see shots in arms of kids under 5 as early as the week of June 20,” he said of the federal review timeline, adding that the federal Juneteenth holiday on that Monday would mean many offices would begin administering the shots on Tuesday, June 21.
“The vaccination program is going to ramp up in the days and weeks that follow with more and more doses and more and more appointments becoming available,” he said.
Moderna is seeking authorization of its two-dose shot for children under 6, while Pfizer is asking regulators to clear its three-dose vaccine for those under 5.
Federal officials have said they are not pre-empting regulatory actions by announcing distribution plans for the vaccine before it is authorized. Instead, they have said, they are working to prepare families and physicians for the possible rollout. Last year, the White House was criticized for subverting the regulatory review that usually precedes vaccination campaigns when it announced a broad booster shot campaign before F.D.A. officials or their outside advisers had weighed in, a decision that proved divisive.
The deliberations over the vaccine for the youngest children are not expected to provoke the same kind of dissent. Parents were briefly given hope over the winter when F.D.A. officials worked to make an initial two doses of Pfizer-BioNTech’s shot available to children as they studied a third dose. That plan backfired when data showed that two doses did not provide significant protection against the Omicron variant.
Moderna is proposing a two-dose regimen for children 6 months through 5 years old, using one-fourth the strength of an adult dose. Pfizer and BioNTech are working on a three-dose regimen for children 6 months through 4 years old, at one-tenth the strength of the adult dose.
Sarah Cahalan contributed reporting from Chicago.
By Sharon Otterman
Mayor Eric Adams of New York City will end the mask mandate for 2- to 4-year-old children who attend day care and preschool on Monday, he said Thursday, because the city is past the peak of its latest wave of coronavirus cases.
“I have always said that the science will guide us out of the pandemic, and because we have followed the data, which shows that cases are steadily falling, we’ve beaten back the latest Covid-19 surge,” said Mayor Adams in a statement.
The city is still strongly recommending that masks be worn indoors for people of all ages, however, as new, confirmed cases still remain at a high level despite recent declines. The city’s alert level is also still orange, or high, but Mayor Adams has repeatedly said he will remove or implement mandates as he and his advisers see fit, rather than wait for his alert system to trigger actions.
The toddler mask mandate has been a subject of great contention in New York City as one of the last mandates the mayor has left in place during the pandemic. The mayor lifted mask mandates for older school children, along with vaccination verification policies at bars, restaurants and indoor entertainment venues, in early March. He also declined to reinstate a wider indoor mask requirement when the city went to a high alert level in mid-May, even though his alert system recommended it.
While some toddler parents supported the mandate, a loud contingent of parents have confronted the mayor on the issue, saying that their children’s intellectual and emotional growth was being stunted because of masks. The mayor had promised repeatedly to remove the mandate when he felt the time was right.
With school set to end in New York City on June 27, that leaves just two weeks of a mask-optional policy for toddlers in schools that are following the school calendar. Advisers to federal regulators are scheduled next week to weigh in on whether to authorize vaccines for children younger than 5, and the shots could be available as soon as the week of June 21.
The city’s latest wave of cases, driven by two Omicron subvariants, appears to have peaked on May 18, with an average of about 4,400 daily confirmed cases, according to city data. After several weeks of decline, case counts and hospitalization rates are now approaching the lower rates that would officially mark the city’s return to a “medium” or yellow alert level.
Nationally, new confirmed cases have been roughly flat at around 110,000 a day on average over the past two weeks as of Wednesday, according to a New York Times database, after rising from lower than 30,000 a few months ago. Infections, though, are thought to be widely underestimated. Death counts have been volatile in recent weeks but remain below 400 per day on average.
Parents who opposed the mandate reacted on Thursday with a mixture of relief and frustration that the rule lasted for so long. In New York City, masks are still required on public transit, in medical facilities and in some congregate facilities such as homeless shelters, according to city rules.
Sarah Cahalan contributed reporting from Chicago.
