Advertisement
Newsletter
Make Eric Kim’s new recipe for a crispy wonton salad, then plan for the days ahead.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Genevieve Ko
Good morning. Genevieve Ko here filling in for Sam and channeling his energy: Today’s a good day to think about the food for parties you’re throwing next weekend.
For me, that means going to Costco — my happy place — and loading up on snacks and flats of peaches so they’re ripe enough by then to bake into Edna Lewis’s flaky-crust cobbler, one of my favorite summer desserts from one of my favorite cookbook authors.
But today, I’m going to get a taste of peaches from the sesame dressing for Eric Kim’s crispy wonton salad (above), which he wrote about in The New York Times Magazine this week. Sometimes I add extra crunch to the salad by frying dried rice vermicelli and peanuts in the hot oil after the wonton wrappers are done. With that, a mojito and some nice rolls.
As for the rest of the week …
I tested this cheesy stovetop mac with sausage and kale, and it’s already a new favorite. Inspired by the 1970s boxed pasta mixes created to stretch a pound of beef, this from-scratch version is especially savory from Italian sausage. Everything melds into a gooey, hearty meal in one skillet, leaving you with almost no dishwashing.
Summer produce is sweeter and makes for the tastiest meals: charred green beans, savory corn fritters and tomato bruschetta are great together or on their own. And a pitcher of gazpacho is always great to keep on hand. Blend in a slice or two of bread to make the soup silkier (and less acidic).
Last week, we published 10 easy recipes to teach beginners how to cook. They’re great for the busy middle of the week, too, and the fastest meals may be breakfast for dinner. I rediscovered the joys of custardy thin slices of French toast and cheesy eggs on toast.
Any fish can be used in this jorim, a garlicky, gingery Korean soy-sauce braise, but it’s tastiest with fatty steaks of salmon, mackerel or black cod. Whole radishes simmered in the sauce, with heat from jalapeños, become tender and sweet.
Start weekend cooking early with a pitcher of rum punch and strawberry hibiscus limeade, then get carnitas in the oven. (If you’re short on time, make carne asada tacos instead.) You’ll want to save any leftover meat to scatter over loaded nachos.
There are many thousands more recipes to cook this week awaiting you on New York Times Cooking, and more inspiration still on our TikTok, Instagram and YouTube accounts. You need a subscription to access the recipes, though. Subscriptions support our work. Please, if you haven’t already, would you consider subscribing today? Thanks.
And if you run into trouble with that, or with our technology, feel free to write: cookingcare@nytimes.com. Someone will get back to you.
As Sam would say, it has nothing to do with cookies or katsu, but this conversation between Jeff Bridges and John Lithgow inspired me to start watching “The Old Man” on FX. (Mr. Bridges, my dude.)
There are a lot of new choices for summer reading, but I often prefer to lie on the beach with the books I had been assigned as a student. They’re enjoyable when they’re not required and when more living makes more sense of them. Right now, that’s Zora Neale Hurston’s “Their Eyes Were Watching God.”
If you’ve ever seen BTS perform, then you know why they’ve been one of the biggest bands for nearly a decade. If you haven’t, read this New Yorker piece from E. Tammy Kim to understand why their current “hiatus” matters.
Finally, in The Times, the running commentary on this week’s Westminster Dog Show will make you laugh — and want a big, fluffy dog.
Advertisement
