Advertisement
Supported by
A man in his 50s was suspected of setting off the explosion that started the blaze at a law office in the city of Daegu, the police said. He is believed to have died in the fire.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By John Yoon, Jin Yu Young and Tiffany May
SEOUL — Seven people were found dead and 48 others injured after an explosion set off by a spray of gasoline ignited a fire on Thursday at a law office in the southern city of Daegu, South Korea, according to the police.
The police said the blaze was being investigated as arson, and after a review of security camera footage, a man in his 50s was identified as a suspect. The man is believed to have died at the site, the police said. He was not identified.
On Friday, the police said that they had begun autopsies after they found stab wounds in the abdomens of two men who died, as well as a knife with a 4.3-inch blade in the room where the fire started. Residues of gasoline and glass containers were also found in the office room.
Local news outlets reported that the police were investigating whether the fire had been started by a disgruntled client over a case.
The police later said that the suspect was the plaintiff in an investment-related legal case in which a lawyer who worked in the office building had been the defense. The Daegu Bar Association said that the suspect had set the office on fire while that lawyer was out and attending a court hearing.
The fire broke out at about 10:55 a.m. on the second floor of a seven-story office building next to Daegu District Court, according to an officer with the police department in Daegu, a city of 2.4 million. The authorities said they had received reports of a loud explosion and black smoke coming from the law firm’s offices, Yonhap News Agency reported.
Nearly 60 fire trucks and about 150 firefighters were deployed to the site, and they extinguished the fire in about 20 minutes. Firefighters rescued about 40 people from the building, officials said. All seven bodies were found in Room 203, according to the police.
At a news briefing Thursday afternoon, the police said that the five men and two women who had died were identified, but no names were released. The building had sprinklers only in the basement and not on the other floors, Fire Department officials said at the same news conference.
South Korea has had a number of high-profile fires in recent years, some of which have been linked to lax safety standards.
In April 2020, a fire at a warehouse in Icheon, southeast of Seoul, killed 38 workers. In 2018, a blaze at a hospital that also served as a nursing home in the southern city of Miryang killed 37. A fire tore through an eight-story building in the city of Jecheon in 2017, leaving at least 29 people dead. Most of those killed had been trapped in a public sauna on the second floor of the building, the authorities said.
In 1995, gas leaks at Daegu construction sites set off explosions and flames that killed at least 100 people, many of them teenagers.
Jin Yu Young and John Yoon reported from Seoul, and Tiffany May from Hong Kong.
Advertisement
