Advertisement
Supported by
letters
Readers discuss a column by Pamela Paul about how actors have been criticized for playing people they do not resemble in real life.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
To the Editor:
Re “Actors Are Supposed to Act. We Should Let Them,” by Pamela Paul (column, May 16):
Ms. Paul’s piece was a breath of fresh air in this politically correct, yet toxic, environment.
As a child, I saw and loved “The Good Earth,” starring Paul Muni. But that was made in 1937, long before anyone questioned a Caucasian playing a Chinese man. It was a movie of its time, and a memorable one, indeed. If it were remade today, the casting would certainly be more sensitive, as Ms. Paul points out — for better or worse, I wonder.
However, I do find the selection of a Black actor, Adrian Lester, to play one of the Lehman brothers a bit tone deaf. Mr. Lester is an extraordinary actor. His performance in “Red Velvet,” a play about a Black Shakespearean actor, was heartbreaking. Could it have been done to equal effect by a white actor? Of course not.
In the same way, I found a Black actor in the role of an Alabama merchant during the days of slavery more than a bit strange. As audience members, are we not to notice what an actor looks like? I’ve recently scratched my head trying to figure out relationships of characters in a play, when I might have been paying closer attention to what they were saying to each other.
When can we finally allow playwrights, directors and actors to make the plays they envision without any political overlay? When can anyone in the arts use their full imaginative abilities to give us their vision, without risk of offending someone?
Carol TamborNew YorkThe writer is chair of the Carol Tambor Theatrical Foundation.
To the Editor:
I was frustrated by the lack of nuance in Pamela Paul’s column. The stance that “good actors are able to find a way to portray people who are not like themselves” is an oversimplification that ignores history and power dynamics.
Characters from marginalized groups being portrayed by actors from dominant groups evokes a longstanding practice in which those with power have used the stage and screen to control the narrative of those with less power. Blackface, yellowface and, yes, Jewface, have created demeaning, distorted misrepresentations of those identities while erasing the visibility of their bodies.
While Helen Mirren certainly has the acting chops to play Golda Meir with integrity, her casting follows a pattern (noted by Sarah Silverman) in which Jewish female characters who are meant to be admirable and identifiable are played by non-Jewish women (“The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” or “On the Basis of Sex”).
While certain roles expect that the audience believe that the actor is the person they are portraying (hence a need for makeup, prosthetics, weight gain or loss, etc.), “The Lehman Trilogy” takes a Brechtian approach that invites the audience to separate the performer from the character. This is because the production is not arguing that this is a tale intrinsically tied to Jewishness, but rather it is meant to be taken as a universal tale about greed and loss of values.
Questioning who has the right to play whom is not having a double standard, but weighing history, power, representation, opportunity, intention and impact. Such decisions are worth deliberation.
Lisa S. BrennerMontclair, N.J.The writer is a professor of theater at Drew University.
To the Editor:
I am an English actress, born of Scottish, English and Irish heritage. I come from a long line, four generations, of theater makers, actors, managers and directors. Acting is in my blood. It was hard to avoid.
Let me tell you about some of the characters that I have played.
Pope Joan, in “Top Girls” — the female pontiff who dressed as a boy, before her pregnancy gave her away, leading to her being stoned to death.
I am neither a pope, a Catholic nor a cross-dresser.
Dorothy Hepworth, in “Stanley” — the painter and lesbian.
I am neither a painter nor a lesbian.
Queen Charlotte, in “The Madness of George the Third.”
I am not, you may be surprised to hear, a member of the royal family.
I currently play Mrs. Tishell in “Doc Martin.” A Cornish pharmacist with a neck brace. This is the final series. Otherwise clearly I would take several years out to get a pharmacy degree, live in Cornwall and hurl myself down a staircase in order to dislocate my neck.
These are but a sprinkling of the parts I have played over a career spanning just under 50 years. Others include pimps, prostitutes, maidservants, slaves, cats, weasels, murderers and lesbian nuns.
For over a century my family has been involved in the art of make believe. Let us do our jobs. Let us drop the endless analysis and assessment of who we are. Let us pretend. And let us move you and make you feel better.
Please. Because I really do not want to have to kill someone in order to play a killer …
Selina CadellLondon
To the Editor:
Regarding Pamela Paul’s column about actors and the appropriated roles they play, I am in total agreement with the points she makes.
I do, however, have an ax to grind about a related issue. There are an increasing number of British and Australian actors playing Americans, with American accents, on TV and in film. There are so many American actors looking for work who are denied those parts in favor of performers from overseas who do not speak American and must be coached to learn the accent.
I have long wondered why this is such a prevalent practice. Is this not the same thing as Caucasians playing Asians and non-Native Americans playing Native Americans? Where is the outrage about this?
Judy WeintraubLouisville, Ky.
To the Editor:
“Hollywood has wisely moved on,” Pamela Paul says, “from the offensive extremes of blackface and Shylock stereotypes, ‘queeny’ stock gay characters and Mickey Rooney’s embarrassing turn as a Japanese landlord in ‘Breakfast at Tiffany’s.’”
The problem with such hateful caricatures is twofold: The performers had no personal knowledge about the roles they were portraying, and actual Black, Jewish, gay and Japanese performers were systematically excluded from them.
While observation or imagination can sometimes be a substitute for firsthand knowledge, there’s nothing like actual experience. We should be wary of constantly centering privileged performers in marginalized roles, while pushing those with actual experience of that marginalization to the periphery.
That’s the problem with Tom Hanks’s terrific performance as a gay character in “Philadelphia.” It’s not innately problematic. But who was excluded when Mr. Hanks and others like him were centered? When gay actors are told to act straight, while straight actors are endlessly cast in gay roles, that’s a problem. And when for centuries, on many stages, only white actors could play Black roles, and only men could play female roles, that was a problem.
Systematic marginalization impoverishes the stories we tell each other.
Ben BeckleyQueensThe writer is an actor and a playwright.
To the Editor:
Bravo to Pamela Paul’s heartfelt and admiring assessment of the acting profession. Her erudite collection of performances by actors is the best argument for performers tackling roles that are not of their race, gender, socio-economic status or physicality.
The type of acting praised by Ms. Paul is what allows all of us “groundlings” to escape reality for a limited, purposeful time. We spend enough time in the real world, and so it is up to actors to transport us to another place. That journey would be far less transformative if the actors all had to be in the “reality” of their characters.
Theater evolved from the time of the ancient Greeks, and were those human actors ever criticized for portraying “gods” in the works of Sophocles and Euripides? I think not. They would have been struck with lightning if that were the case.
Dennis J. PicardSuffield, Conn.The writer is a retired theater teacher and adjudicator of acting competitions.
Advertisement
