Age requirements vary among the larger pharmacy chains, and some won’t give the shots to children younger than 5.
Follow the latest updates on the coronavirus, the BA.2 subvariant of Omicron and mask mandates.
By Christine Chung and Carly Olson
U.S. children as young as 6 months are now eligible for coronavirus vaccines, and many parents are breathing a sigh of relief. But the pharmacy that offered easy access to immunization to you or an older child might not accommodate the under-5 group.
That is not necessarily a surprise. Many pharmacies do not normally give shots to very young children. But parents should know that age requirements may vary among chains.
Under the federal Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness (PREP) Act, pharmacists can give Covid vaccines to all children ages 3 and older during the public health emergency. This effectively gets around the patchwork of widely varying state-level laws around vaccination against diseases, some of which limit pharmacists to administering vaccines to adults and others that set minimum ages that can range from 3 to 17.
While the majority of big pharmacy chains are giving Covid vaccines starting at age 3, some are not. Publix and Kroger, for example, are offering shots starting at age 5.
CVS is offering Covid shots to children as young as 18 months at stores that house its MinuteClinic locations, but set the age minimum at 5 for other stores.
It was not clear on Thursday why some pharmacies set their age limits where they had. Erin Rolfes, a spokeswoman for Kroger, declined to comment on reasons its pharmacies had 5 set as the lower limit. Publix did not respond to messages seeking comment. A CVS spokeswoman, Amy Thibault, said only that the chain was using pharmacists, pharmacy interns and pharmacy technicians to administer shots to children 5 and older.
Mitchel Rothholz, who leads immunization advocacy at the American Pharmacists Association, said all pharmacists are trained to administer vaccines to those ages 3 and older, but some may prefer to go through additional training before working with children younger than that.
“Whether the practice does it or not is based on their comfort level and resource availabilities,” he said.
Even if your pharmacy of choice is not offering shots to your eligible child, the pharmacist there can point you in the right direction. “I always encourage parents and caregivers to have a discussions with the pharmacy or reach out to their pediatrician,” Mr. Rothholz said.
Asked about many pharmacies’ policies to vaccinate children 3 and older on Thursday, Dr. Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said “much of this may be related to the PREP Act, but also ability of pharmacies to handle younger kids.”
She also pointed to what she described as “the willingness of parents to potentially want to take their younger kids to where they routinely get vaccinated, whether it’s their local community health center or their local pediatrician.”
Some parents have already encountered roadblocks.
Kelly Jensen, of Woodstock, Ill., said she placed at least 10 phone calls early this week to locate a vaccine for her 14-month-old daughter. Many larger pharmacies are not administering the shot to children that young, and Ms. Jensen said her pediatrician was not offering the vaccine to young children, either, citing waning interest.
“The thing that is so frustrating is that I could find no information,” Ms. Jensen, 37, said. “I felt like I was losing my mind trying to find anything.”
Other kinds of clinics could be a better option for many parents but some parents have turned to social media groups and grass-roots networks to find pharmacies that can accommodate their children.
A group of volunteers called Vaccinate Under 5 created a national database of pharmacies and providers administering the vaccine to young children. The map, populated by online submissions from parents and doctors, was up and running with appointments for children under 5, the group said.
“We didn’t want more hurdles to access when parents have already been through so much,” the group said in a statement. “As parents ourselves, we were waiting months for the choice to vaccinate and provide them with the same baseline immunity that other ages have been able to access for months.”
On Tuesday, Ms. Jensen drove to a doctor’s office 30 minutes from her home, where she was then told the vaccine was not available as she had been notified. A day later, the office called her to notify her that the vaccine was in stock. She rushed over.
“I had my child during a pandemic,” Ms. Jensen said. “She’s now over a year old in a pandemic, and to finally have some kind of help for her poor little system is just like, now it feels like maybe we can sort of have a normal, normal-ish childhood for her.”
Here are the policies for some major pharmacy chains:
Costco: 3 years and older
CVS: 18 months and older at MinuteClinic locations, 5 and older at others
Harris Teeter: 5 years and older
H-E-B: 3 and older
Hy-Vee: 3 and older
Kroger: 5 and older
Rite Aid: 3 and older
Safeway: 5 and older
Stop & Shop: 3 and older
Walgreens: 3 and older
Wegmans: 3 and older
Walmart/Sam’s Club: 3 and older

By Apoorva Mandavilli
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Friday recommended Moderna’s coronavirus vaccine be used as an option for children and adolescents aged 6 through 17 years.
Dr. Rochelle Walensky, the C.D.C.’s director, signed off on the panel’s recommendation less than a week after she endorsed Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech’s vaccines for even younger children.
“We have expanded the options available to families by recommending a second safe and effective vaccine for children ages 6 through 17 years,” she said. “Vaccinating this age group can provide greater confidence to families that their children and adolescents participating in child care, school, and other activities will have less risk for serious Covid-19 illness.”
Scientific advisers to the C.D.C. concluded on Thursday that the benefits of the Moderna vaccine outweigh potential risks, and recommended two doses of the vaccine for children and teens.
The endorsement was neither a surprise, nor urgently anticipated. The Food and Drug Administration authorized the Moderna vaccine for that age group late last week, and the decisions of the two agencies have rarely been at odds.
The recommendation was one of the last hurdles before a second vaccine option becomes available to a large swath of those younger than 18. The vaccine produced by Pfizer and BioNTech has been available to children 5 through 15 since last year and to Americans 16 and older since late 2020.
Moderna’s vaccine was authorized for adults in December 2020. Last June, the company applied to use its vaccine in adolescents aged 12 to 17 years, who would receive 100 micrograms, the same dose as adults. But while the F.D.A. took roughly a month to sign off on Pfizer’s application for older children, it stalled Moderna’s application.
In an announcement in October, Moderna said the F.D.A. was reviewing reports that suggested its vaccine can cause heart problems in adolescent boys. The company also said it would hold off on applying for authorization for children 6 through 11 until the F.D.A. had made a decision for the older children.
In May, Moderna submitted its application to the F.D.A. for children 6 through 11, who would receive 50 micrograms, or half the adult dose.
In a closely watched two-day meeting last week, advisers to the F.D.A. first endorsed the Moderna vaccine for children 6 through 17 years, and then the use of both the Moderna and the Pfizer vaccines for children as young as 6 months.
Meetings of the C.D.C. advisers late last week prioritized the urgent need for vaccines for the youngest children, deferring a decision on the Moderna vaccine for older children until this week.
In their meeting on Thursday, the committee members were presented with data indicating that the Moderna vaccine has an efficacy against symptomatic infection of about 80 percent in children 6 through 11 years and of about 90 percent in adolescents 12 to 17 years. But that data were all collected before the arrival of the Omicron variant, which has shown some ability to dodge immunity.
“We know that Covid can cause severe disease and death among children and adolescents, including those without underlying medical conditions,” said Dr. Sara Oliver, a C.D.C. scientist who presented some of the data.
“The benefits outweigh the risks for mRNA Covid-19 vaccines in all ages,” Dr. Oliver said.
C.D.C. researchers said the Moderna vaccine is safe overall. It carries a very small risk of transient heart problems in adolescent boys aged 12 to 17, but a similar risk has been observed with the Pfizer vaccine, according to Dr. Tom Shimabukuro, a C.D.C. scientist who presented the data.
Several studies have shown that Covid itself carries a much higher risk of heart problems than either vaccine.
Still, to minimize the risk of heart problems, the C.D.C. now recommends that boys and men between ages 12 and 39 years space their doses apart by eight weeks.
Much of the discussion on Thursday was focused on the potential confusion for providers administering different vaccines, at different doses, for several different age groups.
There is no data on the usefulness of a booster shot of the Moderna vaccine for children and adolescents, and the F.D.A. authorized the vaccine only for primary doses. But those data are likely to be available by the time these children would become eligible for a Moderna booster shot, C.D.C. scientists said.
By Stephanie Lai and Linda Qiu
WASHINGTON — The House passed legislation on Friday to extend free meals and other food assistance for children, clearing it for President Biden’s signature one week before a series of pandemic-era waivers was set to expire.
The bipartisan bill, which passed the Senate on Thursday night by unanimous consent, was a compromise that will prevent children from going hungry, creating a lifeline for families beleaguered by inflation and supply chain woes. It was a rare instance of Congress extending a pandemic assistance program, coming as the Biden administration’s requests for additional coronavirus aid have stalled amid Republican opposition.
The legislation, the Keep Kids Fed Act, which the House approved on a voice vote, extends meal reimbursements and policies aimed at providing more flexibility for schools and meal operators through the summer and the next school year. The measure extends free meals for all children, which had been scheduled to lapse on June 30, until the end of the summer.
Congress also authorized the Agriculture Department during the pandemic to reimburse school districts for those meals at higher rates. The legislation passed on Friday reduces those reimbursements — providing school districts with an additional 40-cent reimbursement for lunches and an additional 15-cent reimbursement for breakfasts above baseline levels — but still reflects a higher rate than before the pandemic.
It also extends pandemic-era measures that gave food providers more flexibility, such as allowing meals to be served outside of school cafeterias or to be brought home by students, and relaxing nutrition standards when healthier food options are unavailable, which is meant to provide relief amid supply shortages.
The House initially passed a more generous version of the bill that would have extended free meals into the coming school year for any student who qualified for reduced-priced meals, but it was scaled back to revert to previous income requirements for reduced-price and free meals for the next school year because of Republican opposition in the Senate.
“I’m glad that leaders on both sides of the aisle came together to reach this agreement and avert a hunger cliff, which would have left countless of our most vulnerable children and families without access to food this summer and into the school year,” said Representative Jim McGovern, Democrat of Massachusetts. “Over the summer, hunger gets worse because kids don’t have access to reliable breakfasts and lunches at school.”
Still, some worry that the bill’s late arrival and limited scope will leave schools financially and logistically strapped and many students hungry as families continue to face food price increases and schools struggle to source ingredients.
Under the pandemic waivers, roughly 30 million children received a free school lunch in the 2021-22 school year, a spokeswoman for the Agriculture Department said.
Just how many students will receive a free school lunch in the upcoming school year is difficult to predict. Before the pandemic, about 20 million children received a free school lunch and another two million paid for a reduced-price lunch. School nutritionists and advocates worry about children whose families make slightly too much to qualify for free meals or whose parents remain unaware of the new guidelines.
“For two and a half years, families haven’t had to fill out an application,” said Lisa Davis, the senior vice president for the No Kid Hungry campaign, an anti-hunger effort by the nonprofit Share Our Strength. “Now all of a sudden they will, and there’s not a lot of time to communicate with them.”
“I think what we’ll see when the school year starts,” she added, “is that there are a lot of eligible people who haven’t heard things are changing over.”
By Michael Paulson
Three days after the Broadway League announced that all 41 theaters would make masks optional starting July 1, one of those theaters has decided to stick with mandatory face coverings.
The producers of a starry revival of “American Buffalo,” which is a 1975 drama by David Mamet about three schemers in a junk shop, announced Friday that they would continue to require masks through the scheduled end of the show’s run at Circle in the Square Theater on July 10.
That’s only 10 days beyond when Broadway plans to drop its industrywide masking requirement, and it’s just one show, but it suggests that the unanimity among producers and theater owners may not be rock solid.
There are several factors that make the “American Buffalo” situation unusual.
The play, starring Sam Rockwell, Laurence Fishburne and Darren Criss, is being staged at Broadway’s only theater-in-the-round (it’s actually almost-in-the-round, because the seating doesn’t entirely encircle the stage), which means there are more patrons seated within spitting distance of actors than at other theaters.
Also, Circle in the Square, with 751 seats as it is currently configured, is the only remaining Broadway theater that is not operated by a large company or a nonprofit organization, so its decisions are not tied to those of a bigger entity.
Rockwell expressed concerns about the end of the masking policy in an interview this week with the New York Times columnist Ginia Bellafante.
The show announced the change in policy in a news release, saying that it was “due to the close proximity of the audience to the actors as a result of the intimate size of the theater and the staging in the round.” The production and theater owner did not immediately respond to requests for further comment.
Charlotte St. Martin, the president of the Broadway League, said of the “American Buffalo” decision, “As the optional mask policy takes effect in July, there may be unique situations which would require the audience, or some of the audience, to be masked.”
It is not clear whether the decision will affect other Broadway shows. The vast majority take place in theaters operated by a handful of big landlords who endorsed the mask-optional decision. Broadway’s four nonprofit theater operators, who have been more Covid-cautious, do not have any shows this summer. And summer fare on Broadway is dominated by big musicals, where the audience tends to skew toward tourists, many of whom come from places where masks are long gone; older New York playgoers are scarcer at this time of year (and the volume of shows is lower, too: there are only 27 shows now running on Broadway).
After “American Buffalo” closes next month, Circle in the Square is scheduled to be vacant until October, when a new musical called “KPOP” begins previews.
Actors’ Equity, the union representing performers and stage managers, has declined to comment on the audience safety protocols, but this week sent an email to its members, previously reported by Deadline, saying, “This decision was made unilaterally, without input from your union or any other, and the unions were only given advance notice a couple of hours before the announcement.”
Although the decision was announced by the Broadway League, it was made by theater owners and operators, and they plan to reconsider the protocols monthly.
By Ana Lankes
A pair of studies from United Nations agencies and other development groups paint a grim picture for a generation of Latin American students, who have lost almost half their school days since the pandemic started and whose reading and math skills are falling drastically behind.
Four-fifths of children at the end of primary school are now unable to understand a simple written text, up from half before the pandemic, according to the reports. Only sub-Saharan Africa has worse educational outcomes.
School closures in Latin America lasted longer than anywhere else except South Asia — an average of 225 days, compared to 141 days for schools around the world overall. Lack of access to computers and the internet means that many children dropped out or received poor instruction. Average scores in reading and math for third and sixth graders may be worse today than they were 10 years ago, wiping out a decade of modest advances, according to one report — and the effects could be permanent. Today’s students can expect to have 12 percent lower incomes throughout their lifetime, meaning a loss of $1,565 in average annual earnings, the studies found.
“My biggest concern now is that this will really break the progress we were making slowly toward improving opportunities and reducing inequality, which is the biggest problem we have in Latin America,” Carlos Felipe Jaramillo, the World Bank’s vice president for Latin America and the Caribbean, said in an interview.
Latin America was already one of the world’s most unequal regions before the pandemic, and learning losses hit vulnerable groups particularly hard. In Brazil, for example, the World Bank report noted that only about a third of students of African descent have access to a computer at home, compared to more than half of white students.
Paola Ramírez, who teaches English at a public school in Suba, a low-income neighborhood in Bogotá, Colombia, said that fewer than 15 of her 40 students could regularly tune into class online. “Some families had to share one phone between five kids,” their only internet-connected device, she said.
In rural areas, connectivity is even worse. Across Latin America, only a quarter of households have access to the internet, though the rate varies by country. Girls, who were often expected to do household chores or care for sick relatives during the pandemic, suffered the most. In 2020, the dropout rate for Paraguayan girls in lower middle school was 23 percent higher than for boys, one report notes.
The report suggests returning to in-person classes, providing teachers support and training, and focusing on assessments to evaluate learning losses and create tailored programs for schools. Above all, the report says, reversing the damage from lost learning needs to become a priority for governments.
“This is going to have major long-term impact, it’s a generational crisis,” said Mr. Jaramillo, adding that governments “need to act now, they can’t wait two or three years.”
By Sheryl Gay Stolberg
President Biden’s coronavirus response coordinator said Thursday that he remained optimistic that Congress would approve billions of dollars in new emergency aid to fight Covid, even as Republicans on Capitol Hill have made clear the aid package is all but dead.
“I’m an eternal optimist,” the coordinator, Dr. Ashish K. Jha, told reporters during a White House briefing. “I remain convinced that Congress is not going to walk away at this point in the pandemic, when we have made so much progress.”
But while Dr. Jha may be an optimist, the mood among Senate Republicans is pessimistic; some even assert the White House lied to them earlier this spring when officials said that, without new aid, the administration would have no money to purchase vaccines and antiviral drugs. More recently, the White House said it was taking money out of other programs to buy the drugs and shots.
On Capitol Hill, lawmakers were consumed by a bipartisan package of gun safety legislation and eager to get out of town for the Fourth of July recess. Approving Covid-19 aid was not on the immediate agenda.
Dr. Jha’s remarks came as the Biden administration is focused on rolling out coronavirus shots for newly eligible children as young as 6 months old. He said that the White House had so far delivered more than four million doses of pediatric vaccine for children in that age group, but that the administration would not know how many doses had been administered until next week. The Pfizer-BioNTech protocol for the very young requires three shots, while Moderna’s requires two.
One concern is whether the vaccines, which have often been administered in pharmacies, will be as readily accessible to the very youngest children as they were to other age groups. A federal law, the Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness (PREP) Act, was amended to authorize pharmacists to administer Covid vaccines only to those age 3 or older.
At the same time, many parents may be reluctant to have their young children vaccinated at pharmacies, said Dr. Rochelle Walensky, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. They “want to take their younger kids to where they routinely get vaccinated, whether it’s their local community health center or their local pediatrician,” she added.
For those reasons, administration officials say they have gone to great lengths to enlist pediatricians in the childhood vaccination program.
The administration began shipping vaccines late last week, and on Saturday, the C.D.C. recommended the Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech vaccines for the very young. Many parents had been eagerly awaiting the moment. But many have trepidation; a recent poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that only one in five parents would get their young children vaccinated immediately. Many are taking a “wait and see” approach.
Dr. Jha, Dr. Walensky and Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, Mr. Biden’s top medical adviser for the pandemic, used Thursday’s briefing to promote childhood vaccination.
“The known and potential benefits clearly outweigh the known and potential risks in this pediatric population,” said Dr. Fauci, who is recovering from his own bout with the coronavirus, adding, “We are all very enthusiastic about getting your children vaccinated.”
Dr. Walensky addressed parents directly: “The most important thing to do is to get your child vaccinated, get your family vaccinated, and that will deliver the most protection to you and your family and allow you to not be at risk of severe disease.”
And Dr. Fauci, 81, attributed his resilience more than a week after testing positive — “I’m feeling really fine” — to being vaccinated and double-boosted, saying he viewed himself as “an example, given my age, of what we’re all talking about today.”
“And I believe if that were not the case,” he said referring to having received a full complement of shots and boosters, “I very likely would not be talking to you looking as well as I look, I think, right now.”
By Noah Weiland
WASHINGTON — Dr. Deborah L. Birx, President Donald J. Trump’s coronavirus response coordinator, told a congressional committee investigating the federal pandemic response that Trump White House officials asked her to change or delete parts of the weekly guidance she sent state and local health officials, in what she described as a consistent effort to stifle information as virus cases surged in the second half of 2020.
Dr. Birx, who publicly testified to the panel Thursday morning, also told the committee that Trump White House officials withheld the reports from states during a winter outbreak and refused to publicly release the documents, which featured data on the virus’s spread and recommendations for how to contain it.
Her account of White House interference came in a multiday interview the committee conducted in October 2021, which was released on Thursday with a set of emails Dr. Birx sent to colleagues in 2020 warning of the influence of a new White House pandemic adviser, Dr. Scott Atlas, who she said downplayed the threat of the virus. The emails provide fresh insight into how Dr. Birx and Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the government’s top infectious disease expert, grappled with what Dr. Birx called the misinformation spread by Dr. Atlas.
The push to downplay the threat was so pervasive, Dr. Birx told committee investigators, that she developed techniques to avoid attention from White House officials who might have objected to her public health recommendations. In reports she prepared for local health officials, she said, she would sometimes put ideas at the ends of sentences so colleagues skimming the text would not notice them.
In her testimony on Thursday, she offered similarly withering assessments of the Trump administration’s coronavirus response, suggesting that officials in 2020 had mistakenly viewed the coronavirus as akin to the flu, even after seeing high Covid-19 death rates in Asia and Europe. That perspective, she said, had caused a “false sense of security in America” as well as a “sense among the American people that this was not going to be a serious pandemic.”
Not using “concise, consistent communication,” she added, “resulted in inaction early on, I think, across our agencies.”
And those at fault, she said, were not “just the president.”
“Many of our leaders were using words like, ‘We could contain,’” she continued. “And you cannot contain a virus that cannot be seen. And it wasn’t being seen because we weren’t testing.”
Dr. Birx became a controversial figure during her time in the Trump White House.
A respected AIDS researcher, she was plucked from her position running the government’s program to combat the international H.I.V. epidemic to coordinate the federal Covid response. But her credibility came into question when she failed to correct Mr. Trump’s unscientific musings about the coronavirus and praised him on television as being “attentive to the scientific literature.” She was also criticized for bolstering White House messaging in the early months of the coronavirus outbreak that the pandemic was easing.
Yet as outbreaks continued that year, Mr. Trump and some senior advisers grew increasingly impatient with Dr. Birx and her public health colleagues, who were insistent on aggressive mitigation efforts. Searching for a contrarian presence, the White House hired Dr. Atlas, who functioned as a rival to Dr. Birx.
“They believed the counterfactual points that were never supported by data from Dr. Atlas,” she said in Thursday’s hearing.
In one email obtained by the committee, dated Aug. 11, 2020, Dr. Birx told Dr. Fauci and other colleagues about what she called a “very dangerous” Oval Office meeting with Mr. Trump. In that session, she said, Dr. Atlas had called masks “overrated and not needed,” and had argued against virus testing, saying it could hurt Mr. Trump politically.
Dr. Birx claimed that Dr. Atlas had inspired Mr. Trump to call for narrower recommendations on who should seek testing.
“Case identification is bad for the president’s re-election — testing should only be of the sick,” she recounted Dr. Atlas saying.
“He noted that it was the task force that got us into this ditch by promoting testing and falsely increasing case counts compared to other countries,” she added, referring to a group of senior health officials that gathered regularly at the White House. “The conclusion was Dr. Atlas is brilliant and the president will be following his guidance now.”
In another email sent to senior health officials two days later, Dr. Birx cataloged seven ideas espoused by Dr. Atlas that she referred to as misinformation, including that the virus was comparable to the flu, that football players could not get seriously ill from the virus and that “children are immune.”
“I am at a loss of what we should do,” she wrote, warning that if caseloads kept mounting, there would be “300K dead by Dec.” The United States ended the year with more than 350,000 Covid deaths.
“I know what I am going to do,” Dr. Fauci wrote in reply. “I am going to keep saying what we have been saying all along, which contradicts each of his seven points listed below. If the press ask me whether what I say differs from his, I will merely say that I respectfully disagree with him.”
In her interviews with the committee last year, Dr. Birx described regular attempts by others to undermine the weekly pandemic assessments she first sent to state and local officials in June 2020, which offered “comprehensive data and state-specific recommendations regarding the status of the pandemic,” the committee wrote.
Beginning in the fall of that year, Dr. Birx said, she began receiving “a list of changes for three or four states” each week, which sometimes involved bids to loosen mask recommendations or indoor capacity restrictions. In one instance, she was asked to soften guidance for South Dakota officials and remove some recommendations for the state, which had a surge in cases.
When she asked the White House to publish the reports so Americans would know more about outbreaks in their communities, the request was denied, she told investigators. In December 2020, she told them, the White House stopped sending the reports to states unless they were requested.
Dr. Birx told committee investigators that she was asked to change the reports about “25 percent” of the time or else they would not be sent.
Sheryl Gay Stolberg contributed reporting.
By Christopher F. Schuetze
BERLIN — Austria, the only Western nation to introduce a general vaccine mandate against the coronavirus, is abandoning the policy a few months after it decided to hold off enforcement, the country’s health minister said Thursday.
The government will remove the law from its books in the coming weeks, putting an end to a mandate that led to protests and was suspended in mid-March, just before enforcement was set to begin.
The health minister, Johannes Rauch, said the mandate had not led to an increase in vaccinations, but had “widened rifts in the population.”
“I am convinced that it will not help us to achieve the goal of motivating as many people as possible to have a booster vaccination in the fall,” he said. “If anything, it will do the opposite.”
Vaccination rates in Austria have lagged much of the rest of Western Europe, and plans for the mandate were announced in November, when a severe wave of infections driven by the Delta variant threatened to overwhelm its health system. But the idea was not popular with everyone: Tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets in response.
When the legislation passed Parliament and was written into law in February, it imposed fines of up 3,600 euros (roughly $4,000) on adults who refused to be vaccinated. Unvaccinated citizens began receiving letters about the mandate, warning that the fines would begin in March.
But by that month, a government commission in charge of overseeing the mandate decided that new cases — which were mostly being driven by the Omicron variant — were not as great a threat. Enforcement of the mandate was suspended just days before the authorities were supposed to start enforcing it.
During the time it was in effect, a little more than a month, the mandate did little to increase the pace of vaccination. Roughly 74 percent of Austrians have received two doses of the vaccine, according to government figures. That represents one of the lowest vaccination rates in Western Europe and less than the average of the European Union.
