Advertisement
Supported by
Nonfiction
Erin Kimmerle’s “We Carry Their Bones” describes efforts to uncover the graves and crimes at a boys’ school in Florida.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By W. Caleb McDaniel
When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.
WE CARRY THEIR BONES, by Erin Kimmerle
Colson Whitehead’s Pulitzer Prize-winning 2019 novel, “The Nickel Boys,” closes with a fictional news conference. A main character, the survivor of a traumatic boyhood at a reform school in Jim Crow Florida, attends the presser hoping to learn more about a professor’s excavation of a burial ground at the school. Survivors like him, the novel says, had long known the truth of what happened there, but few others listened: “No one believed them until someone else said it.”
In the novel, that “someone else” is an archaeologist from the University of South Florida who is investigating unearthed graves at the fictional Nickel Academy. But, as Whitehead informs readers later, the novel is based on the harrowing true story of the Dozier School for Boys, and the fictional archaeologist had a real-life inspiration: Erin Kimmerle. In “We Carry Their Bones,” Kimmerle tells the true story of the investigation that inspired “The Nickel Boys,” opening with the actual news conference in which she first shared her troubling findings with the world.
The Arthur G. Dozier School for Boys outside Marianna, Fla., operated under different names for 111 years before closing in 2011. From the start, it was haunted by reports of abuse, including brutal beatings of both Black and white boys, who were often accused of nothing more than truancy or “incorrigibility.”
In 2008, the suffocation of Martin Lee Anderson, a 14-year-old African American, in Florida sparked new reporting about this grim history, especially after a group of former Dozier inmates, the White House Boys, went public with stories about the torture sessions they had once endured — as well as burials some had witnessed — on campus.
Survivors’ testimonies prompted a state investigation into a cemetery known as Boot Hill, on the “colored” side of the once segregated grounds. Four rows of concrete crosses supposedly marked only 31 graves at the site.
But in 2012, Kimmerle and her team of researchers used ground-penetrating radar to identify at least 50 possible grave sites scattered around the crosses, disputing official accounts. After confirming the radar images with a soil analysis technique aptly named “ground-truthing,” Kimmerle set out to find the truth beneath the ground.
In the end, Kimmerle’s team would find 55 burials, though not before a long struggle to gain approval for a full excavation. In narrating that struggle, “We Carry Their Bones” introduces readers to a large cast of characters that includes survivors, activists, journalists, police officers, politicians, scientists and local residents of Marianna, among others.
Kimmerle also tells how she came to lead the investigation, starting with her childhood in Minnesota and her early interest in forensic science. After working at the Smithsonian on the repatriation of Native American human remains, Kimmerle completed a doctorate in anthropology and worked with the United Nations doing trauma analysis in the war-torn Balkans, challenging gendered stereotypes along the way. “For most of my career,” she writes, “I have been the only woman in the room.”
Kimmerle shows how these personal experiences prepared her for the challenges of the multidisciplinary investigation that unfolded at the Dozier School in 2012, while also situating the school’s history of abuse in a longer story of silences around violence and racism in Marianna, including the lynching of a Black man on the courthouse lawn in 1934.
The Dozier School itself was built on land owned by a descendant of Florida’s Confederate governor, who died from a self-inflicted gunshot following the war, not long after telling the State Legislature that “death would be preferable to reunion.” After slavery, white reactionaries built a convict-leasing regime that ensnared Black Floridians, including children, in new systems of incarceration, coerced labor and violence. In fact, the segregated Dozier School was founded in 1900 to provide a progressive alternative to convict labor for juveniles.
Instead, the school became a house of horrors that was always deadlier for Black boys than it was for white ones. Family members on the outside learned of some boys’ deaths with little information, after their bodies were already in the ground. Survivors remembered classmates being dragged away for corporal punishment and either returning with ghastly injuries or not returning at all. In 1914, a dormitory fire killed boys, the youngest only 5 years old, who had been chained to their beds.
Despite all the evidence of atrocity, Kimmerle details the resistance she faced from some local residents who accused her team alternately of digging up graves or making them up. Because of the school’s longevity, many in the community had deep connections to Dozier.
Kimmerle’s response was to keep up “the constant drumbeat of inquiry, proof and interpretation,” trusting the scientific method to do its work. “We Carry Their Bones” walks readers through the painstaking job of reconstructing fragmentary skeletal remains, but Kimmerle also stops to register the emotional weight of particular discoveries, like a white-and-burgundy marble found in one boy’s grave.
The result is a fascinating account of forensic science that gleams with moral clarity. As the book unfolds, Kimmerle increasingly focuses on the team’s efforts to put names to buried remains and connect them to living family members through DNA testing. Drawing on her work in the Balkans, she spotlights the right of relatives to know about the fate of disappeared loved ones, and she movingly introduces the families, white and Black, who look to her to fill in painful gaps in their genealogies. For some, a measure of closure comes by the end of the book, though justice remains elusive.
The emphasis on reuniting the remains with relatives does leave some aspects of Kimmerle’s investigation less fully addressed than others. After noting that a disproportionate number of Black deaths were attributed to a flu outbreak, Kimmerle asks, “How were white and Black boys cared for during the flu epidemics in 1918 and 1932?” The question recedes from view. Likewise, readers learn about a second group of survivor-activists, the Black Boys of Dozier, who appear at key junctures in Kimmerle’s narrative but whose aims and members are not as fully described as those of the White House Boys.
The book also misses opportunities to connect the investigation at Dozier to larger state and national developments at the time. What did it mean that Kimmerle’s investigation unfolded in the aftermath of the killing of Trayvon Martin, the birth of a mass movement for Black lives and the rise of a conservative backlash whose fruits are now evident in the official resistance, in Florida and elsewhere, to exhuming difficult pasts?
Though Kimmerle notes that contention remains over the future of Boot Hill, the tight focus on her investigation leaves readers to reflect on such questions themselves, potentially at the risk of ending the story on a more positive note than later events would warrant. Reporting on a final presentation to the Florida cabinet, for example, Kimmerle quotes Rick Scott, who was then the governor, saying that “it’s a very good day for our state, because you can see things are heading in the right direction.” That was in January 2016.
Still, Kimmerle’s determined efforts to expose injustice, honor the dead and answer their families’ questions remain as timely as ever. After the 2019 discovery of another unmarked burial ground connected to convict leasing in Sugar Land, Texas, the just-released report by the Department of the Interior about children’s deaths at federal Indian boarding schools and, most recently, the official opacity over exactly what transpired in Uvalde, the number of bones we carry is growing by the day. The Dozier School story shows the importance of handling them with care.
W. Caleb McDaniel is the author of “Sweet Taste of Liberty: A True Story of Slavery and Restitution in America,” which won the 2020 Pulitzer Prize for history.
WE CARRY THEIR BONES, by Erin Kimmerle | 256 pp. | William Morrow | $27.99
Advertisement
