Advertisement
Supported by
There were fears that the death toll could rise as rescuers searched the train cars after the deadly accident, which took place about 340 miles southeast of Tehran.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By The Associated Press
TEHRAN — A passenger train partially derailed in eastern Iran early Wednesday, killing at least 21 people and injuring 87 more, the authorities said.
The train, operated by the state-run Islamic Republic Railway, was carrying about 350 people when it derailed near the town of Tabas, about 340 miles southeast of Tehran, on its way to the city of Yazd. The route had began as an overnight train out of Iran’s holy city of Mashhad.
Rescue teams with ambulances and helicopters arrived at the crash site, in a remote area with poor communications links. Aerial footage of the desert site of the disaster showed train cars on their side, with some rescuers running at the scene as they tried to care for those injured. 
Over a dozen people suffered critical injuries, with some transferred to local hospitals, officials said. Ali Akbar Rahimi, the governor of Tabas, was quoted by Iranian media as saying the number of deaths could rise after rescuers searched the train cars.
One of those injured told the broadcaster they felt the train suddenly brake and then slow before the derailment. “Passengers were bouncing in the car like balls in the air,” said the injured passenger, who was not identified.
Iranian media reported that the crash was under investigation. Initial reports suggested the train collided with an excavator near the track, though it was not immediately clear why an excavator would have been close to the train track at night. One official suggested it could have been part of a repair project.
Iran’s worst train disaster came in 2004, when a runaway train loaded with gasoline, fertilizer, sulfur and cotton crashed near the historic city of Neyshabur, killing close to 300 people, injuring 460 others and damaging five villages. Another train crash in 2016 killed dozens and injured scores of people.
Advertisement
