After over two years of living with Covid-19, we are learning to adapt to a world with this disease. In the first two years of the pandemic, nearly 15 million more people died globally than would have been expected during normal times, and over one million Americans have died.
The vaccines seem safe for children and are likely to protect against severe illness. But data on efficacy is thin, and most children have already been infected.
By Apoorva Mandavilli
Most Americans now carry some immune protection, experts said, whether from vaccines, infection or both.
By Benjamin Mueller
Dr. Lekshmi Santhosh parses what research has illuminated about long Covid, and what questions remain.
By ‘The Ezra Klein Show’


The expert panel will vote at the end of the daylong meeting on whether the vaccines should be reformulated to target Omicron or one of its subvariants, BA.4 and BA.5.
By Noah Weiland
The F.D.A. may target fall boosters to Omicron or subvariants.
By Amelia Nierenberg
Daily coronavirus case rates in the county are falling, and while the number of residents hospitalized remains high, daily new admissions have stabilized, health officials said.
By Alexandra E. Petri and Adeel Hassan
China’s congested and highly regulated capital is not known for either its natural refuges or its rule-bending. But swimming in the city’s lakes and waterways is a cherished, if contested, tradition.
By Vivian Wang
Age requirements vary among the larger pharmacy chains, and some won’t give the shots to children younger than 5.
By Christine Chung and Carly Olson
“American Buffalo,” at Circle in the Square, is sticking with masking till it closes, July 10, citing the “proximity of the audience to the actors” and “the staging in the round.”
By Michael Paulson
The bipartisan bill passed as pandemic-era waivers, including a provision that offers free meals to all children, were about to lapse.
By Stephanie Lai and Linda Qiu
La capital del país está en buena medida paralizada por los manifestantes, y el gobierno dice que ha perdido el control de una pequeña ciudad en la Amazonía a manos de manifestantes con armas, lanzas y explosivos.
By José María León Cabrera and Megan Janetsky
Beginning in July, Broadway will no longer require audiences to mask up. Actors and theater workers aren’t loving the idea.
By Ginia Bellafante
Billions of dollars in new emergency aid to fight Covid has been stalled in Congress, and Republicans on Capitol Hill have made clear the aid package is all but dead.
By Sheryl Gay Stolberg
Advertisement
Advertisement
