Advertisement
Supported by
The Walton-Penner group was selected from among more than a dozen bidders for the N.F.L. team, which is expected to sell for $4.65 billion, a record price.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Ken Belson
The Denver Broncos have reached a tentative agreement to sell the team to Rob Walton and members of the Walton and Penner families, all but ending an auction that is expected to fetch a record $4.65 billion, more than twice the price of the previous record for an N.F.L. franchise.
The announcement by the team and Walton also ends a long tussle between the children of Pat Bowlen, who owned the team for nearly four decades before he died in 2019 at age 75.
The Walton and Penner families, who amassed their fortunes largely through their stakes in Walmart, were considered the best-financed bidders. The executors of the Bowlen Family Trust were obligated to accept the highest offer for the team to maximize the value of the family estate.
According to Forbes, Walton is believed to have a net worth of about $70 billion, which would make him the wealthiest owner in the N.F.L. if his families’ bid is formally approved.
The sale must be approved by the league’s finance committee and by at least three-quarters of the 31 other team owners, which could take those steps within weeks. The Waltons are not expected to face much opposition given their wealth, roots in Colorado and willingness to consider building a new stadium.
In a statement, Rob Walton, speaking on behalf of the families, said they “are inspired by the opportunity to steward this great organization.”
Joe Ellis, the team’s longtime president and one of the trustees of the Bowlen trust, said in a statement that “today marks a significant step on the path to an exciting new chapter in Broncos history.”
Ellis said this winter that a new Broncos ownership group would likely be in place by the beginning of the new season in September, and the announcement late Tuesday night suggests that prediction was accurate.
Walton said that his ownership group would include Mellody Hobson, a Black woman who chairs the board of Starbucks Corporation. It is unclear what percentage of the team she will own. But the N.F.L.’s commissioner, Roger Goodell, under criticism for the league’s lack of diversity among its leadership ranks, said in February that he hoped the Broncos’ new ownership would include a person of color.
Given how seldom N.F.L. teams change hands, and the league’s extraordinary growth in recent years, the winner of the auction was bound to pay far more than the $2.2 billion paid that David Tepper paid for the Carolina Panthers in 2018, the previous record sale.
The winning bid of $4.65 billion, confirmed by a person familiar with the sale, accounts for the 10-year media contracts that the league signed in 2021 that are worth more than $100 billion. The league is also expected to see additional revenue from legalized sports gambling in the coming years.
The bid for the Broncos is also twice what Joseph Tsai paid for the Brooklyn Nets, which had been the record price for a North American sports franchise.
In recent months, the names of numerous billionaires surfaced as interested parties for the team, which according to Forbes is worth $3.75 billion, making it the 10th most valuable N.F.L. franchise. The team’s revenue grew 17 percent last year and it has relatively little debt on its books, according to Forbes.
The team’s value is expected to climb even higher if the new owners build a new stadium to replace Empower Field at Mile High, which opened in 2001.
The Broncos draw fans from throughout the West, but particularly in the fast-growing Rocky Mountain states. The team has had only one winning season and no playoff appearances since it won its third Super Bowl title in the 2015 season. But the team has had a busy off-season, hiring Nathaniel Hackett, an offensive specialist, as head coach, and trading for quarterback Russell Wilson.
Given the potential price for the team, the list of legitimate bidders dwindled to around a half dozen. Robert Smith, who grew up in Denver and is considered one of the wealthiest Black people in the country, was considered a contender but his bid never materialized.
Other bidders included Josh Harris, who already owns stakes in the N.B.A.’s Philadelphia 76ers and the N.H.L.’s Devils.
Some reports have linked the former Broncos quarterbacks John Elway and Peyton Manning to different bidders, but they would presumably hold small financial stakes. Under league rules, the new owner can only borrow up to $1 billion to finance the purchase, a limitation that eliminated many parties.
That restriction is unlikely to limit Rob Walton, Greg Penner and their families. Walton, 77, is the oldest child of Helen and Sam Walton, the co-founder of Walmart. Rob Walton was chairman of Walmart from 1992 to 2015. His cousin is Ann Walton, the niece of Sam Walton and the wife of E. Stanley Kroenke, who owns the Los Angeles Rams of the N.F.L., the Denver Nuggets of the N.B.A., the Colorado Avalanche of the N.H.L. and Arsenal F.C. in the Premier League, among other teams.
Penner married Rob Walton’s daughter, Carrie, and has been Walmart’s chairman since 2015.
The Walton-Penner bid, if approved, would end nearly four decades of ownership by the Bowlen family. The Broncos joined the A.F.L. in 1960 and were dismal on the field for their first decade and a half, though they were popular with fans in the Rocky Mountain states. But after Bowlen bought the club in 1984, the Broncos had 21 winning seasons, 13 division titles, nine conference championship berths and seven Super Bowl appearances.
His memory failing, Bowlen stepped away from running the team in 2014, and left several trustees, including Ellis, to oversee the franchise. The trustees were tasked with deciding which of his children should become the controlling owner — or whether the franchise should be sold, if they believed that was in the family’s best interest.
Beth Bowlen, Bowlen’s second daughter from his first marriage, worked at the club and was interested in becoming the principal owner. But she left the team several years ago.
Brittany Bowlen, a daughter from Bowlen’s second marriage, was being tabbed as a potential replacement. All seven Bowlen children could not reach an agreement on who should take charge, so the team was put up for auction.
Now it’s another family, this time with even deeper pockets, that is likely to take over.
Advertisement
