
Sign In


            Fairfax's first homicide in 13 years
Manage Newsletters
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Kavanaugh’s Democratic assassins
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Police in Fairfax, Virginia, are treating the death of a nonprofit founder as a homicide after he was found shot and killed in his bed early Friday. 
Fairfax police said that DonorSee CEO Gret Glyer, 32, died from a gunshot wound around 3 a.m. Friday at his home in the 9800 block of Bolton Village Court. Mr. Glyer’s wife and two children were home at the time of his death.
WRC-TV, an NBC affiliate, reported that police found the back door to his home was open during their investigation, but would not say if there was a forced entry into the house.
This would be the city of Fairfax’s first homicide since July 2009, according to WUSA9-TV, a CBS affiliate.
“We deeply regret to inform you of the unexpected and tragic passing of our inspirational Founder, Gret Glyer,” DonorSee wrote in a Facebook post. “Gret is a shining light that has brought hope and joy to everyone and everything he touched. The DonorSee team is in shock.”
DonorSee is an online giving platform that describes itself as a place “where you can give directly to people in need all around the world and see the difference you make with video updates.”
Mr. Glyer started the company in 2016 after moving to the African country of Malawi in 2013. The organization went global in 2020 and a year later announced that it had partnered with more than 100 nonprofits in 38 countries. 
Anyone with information about this incident is asked to contact Detective Matthew Green at Matthew.Green@Fairfaxva.gov or call 703-385-7959.
• Matt Delaney can be reached at mdelaney@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
                          Click
                            here for reprint permission.
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
