Discovery
Adventure
Destinations
Collections
About us
50 Reasons to Love the World
Untold America
More
Laverton is the kind of outback town you might expect at the end of an epic desert road trip, not at the start of one. Marooned on the edge of Australia's two largest deserts – the Victoria and the Great Sandy – Laverton felt like the last outpost of frontier civilisation, a 12-hour drive from Perth, five hours from already-remote Kalgoorlie.
Whenever a road train rumbled through town, Laverton rouses into life. Otherwise, it is eerily, gloriously quiet. Tarmac roads disappear beneath the red sand long before they reach the town's outskirts. When the wind picks up, the sand turns to dust and blankets the town with a fine, coppery sheen. After the dust settles, when darkness falls, the stars come out, more stars than seem possible.
Laverton, founded on the traditional lands of the Wongutha and Tjalkanti people, marks the starting point of the Outback Way, also known in Western Australia as the Great Central Road. One of the world's great transcontinental traverses, it was laid out by Len Beadell in the 1950s in what was surely one of the road-building achievements of the time; from 1947 until 1963, Beadell forged more than 6,000km of outback tracks for the Australian government. The marks his bulldozers left behind in the desert sands terrified desert peoples who wondered what great animal had passed this way.
Laverton is located on the edge of Australia's two largest deserts – the Victoria and the Great Sandy (Credit: Zuma Press/Alamy)
Standing here nearly 70 years later, there were signs to what lay ahead: the Great Beyond Visitor Centre; the Explorers Hall of Fame; the big-sky views of an endless desert landscape from Windarra Lookout. And before setting out, it was difficult not to contemplate the enormity of the undertaking.
Tracking north-west, connecting one side of Australia to the other, the Outback Way is the most direct route through the heart of the country. Along the 2,700km from Laverton in Western Australia to Winton in far-off Queensland, the Outback Way passes through countless indigenous homelands, skirts isolated national parks and stops in at life-saving outback roadhouses. It ultimately connects Perth with Cairns in a great diagonal shortcut that cuts thousands of kilometres (and weeks of travel) from the paved route that follows the coast for part of the way. As a road trip, it captures the essence of outback travel as it once was.
But, perhaps, all of that may soon be about to change.
At first after I left Laverton, it was difficult to understand why the Outback Way is considered such an epic crossing: the road was paved; the going was easy; and the thrill of departure kept at bay any awareness that ahead lay one of the longest and emptiest roads on the planet.
Where the tarmac ended, the jarring presence of road crews, graders and towering eddies of red dust offered a vision of the road's future: one day, perhaps soon, the Outback Way will be sealed along its entire length. Already, only 1,200km remain unsealed and best driven in a 4WD. What it gains in speed and ease of access – after rains, unsealed sections of the road can become impassable – it will surely lose in romance. Here was a road, perhaps even a desert, on the cusp of great and irreversible change.
The Lasseter Highway, named after gold prospector Lewis Harold Bell Lasseter, runs through the Northern Territory's Red Centre (Credit: gionnixxx/Getty Images)
"Can't hold back progress," said Bev Carmichael, with her nearly superfluous "Stop" sign, as a truck with wheels the size of a small family car blocked the way and the smell of hot asphalt caught in my nostrils. "When all this is finished, it'll cut days off the journey. It can't come soon enough for remote indigenous communities out there."
Just who might be making such a journey was a mystery – no other vehicles had passed through Carmichael's checkpoint all day.
Beyond the Tjukayirla Roadhouse 305km after leaving Laverton, the road skirted another of Australia's great deserts, the Gibson. In such lonely surrounds, it was easy to fall prey to the fears of another era, to imagine what it might mean to leave the road behind and strike out into the desert that lay beyond. The desert's name provided a clue. In 1874, a young man named Alfred Gibson was sent to get help by explorer Ernest Giles on the expedition's last remaining camel. Giles survived, but Gibson was never seen again.
Warburton, the first settlement of any size in the 550km from Laverton, felt like a metropolis, and its Tjulyuru Art Centre was filled with canvases of rare beauty by artists from the Ngaanyatjarra people. In town, daytime ennui evaporated with the heat and locals came out to reclaim their streets at dusk. At the Eider Creek Crossing 3km from town, river red gum trees formed what seemed like an honour guard to the deep desert that lay beyond.
Over the days that followed, the road unfurled into the heart of the desert: past the ochre-tinted Rawlinson Range to the north then through the Aboriginal settlement of Warakurna; past Kaltukatjara (Docker River) then through the Petermann Range to the south. This red-rock massif was the final resting place of Harold Lasseter; he died in a cave in the Petermanns in 1931, and with him went any hope of finding the reef of gold he claimed to have found near here.
The route passes near Kata Tjuta, formerly known as The Olgas (Credit: ImageBroker/Alamy)
The country through which I was driving was beyond remote.
That changed as Kata Tjuta, formerly known as The Olgas, loomed on the eastern horizon. These soulful, domed monoliths at the heart of Anangu country rose hundreds of metres into the air and had the appearance of a giant desert cathedral, nowhere more so than in the haunting Valley of the Winds, an immersive 7.4km loop walk into the heart of the range. Nearby, Uluru was a place of gravitas, spirituality and texture.
Beyond Yulara, the service town for Uluru and Kata Tjuta, the tarmac of the Lasseter Highway was at once a blessing and curse: the desert miles sped past, but with speed came an awareness of what might be missed in the rush of forward momentum. Mt Connor rose from the sands to the south. At the roadside lookout, travellers coming from the east who were yet to see the real Uluru on the horizon, gasped in awe, mistaking it for the more famous landmark. Aboriginal legends say that Ice Men inhabit Mt Connor, emerging on winter nights to sprinkle frost upon the Earth as a symbol of their passing.
The Lasseter Highway ended at the crossroads town of Erldunda, where it met the north-south, Darwin-to-Adelaide Stuart Highway, a prototype, perhaps, for paved transcontinental highways in Australia.
Many empty desert miles north, beyond a rocky defile in the MacDonnell Ranges with its dragons-back ridges and water-filled gorges, lay the large town of Alice Springs, or Mparntwe to its Arrernte traditional owners. Art galleries and bookshops, supermarkets and restaurants, desert wildlife parks and fine sunsets – Alice Springs combined convenience with a true desert sensibility.
Vivid sunsets, wide horizons and remote windmills are all iconic symbols of the Australian outback (Credit: Anthony Ham)
But the call of the road was even more powerful, and the journey continued. Some 80km north of Alice Springs, the Plenty Highway – the long, final leg of the Outback Way – veered away to the east. Past the Gemtree, where travellers can fossick for gemstones, along a paved road that continued as far as Atitjere (Harts Range), the sensation of deep-desert immersion returned. Along the roadside, signs showed examples of indigenous artworks, which travellers can buy by scanning a QR code.
For traditional owner Anthony Patrick, a better road through Atitjere would mean cheaper supplies, fewer vehicle accidents and better hospital access for members of his community, and, yes, more tourists able to visit his people's traditional lands.
"When tourists come through, we would like them to come, be welcomed, and have two-way respect of culture," he said.
Dry river crossings, giant termite mounds, horizons flecked with ghost gums and bloodwoods – QR codes aside, so much of this stretch was classic outback travel. Out past the remote roadhouse of Jervois, the Outback Way carried echoes of its lonely beginnings far across the continent: hours passed without my seeing another vehicle.
Not far beyond the Northern Territory-Queensland border, 2,100km and more than a week into my journey, the road again was paved and inching further west with each passing year.
The Boulia-Winton road that emerges from the desert marks the end of the Outback Way (Credit: Anthony Ham)
Paved roads are more welcome at the end of a long desert journey than they are at the beginning, and the thrill of having crossed a continent carried all the way into the town of Boulia. With its pubs and provisions, where glorious sunsets were a backdrop to creaking windmills, Boulia was a true outback town. Along its broad main street, locals stopped their vehicles in the middle of the road to chat.
The Boulia-Winton road hadn't left the desert behind, merely tamed a path through it. Desert country here consisted of spinifex and the flat-topped mesas of the Cawnpore Range. More big skies were to follow, and the Middleton Hotel felt like a film set, so closely did it resemble the stereotype of an isolated outback pub.
And then my final destination of Winton, as first one, then a line of buildings filled the horizon. It was a sign of the busier world that lay ahead. It took every ounce of willpower not to turn around and return back down the road.
The Open Road is a celebration of the world's most remarkable highways and byways, and a reminder that some of the greatest travel adventures happen via wheels.
--
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Art
Books
Music
TV
Style
Identities
Designed
The Collection
More
In the 1990 classic Pretty Woman, when Edward Lewis (Richard Gere) first picks up Vivian Ward (Julia Roberts) in the luxury silver sportscar he borrowed from his lawyer, there is an implication he is somewhat oblivious to the fact that the woman is a sex worker. The businessman, a New Yorker lost amid the vast highways of Los Angeles, is initially only interested in directions. In Sophie Hyde's Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, which is released this week, there is no such confusion. When the doorbell of her hotel suite rings, Nancy Stokes (Emma Thompson) knows who's at the other side of the door: Leo Grande (Daryl McCormack), a sex worker she hired online. 
More like this:
-       How Pretty Woman erased sex from its story
-       Why Hollywood is shunning sex
-       The 12 best films of 2022 so far
A retired teacher and widow with two grown kids, Nancy finds herself with time to reflect on the years that are now behind her. Out of this process of contemplation, one thing in particular bothers the woman: she has never reached an orgasm. Sex, throughout her life, has been akin to a chore – in, out, done. Frustrated, she takes the plunge and books Leo Grande for the night, hoping to explore all the desires she was never allowed to act on with her one and only partner.
From this seemingly simple premise, Good Luck to You, Leo Grande presents a shift in the portrayal of sex work on film, with the most obvious change being that it is an older woman hiring a younger man, a reversal of the usual pattern of age and gender. In addition, the woman here is solely concerned with her own pleasure. She has no expectations of having an orgasm this late in life, but she wants to be touched, to touch, to experience pleasure by allowing herself to openly admit that’s what she desires.
In Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, Daryl McCormack plays a sex worker hired online by widow Nancy Stokes (Emma Thompson) (Credit: Searchlight Pictures)
Leo, too, represents a diversion from the way sex workers have generally been depicted on screen. Yes, he is young, tall and handsome, but he is also void of the stereotypical masculinity that typically comes along with such attributes, as when the protagonist of Paul Schrader's American Gigolo (1980), high-end escort Julian (Richard Gere, once again), repeatedly reinforces his virility by employing mockery and unwarranted outrage to negate any suggestion of queerness or femininity. Leo showers Nancy with tenderness, even when she offers him the opposite in return. The former teacher pokes and prods at the dynamics of his job, enquiring if he ever feels degraded or what could have gone so terribly wrong for him to choose that specific career. In response to this line of questioning, Leo offers nothing but patient kindness, firmly rooted in the understanding that animosity often comes from a place of insecurity. 
Challenging stereotypes
The stereotypes Nancy frames Leo with are the result of long-perpetuated stigma, and they have been reinforced by cinematic portrayals of sex work. "We're either villainised or sensationalised, and we are rarely allowed to exist in this space of being someone who is just working to make money to survive," sex worker Parker Westwood tells BBC Culture. In 2021, Westwood launched the podcast A Sex Worker's Guide to the Galaxy, with the aim to "destigmatise and humanise sex workers".
Destigmatising is key when it comes to what sex workers expect from depictions of their practice. For a long time, film has done the very opposite, feeding into patterns of preconceptions that are not only inaccurate, but arguably dangerous. Most popular accounts of sex work fall under two contrasting detrimental categories: "the disposable sex worker" or "the hooker with a heart of gold". The first encompasses the films in which sex workers are ruthlessly (and often brutally) murdered, their death handled as nothing more than a work hazard. Think Stanley Kubrick's Eyes Wide Shut (1999), where high-end escort Mandy (Julienne Davis) is introduced mid-overdose, briefly seen again masked and half-naked, then – finally – at the morgue.  
Thrillers notoriously foster this trope, with films such as David Fincher's Se7en (1995) and Nicolas Winding Refn's Only God Forgives (2013) both featuring shockingly vicious murders of sex workers. True crime adaptations are another fruitful genre for the perpetuation of this violent pattern, with titles such as The Frozen Ground (2013), Lost Girls (2020) and Green River Killer (2005) dwelling – often with gratuitous violence – on the killing of sex workers and the disregard commonly shown by authorities in solving such cases.
Even the most celebrated film about a "hooker with a heart of gold" begins by reinforcing the notion of the disposable sex worker. The aforementioned Pretty Woman features a dead street worker in one of its very first scenes. "She be out on these streets day in, day out, trading her sorry self for some crack", says a man to the journalists gathering nearby, implying the young woman was to blame for her own death. As the dead body lays in a skip, tourists snap pictures, desensitised to this very specific type of violence. 
Starring Julia Roberts and Richard Gere, Pretty Woman brought conversations about sex work to the mainstream, but has been widely criticised (Credit: Warner Bros)
Pretty Woman helped bring conversations about sex work to the mainstream, but has been widely criticised in its approach to the subject. Vivian's trajectory is constructed with the single goal of having the audience root for her to ultimately abandon sex work – any other outcome would be deemed tragic. The way out, of course, is presented in the form of Edward, a rich, white, older man who is unable to resist the urge to rescue her. "You could be so much more," he tells Vivian as the two lay in bed, the faint lights failing to obscure the fact he perceives her as “lesser than”. 
The film also fosters the idea that this transactional relationship is a romantic one, which, in turn, romanticises the idea of sex work itself. Edward showers Vivian with gifts, hands her a limitless credit card and arranges a personal shopper to carefully curate her new image. This fairytale-esque approach to their dynamic reinforces the notion that all sex workers are patiently awaiting a knight in shining armour to whisk them away from such a sorrowful predicament. If Edward was ever truly in love, it was with his own creation.
Comedy is yet another outlet for poor sex work representation, as producer, screenwriter and former sex worker Isa Mazzei tells BBC Culture: "There are a lot of comedies out there where the plot is 'oops, we killed a sex worker' and those types of narratives are degrading and perpetuate harm. The fact they're often played off as a joke is the most insidious part of it all, it implies killing a sex worker is somehow less than killing someone with another profession." 
Entire comedies are centred on the murder of sex workers, such as Peter Berg's Very Bad Things (1998) and Lucia Aniello's Rough Night (2017), while many others employ the demeaning narrative device as a passing joke, as is the case with Dirty Work (1998), where a car salesman is caught live with several dead sex workers in the trunk of the cars on display. Some films take it up a notch by adopting these harmful stereotypes in their titles, such as Dead Hooker in a Trunk (2019) and Death of a Hooker (1971), also known as Who Killed Mary What's 'Er Name?
Reframing sex work
Many recent films, however, are actively challenging these stereotypes, with one example being 2018's CAM, written and produced by Mazzei. The story, which employs horror to explore the loss of agency frequently experienced by sex workers who perform online, debates important matters such as consent and the separation between person and persona. "It was absolutely mandatory for us to include sex workers in every step of the filmmaking process. I can't speak for all sex workers, I'm just one. So it was important to include other voices and make sure that we had arrangements about how things were portrayed," says Mazzei, who is also the author of Camgirl, a candid memoir about her days of live-stream camming.
Although Mazzei emphasises the importance of employing sex workers in all steps of the creative process, she admits it is still far from easy for current or former sex workers to be open about their past within the industry. "It was a terrifying experience coming out as a sex worker in Hollywood and taking meetings with people who didn't always respect me as a writer and people who just wanted to ask salacious questions about camming", Mazzei says.
This sentiment is shared by Numa Perrier, whose directorial debut Jezebel (2019) is adapted from her time as a camgirl in the late 1990s. "There is a long-lasting stigma around any type of sex work, and that was a big part of why I was afraid to talk about my personal story at first. I have, however, quickly realised through workshopping the script that it was a bigger creative challenge to hide behind a story that was mine. From that point onwards I became bolder and bolder in expressing that part of me and the film is much better for it."
CAM (2018) uses horror to explore the loss of agency experienced by online sex workers (Credit: Netflix)
CAM and Jezebel greatly benefit from having sex workers reframe their own stories on screen, and prove that faithful portrayals of the subject require insight from people with lived experience. In Sean Baker's ground-breaking Tangerine (2015), former sex workers Kitana Kiki Rodriguez and Mya Taylor imbue their nuanced performances with lived knowledge, giving the film authenticity. French director Camille Vidal-Naquet spent years listening to the stories of young men working in the Bois de Boulogne – a public park in Paris notoriously known as a sex work spot – to create Sauvage (2018), a blistering tale of a young hustler determined to trail his own imperfect path.
Ninja Thyberg's recently released Pleasure, a gruelling look into the world of pornography, is yet another example of how having sex workers involved in the creative process can aid honest representation. Speaking to The New York Times, the director said she "wanted to look at porn from a perspective that doesn't see women as victims," and credits the industry professionals who worked with her on the project for the authentic feel of the film. The result is a hyper-realistic drama that employs the journey of Swedish newcomer Bella Cherry (Sofia Kappel) to scrutinise the ins and outs of the porn industry, from the predatorial behaviour of producers to the fierce competition between performers.
Thyberg's feature debut may be called Pleasure, but it is all about business. At times crushingly credible, the film places the porn industry under surgical lights, and is an uncomfortable watch. The director lingers on the little-known behind-the-scenes minutiae general audiences are likely to be unfamiliar with, but it is its approach to wider, more complex topics such as sexism, consent and sexual trauma that sets this particular story apart from its predecessors. Thyberg's sensitive eye bypasses the dangerous threat of gratuitous fetishism to build a poignant study of ambition.
Both Pleasure and Good Luck to You, Leo Grande offer fresh, rarely-seen-before perspectives on the portrayal of sex work on screen. While the former approaches the topic through the visual shock of the ultra-explicit, the latter does so through carefully crafted dialogue. In fact, there were no sex scenes on the first draft of the film. "I just enjoyed the verbal side of it," writer Katy Brand tells BBC Culture. And conversation is central to the film's positive portrayal of sex work, exploring the notion of consent through verbalisation. Before every touch, every advance, the man lays out the terms of what is about to happen, harnessing eroticism out of safety. 
Ninja Thyberg's Pleasure (2022) is a gruelling exploration into the world of pornography (Credit: Mubi UK)
"I wanted it to be positive because there are positive stories out there. And they are real and they are true. And just because they make some people feel a bit uncomfortable, it doesn't mean they don't get to be represented," says Brand. Here, this element of discomfort is introduced through Nancy's insecurities, which lead the retired teacher to a place of toxic bias. In Leo's gentle handling of his client's vitriol, there is a clear demonstration of vocational tact, something actor Daryl McCormack was keen to explore through his performance.
"When I was speaking with sex workers, they had this ability to consistently find a balance with another person, and to me, that's a real gift. That's an intuitive thing and maybe where the vocation comes in. It's something that can’t be taught," he tells BBC Culture. For a film to depict sex work as a true vocation is already a real change, but to do so through a male sex worker adds yet another layer of progressiveness.
"The world of sex work is dominated by women, queer folks, trans folks and people of colour. The power structure in place means the people with extra income available to spend on sex workers are cis white men, or seemingly cis white men, so that's where the demand is", says Westwood.
Would the film have worked so well if the genders were reversed? It is questionable whether the film could preserve its essence without its very specific, subversive gender dynamic, a fact director Sophie Hyde was acutely aware of: "A lot of the time when we see a younger man with an older woman it's through this idea of a cougar, which I don't subscribe to. One of the things I loved about making [the film] was that there were so many power dynamics at play. Somebody's paying, so there's power in this; someone is young and beautiful, so the other person feels powerless in that situation. Daryl and I have even talked about a mixed-race person coming into the room as a sex worker and the power dynamic there. These things were not necessarily the plot of the movie but they are there all the time for the characters."
It is clear that, as cinema slowly progresses towards a more faithful portrayal, there is a need for these more diverse stories, crafted with the help of sex workers. "I would like to see not only inclusion of sex workers, but also deferring to sex workers," says Mazzei, on the commitment required of the entertainment industry to achieve meaningful change. "And there's a big difference there because a lot of people will hire someone to consult on their film but then not listen to that. And that's not doing the work. Doing the work is willing to step aside and listen to what someone is telling you about their lived experience and understand that they know it better than you."
Good Luck to You, Leo Grande is released in the UK and US on 17 June.
Love film and TV? Join BBC Culture Film and TV Club on Facebook, a community for cinephiles all over the world.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Art
Books
Music
TV
Style
Identities
Designed
The Collection
More
Simply uttered on its own, the word Lolita conjures up a certain collective image: an "underage" girl who is aware of – and deliberately overt with – her own sexual attractiveness, developed beyond her years. This troubling pop culture legacy, that propagates throughout music, fashion, photography and beyond, feels worlds away from the tomboyish, unselfconscious girl described in Vladimir Nabokov's 1955 novel of the same name. On the infamous poster for Stanley Kubrick's adaptation, a 1962 "black slapstick" comedy, as critic Pauline Kael called it, a young girl peeks at us over a pair of heart-shaped sunglasses, sucking on a lollipop, accompanied by the sentence: "How did they ever make a movie of Lolita?" The photograph, taken by Bert Stern, is hazy and soft-focus. Memorable for its "come-hither" quality and flippantly daring tagline – that overlaid the film with a smug defiance in the face of strict censorship laws – it's this image that has come to define the long-debated film which turns 60 this month. Is this where the misunderstanding of Lolita can be traced back to?
More like this:
-       The grossest film of 2022?
-       Why 1971 was a great year in film
-       Stories that reflect our oldest fear
The film Lolita (1962) has long been accused of adopting too breezy a tone in its depiction of a story that involves a middle-aged professor grooming and raping his pre-teen stepdaughter. It was adapted from Nabokov's novel by the author himself. But it later emerged that his draft was considered overlong and unfilmable by the director and by producer James B Harris. Twenty years after the film was released, Nabokov recalled "an amiable battle of suggestion and countersuggestion on how to cinemise the novel," and that the final script was heavily edited by Kubrick, heavy on wink-wink, nudge-nudge double entendres, exonerating plot tweaks and a perplexing moral stance. Made with Kubrickian flair, the adaptation is also laden with pratfalls and wordplay – and appears to be more concerned with sending up the idea of sexual repression than critiquing the real sexual crimes of the protagonist. While this is understandable due to aforementioned censorship laws that banned, loosely, "obscenity", many questioned why the director bothered to adapt the book in the first place, given the restrictions; writing in Esquire in 1963, Dwight MacDonald noted that Kubrick had been "evidently scared stiff of the Legion of Decency and such self-appointed guardians of our morals". According to an anonymous Motion Picture Association of America spokesman at the time of release, the script had "turned an important literary achievement into the worst sort of botched-up pastiche that could be imagined".
The poster for Kubrick's 1962 film Lolita featured a photo that has since become familiar and iconic (Credit: Getty Images)
But who is to blame for the historic misjudgement of the Lolita story? The book was variously debated as comedy ("wildly funny," according to TIME magazine), tragedy ("Humbert is the hero with the tragic flaw," mused the New York Times), and a paedophilia enabler ("Anyone who published it or sold it here [the UK] would certainly go to prison," according to Sunday Express editor John Gordon). So is it fair to blame the film for the role of Lolita in the cultural conversation? Whether the web was spun by Kubrick and Harris, or by Nabokov himself in writing the book in the first place, is open to argument. What can be examined is how the film has prevailed in pop culture, with bubblegum-chewing pop stars adopting the film's aesthetic, and how one salient voice – that of Sue Lyon, the film's co-lead – has been left out of the discussion of it, while people busy themselves debating the "genius" or not of the men involved in its creation.
Lolita was already much talked about in cultural circles by the time it was optioned for the screen. Published in Paris to both fanaticism and furore, before finally finding a home three years later in the US in 1958, contemporary reviews were split down the middle about this lyrical tale of a tortured paedophile. New York Times critic Orville Prescott dismissed the novel as "florid and archly fatuous" surmising: "Perhaps [Nabokov] thinks of his book as a satirical comedy and as an exploration of abnormal psychology. Nevertheless, Lolita is disgusting." Others were moved; even famously sharp-tongued Dorothy Parker described it as "the engrossing, anguished story of a man, a man of taste and culture, who can only love little girls".
Perhaps it is unfair to entirely blame Kubrick's film for adding comic levity to the story, when many argued it was in the book in the first place. Much of the moral outrage surrounding the novel focused on how the attempts at comedy were crude and ill-suited to the subject matter, noting a sour taste left by Humbert's swooning, sickly prose. This was a factor that hindered the book getting published in the United States for three years, forcing Nabokov to publish his work with Olympia Press, the Parisian publisher helmed by Maurice Girodias that specialised in books which could not be published (without legal action) in the English-speaking world. But certain contemporary reviews made note of the book's jocular tone: Charles J Rolo deemed it "one of the funniest serious novels I have ever read" that "parodies everything it touches" with its "charge of comic genius". Many couldn't get past what they saw as an excuse to detail child abuse; others found it impossible not to give in to a wry smile as the unreliable narrator performed Olympic-standard mental gymnastics in order to justify his actions. 
It took Vladimir Nabokov several years to find a publisher for his novel Lolita (Credit: Getty Images)
Lolita would become Stanley Kubrick's first comedy, and after having just completed a for-hire job with the mammoth studio production Spartacus (1960), the director was determined to exact his now-infamous precision and control in shepherding the novel to the screen. Fifty-three-year-old British actor James Mason – who was known on both sides of the Atlantic for roles in Odd Man Out, A Star is Born and North by Northwest – was cast in the central role, playing the part with a sense of ruffled debonair charm that invited pity rather than disgust. Indeed, Mason's Humbert is not the man we are introduced to in the book's foreword, where the fictional John Ray Jr, describes Humbert as "horrible, he is abject, he is a shining example of moral leprosy". What's more, Kubrick and Nabokov's script entirely removes the "explanation" Humbert gives for his sexual obsession: that, one summer as a young boy, he was interrupted during a sexual encounter with his 14-year-old love, who then died. Instead his Lolita, real name Dolores, is depicted simply as a girl that has transfixed and enamoured him; there is no hint of prior paedophilia, or, as the book says, "diabolical cunning".
A bag of contradictions
To make a releasable film, Kubrick and Harris were tasked with hiring an actress for the role of Dolores Haze who looked older than the girl Nabokov had described in the novel as a "monkeyish" 12-year-old who was "unconscious herself of her fantastic power". Of 800 auditionees, a model and TV actress from Davenport, Iowa was chosen: Sue Lyon. Sophisticated, sunny, and – crucially – appearing far older than her 14 years, she flew to the UK for the film's lengthy shoot. Some years later in 1969, Kubrick admitted to bowing to "the pressure over the Production Code and the Catholic Legion of Decency at the time," of which the casting of the older-looking Lyon was a significant part. Seemingly in agreement, Nabokov would say that Catherine Demongeot – the scrappy, tomboyish then-12 year old of Zazie in the Metro (1960) fame – "would have been the ideal Lolita" instead.
When watched today, the final film is a bag of contradictions. Lyon is made up with eyeliner, sooty lashes and permanently coiffed hair – and yet she sleeps in the nightdress of a Victorian doll, all ruffles, ribbons and bows. When we first meet her she's rigidly placed and posed, gazing at Humbert over the top of her sunglasses. She looks imperious, knowing, and appears to be at least 18; she is not, as Nabokov describes in the book, "standing four feet ten in one sock". In a 1974 foreword to Lolita: A Screenplay, Nabokov admitted that "the frills of Miss Lyon's elaborate nightgown were painful".  
One of the most notable changes from page to screen was through the character of Clare Quilty, played in this film adaptation by British actor Peter Sellers. It is with Quilty that Dolores eventually decides to run away, orchestrating her escape from Humbert by having the other man pose as her uncle to discharge her from hospital where she is staying with a phony illness. Kubrick expanded significantly the role of Quilty, an avant-garde playwright who is directing a play at Dolores's school; the film opens with his murder, which occurs at the book's close, after Sellers has immediately set up the film's comic tone by popping out from behind a chair and declaring "no, I'm Spartacus!" in reference to Kubrick's last feature.
James Mason played middle-aged professor Humbert Humbert in Kubrick's film (Credit: Getty Images)
Instead of fulfilling the novel's expectation of his role as the manifestation of Humbert's guilt or his tragic foil, instead Sellers displays his comic timing and predilection for skits. Quilty disguises himself as characters including a policeman, a queer-coded lisping playwright, and a newly invented deadpan German psychologist named Dr Zempf, who phones Humbert and tells him that Dolores is sexually repressed and simply must be allowed to socialise by participating in the school play. And it isn't just with Sellers where the supposedly comic tone lies, but also in the film's frequent innuendo, for instance Humbert complementing Dolores' mother Charlotte's "cherry pies".
But just because the film is different to the book, does that automatically make it a failure? In one cutting contemporary review, New York Times movie critic Bosley Crowther recalled the poster tagline of "How did they ever make a movie of 'Lolita'?" before answering: "they didn't," pointing to the adaptation's "strange confusions of style and mood". Later, Adrian Lyne's 1997 version starring Jeremy Irons and Dominique Swain was considered far more loyal to the source text, yet was itself surrounded by controversy, and drew accusations of sentimentalism and unnecessary romanticisation. If Kubrick had made the film he really wanted to make, audiences may well have been too repulsed by the abuse unfurling on screen to differentiate between depiction and endorsement.
Determined to adapt the book in the face  of strict censors, Kubrick and Harris diverted focus away from Lyon's age. According to Harris: "We knew we must make her a sex object [...] where everyone in the audience could understand why everyone would want to jump on her." In a 2015 interview with Film Comment, the producer reaffirmed: "We made sure when we cast her that she was a definite sex object, not something that could be interpreted as being perverted." Then comes an admission that makes the entire film seem like a wilful misunderstanding of Nabokov's book: "we wanted it to come off as a love story and to feel very sympathetic with Humbert." Harris's gamble worked. "Though 14 during filming," wrote critic Daniel De Vries in 1974, "Lyon appears to be a well-developed 17, and Humbert's desire for her comes off as ordinary lust."
Sue Lyon became famously reticent about speaking to the press after she stopped acting, giving a rare statement in 1996 that lambasted the effect Lolita had had in her life. "My destruction as a person dates from that movie," she said. "I defy any pretty girl who is rocketed to stardom at 14 in a sex-nymphet role to stay on a level path thereafter." While there have been appraisals of Nabokov's novel and Kubrick's film, Lyon has been markedly absent from the cultural conversation. James Fenwick, senior lecturer in the Department of Media Arts and Communication at Sheffield Hallam University, says that "what is missing from these studies is the voice of Lyon and of the way in which she experienced the production of Lolita. She is absent, silent, and silenced". Obvious parallels to the source novel arise here: in an essay titled The Art of Persuasion in Nabokov's Lolita, Nomi Tamir-Ghez writes that "not only is Lolita's voice silenced, her point of view, the way she sees the situation and feels about it, is rarely mentioned."
Sue Lyon played the role of Lolita in the 1962 film, and was 14 years old at the time (Credit: Alamy)
Speaking to BBC Culture, Lyon's daughter Nona Harrison Gomez explains that the reputation thrust upon her mother negatively affected Lyon's career: "She was so much stronger than this twisted, complicated interpretation of what a girl or woman is." While Kubrick and Harris were determined to cultivate a star, this never truly came into fruition."[They] had her in a contract," Harrison Gomez continues. "She was supposed to do something like five to six movies after Lolita. And instead, she had to keep promoting Lolita for years afterwards [...] that movie pigeonholed her in ways that didn't allow her to move forward within her career."
While Lyon went on to act in films like The Night of the Iguana (1964) by John Huston and 7 Women (1966) by John Ford, her roles began to dwindle drastically, and she made her final film appearance in 1980, aged 34. "Being typecast wasn't a positive experience for her," Harrison Gomez acknowledges. "I think my mother was a very funny actress. She had the ability to do other things, not just the seductive thing she was associated with when she was 14."
"She was an activist. She was an amazing writer [...] she did really amazing work in New York, helping women prepare for jobs that didn't have the income for finer clothes." She elaborates: "Don't get me wrong. There was a lot of darkness in her life. But I think being young in Hollywood – we've seen it 1,000 times with young actresses – they'll pull you to the top, let you do whatever you want, until you do one thing that's too much, and then they'll just destroy you."
Today, the iconography associated with Lolita (1962) has been adopted in varying degrees of earnest by wider pop culture. Those heart-shaped sunglasses, symbolic of knowingly babyish kitsch, have become a stand in for "sex-kitten" tendencies – wilfully ignoring the dark elements of the story it cribs from. 
By making his version of Dolores a wordly participant, Kubrick's adaptation set off a domino effect that continues to poison pop culture to this day. She appears in the lyrics of the song Don't Stand So Close to Me by The Police, that details a teacher's sexual attraction to one of his students, in which one lyric reads: "He sees her / He starts to shake and cough / Just like the old man in / That book by Nabokov". Or she rears her head as the sordid moniker used to describe disgraced sex offender Jeffrey Epstein's private jet: the "Lolita Express". In 1992, Ellen Von Unwerth shot Kate Moss for Glamour Italia, in a cover and spread titled "Charming Lolita". In the photos, 18-year-old Moss is styled with a red lollipop, a doll, ringlet curls – years earlier, John Galliano had selected the 15-year-old to open his show as his "Lolita", launching her career as a forever-young waif. This alone reflects how the word has become a stand-in for a young girl who is a willing participant in her own premature sexualisation. It’s fair to say that Lolita walked so that Alicia Silverstone's sexually aggressive 14-year-old Adrian in The Crush (1993) could run. Japanese "Lolita" fashion also continues to be popular.
It's this lack of context in the imagery of Lolita that leads to a fundamental retrospective misunderstanding of the character and story, the name now a proxy term for a type of bratty coquettishness: see Katy Perry's 2014 Twitter selfie, complete with the caption "Feeling v Lolita rn". Pop contemporary Lana Del Rey's 2012 album Born to Die is stuffed full of references to Nabokov's novel, too. In Off to the Races, she begins: "My old man is a bad man, but / I can't deny the way he holds my hand", before warbling the very opening lines to the book in the chorus: "Light of my life, fire of my loins". On the same album, her song Lolita opens with the lines: "Would you be my baby tonight? Could be kissing my fruit punch lips in the bright sunshine". She is, ironically, doing exactly what Nabokov satirises through Humbert's voice – using cloying, poetic metaphors to dress up a hazy fantasy of concealed horror.
The character Dolores 'Lolita' Haze in the film is very different from her depiction in Nabokov's 1955 novel (Credit: Alamy)
In 2020, singer-songwriter Madison Beer was forced to apologise to her 3.2 million Twitter followers after she made a pithy comment on a TikTok livestream that she "definitely" romanticised the book. After the hashtag #madisonbeerisoverparty went viral soon after, she wrote to her Twitter followers: in a characteristically Gen-Z low-caps notes app apology: "i see now that the book is triggering for some people, evoking a very complicated emotional response". An even more infamous story came in 2013 when a then-38-year-old Bradley Cooper was photographed alongside his then-21-year-old girlfriend Suki Waterhouse as he read Lolita to her in a Parisian park. As the press at the time were constantly trailing the couple, many news outlets hinted that they believed this to be staged; like Kubrick's film, perhaps this was a participatory in-joke. Or it is entirely possible, too, that it was a stroke of serendipity that the couple – while in a legal relationship – were caught reading an infamous story of an age-gap liaison.
When it comes to Kubrick's version of Lolita, there may never be a cultural reckoning with the film when the jury is still out on what it is trying to achieve – or make us feel – in connection with its source novel. But with its leading actress as an unwilling, lash-batting icon for a culture that has long romanticised statutory rape, we can only think that Kubrick's film – divorcing itself from the careful context of Nabokov's satirical novel – has spawned a monster.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

