Discovery
Adventure
Destinations
Collections
About us
50 Reasons to Love the World
Untold America
More
Coming to the end of a short, winding trail, I found myself standing in the extreme north-west corner of the contiguous US, a wild, forested realm where white-capped waves slam against the isolated Washington coast with a savage ferocity. Buttressed by vertiginous cliffs battling with the corrosive power of the Pacific, Cape Flattery has an elemental, edge-of-continent feel. No town adorns this stormy promontory. The nearest settlement, Neah Bay, sits eight miles away by road, a diminutive coast-hugging community that is home to the Makah, an indigenous tribe who have fished and thrived in this region for centuries.
The Makah are represented by the motif of a thunderbird perched atop a whale, and their story is closely linked to the sea.
"The Makah is the only tribe with explicit treaty rights to whale hunting in the US," explained Rebekah Monette, a tribal member and historic preservation programme manager. "Our expertise in whaling distinguished us from other tribes. It was very important culturally. In the stratification of Makah society, whaling was at the top of the hierarchy. Hunting had the capacity to supply food for a vast number of people and raw material for tools."
After reading recent news stories about the Makah's whaling rights and the impact of climate change on their traditional waters, I had come to their 27,000-acre reservation on Washington's Olympic Peninsula to learn more, by visiting a unique tribal museum that has just reopened after a two-year hiatus due to Covid-19.
The imposing statues outside the Makah Museum wear distinctive cedar-bark rain hats (Credit: Brendan Sainsbury)
Due to a trick of fate, Makah history is exceptionally well-documented. In contrast to other North American civilisations, a snapshot of their past was captured and preserved by a single cataclysmic episode. In 1970, a brutal Pacific storm uncovered part of an abandoned coastal Makah village called Ozette located 15 miles south of Cape Flattery. Part of the village had been buried by a mudslide that was possibly triggered by a dramatic seismic event around 1700, almost a century before the first European contact. Indeed, recent research argues that ancestors of the Makah – or related Wakashan speaking people – have been present in the area for at least 4,000 years, which, if proven, would change our understanding of prehistory in the Olympic Peninsula and Vancouver Island.
Miraculously, the mud had protected embedded organic matter by sealing it off from the air. As a result, thousands of well-preserved artefacts that would normally have rotted – from intact woven cedar baskets to dog-hair blankets and wooden storage boxes – were able to be painstakingly unearthed during a pioneering archaeological dig.
Due to the suddenness of the event and the exceptional levels of preservation, scientists hailed the find a "Western Pompeii" and the Washington Post called it "the most comprehensive collection of artefacts of a pre-European-contact Indian culture ever discovered in the United States".
Anxious the material might be engulfed by the sea and lost, the tribe called in Richard Daugherty, an influential archaeologist at Washington State University who'd been involved in fieldwork in the area since the 1940s. Having good connections with Congress, Daugherty helped secure federal funding for an exhaustive excavation.
Makan petroglyphs can still be seen at Wedding Rocks, just south of the Ozette archaeological site (Credit: Natalie Fobes/Getty Images)
"Dr Daugherty was instrumental in the excavation work," recounted Monette. "He was very progressive and interested in working alongside the tribe in the process. He worked to gain financing for 11 years."
The Ozette dig lasted from 1970 until 1981 and ultimately unearthed around 55,000 artefacts from six beachside cedar houses covered by the slide. The Makah, like many indigenous groups, have a strong oral tradition, with much of their history passed down through storytelling, song and dance. The evidence unearthed at Ozette affirmed these stories and added important details.
"It was a spectacular place to excavate; the preservation and richness was extraordinary," recalled archaeologist Gary Wessen, a former field director at the site who later wrote a PhD dissertation on the topic. "Ozette is what we call a primary deposition. We have all these materials preserved in the places where they were actually used. It helps tell us more about the social and spatial relationship of the people who lived in the houses."
While much of the material dated from around 1700, some of it was significantly older. Indeed, archaeologists ultimately determined that multiple mudslides had hit Ozette over a number of centuries. Beneath one of the houses, another layer of well-preserved material dated back 800 years. The oldest finds so far have been radiocarbon-dated to 2,000 years and there are middens in the area that are at least 4,000 years old, according to Wessen.
From the outset, the Ozette dig was different to other excavations. Tribal members worked alongside university students at the site, and, early on, it was decided that the unearthed material would stay on the reservation rather than be spirited off to distant universities or other non-indigenous institutions. In 1979, the tribe opened the Makah Cultural and Research Center in Neah Bay with a museum to house a "greatest hits" of the collection. The 500 pieces currently on display represent less than 1% of the overall find.
"The tribe was very assertive of their ownership and control of the collection," said Monette. "A lab was developed in Neah Bay. For the museum, we hired Jean Andre, the same exhibit designer as the Royal BC Museum in Victoria. We decided to tell our story seasonally with sections on spring, summer, fall and winter."
The museum includes a reconstruction of a wooden Makah house among hundreds of other artefacts (Credit: Brendan Sainsbury)
The result, which has only recently reopened, is a beautifully curated space. Outside on a verdant lawn, I was welcomed by a reconstruction of a traditional wooden Makah house and two large statues wearing distinctive cedar-bark rain hats. Inside, where I met Monette, the assembled exhibits left no doubt about the tribe's maritime prowess. I saw 13ft whaling harpoons, wooden paddles and seal skin buoys. A large central space was taken up with two red cedar canoes guarded by a giant whale skeleton. We proceeded through a mock-up of a dark wooden Makah house with an opening that looked out over a hyper-realistic diorama of the seashore at Ozette.
I was particularly enamoured by the artistry of many of the carved wooden objects. There was a dorsal fin of a whale studded with hundreds of sea otter teeth, and an unusual figurine of a woman lying prostrate in the act of childbirth. These artefacts, along with ornate seal clubs and delicate combs, testify to a remarkable level of craftsmanship.
"The Makah were skilled woodworkers," said Wessen. "They exhibited levels of sophistication regarding technology that weren't appreciated before."
There are several elements about the Ozette project that make it one of the most important archaeological finds in North America to date. The sheer size of the collection coupled with the scale of the effort to recoup it was unprecedented. Then, there's the calibre of the preservation, which, at times, was almost surreal. Wessen recalled excavators using fire hoses to blast the clay off vegetation entrenched in the mudslide. In the process, they exposed green leafy alder branches to sunlight for the first time in more than 300 years. As the oxygen hit, the leaves would quickly turn black, but for 15 to 20 seconds, workers were treated to a glimpse of a bright green leaf from 1700.
Tribal elders were integral in helping archaeologists understand the meaning of many of the artefacts and how they were used. In the 1970s, there were still a dozen or so native speakers alive in Neah Bay. The knowledge of these elders perfectly complemented the scientific expertise of the archaeologists. Wessen remembers this sharing of ideas as a powerful experience. "When archaeologists and elders work together, we get a more complete understanding of the past," he said.
The Makah are represented by the motif of a thunderbird perched atop a whale (Credit: Brendan Sainsbury)
Neah Bay today has a population of just more than 1,000 people and an economy based mainly on fishing. After returning to the town from my blustery walk out to Cape Flattery, I sought shelter in a small waterfront joint called Calvin's Crab House and watched as the weather swung capriciously between sun and rain.
Just outside, a small monument marked the site of Fort Núñez Gaona, a colonial outpost established by a Spanish lieutenant called Salvador Fidalgo in 1792 as the first non-native settlement in the north-western US. Although the Spanish only stayed for four months, their presence marked an important historical watershed, the moment in which two cultures intersected and learned to live alongside each other in a new and different world. Uniquely, Ozette offers us a time capsule of Native life before the changes prompted by European contact.  
With the weather closing in, I decided against visiting the archaeological site, which is isolated and difficult to reach without a car. Unlike Pompeii, there are no ruins to walk around – although the surrounding beaches are spectacular – as the site was backfilled in 1981. All that remains today is an abandoned ranger station, a small memorial shed and some indigenous petroglyphs carved on rocks.
As to whether there's anything else down there, Wessen speculated there might be, but admitted that there's still more research to be done on the existing artefacts first: "The Ozette collection in its entirety has not come anywhere close to having its full research potential realised," he said.
--
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.



Discovery
Adventure
Destinations
Collections
About us
50 Reasons to Love the World
Untold America
More
In the garden of an abandoned monastery, on an ancient cemetery island in the Venetian Lagoon, I found myself surrounded by life. A man bustled past with a wheelbarrow full of brambles; two women sat on the ground, tending to flowering grapevines about to burst into fruit. Preparations were afoot on the Isola di San Michele for Venice's festival season, and Laguna nel Bicchiere, a non-profit organisation devoted to the propagation of Venetian viticulture, would be providing the wine.
"In late spring and early summer there are quite a few festivals," explained Colleen McCann, a long-time member of the organisation, as she showed me around San Michele's vineyard. "Each campo [city square] has its own different celebration, and on the solstice in June there's three days of festivities at the [Church of San Giovanni in] Bragora. We go there and offer people an ombra [small glass] of wine, with the idea being to let the city know about Venice's historical vineyards."
In addition to the vineyard we were standing in on San Michele, Laguna nel Bicchiere currently preserves three others – with origins going back centuries – on the Venetian islands of Giudecca, Sant'Elena and Vignole.
Laguna nel Bicchiere, an organisation devoted to the propagation of Venetian viticulture, preserves the vineyard on San Michele (Credit: Daniel Stables)
Laguna nel Bicchiere is not a commercial operation – they can't sell the wine, only give it away – and the vineyards are staffed by enthusiastic volunteers, motivated purely by the revival and preservation of Venetian winemaking. In the name of research, amid the mighty oak barrels of the monastery's cellar, I tried a couple of ombras myself. The wine was the colour of honey, rich and robust – tangibly imbued, even to my dilettante palate, with the salty taste of the lagoon.
Venetian winemaking has a long history that has been documented as far back as 2,500 years ago; until 1100, there was even a vineyard in the Piazza San Marco­. That's despite the unique challenges associated with growing vines on islands prone to flooding, where saltwater lies just a few feet beneath the shallow earth. Stressed vines produce the best wines, though, according to winemaking wisdom, and this was certainly seen to be the case for Venice's indigenous dorona grape. The golden wine it produced was prized above all others by wealthy Venetians in centuries past, including by the doges – Venice's powerful heads of state.
"Archival research shows that the dorona was considered the doges' favourite variety because of its golden colour and the quality of the wine made from it – balanced and structured," said Valeria Necchio, a Venice-based food writer.
The dorona's dominance was not to last, however. "The diseases that spread across Europe at the turn of the last century – phylloxera, powdery and downy mildew – took a huge toll on the overall production and on the economy of the islands that were devoted to winemaking, like Mazzorbo, Sant'Erasmo and Le Vignole," said Necchio. "The workforce was redirected from fieldwork to factory work – for example, in the glass furnaces of Murano."
Venissa's vineyard is enclosed by ancient walls and towered over by a medieval bell tower (Credit: Daniel Stables)
The ease of importing wine from more reliable terroirs won out, and dorona wine was replaced on Venetian tables with those from elsewhere in Italy and beyond. In the 1950s and '60s, tourism came to further displace agriculture as the predominant industry in the lagoon. Then, most devastating of all, came a catastrophic high tide in 1966, which caused the worst flood in the history of Venice and drowned the few remaining vines. Venetian wine, along with the dorona grape itself, was a thing extinct, consigned to the history books.
Or so it was thought.
In 2002, local winemaker Gianluca Bisol was exploring the island of Torcello when he noticed an unusual golden grape gleaming on a gnarled vine in a garden beside the Byzantine Church of Santa Maria Assunta. "It was an accidental discovery, but when I saw those three dorona plants for the first time, a great emotion came over me," said Bisol. "It was immediately clear to me that they were different from any vines I'd seen before. Nicoletta, who looked after the garden, told me that indeed they were different – a native grape variety from the Venetian Lagoon. I was mesmerised."
Unsure if it could be true, Bisol arranged for DNA tests, which confirmed the grapes were indeed the storied dorona.
After poring over historical viticultural texts and scouring local vineyards and gardens, Bisol discovered a total of 88 surviving dorona vines on Torcello and the surrounding islands. A key player was Gastone Vio, a farmer on the island of Sant'Erasmo, who provided scores of dorona vines to the Bisol family and whose planting techniques had enabled the survival of his crop through the flood of 1966. "Thanks to the conversations and exchanges I had with other growers and winemakers working in the lagoon, I learnt more about what I had to face in order to bring back this time-honoured Venetian tradition – viticulture," Bisol said.
Honouring two more Venetian traditions, Venissa's hand-blown wine bottles display hand-beaten gold leaf (Credit: Awakening/Getty Images)
He learned how the vines needed to be planted far apart, to allow the roots to grow sideways to avoid the saltwater; and how wells had to be dug hundreds of feet deep to reach the fresh water needed to flush the vineyards. Bisol found a medieval monastery on the nearby island of Mazzorbo with a walled vineyard and put to work what he had learned. Ten years and much experimentation later, the first vintage of his Venissa wine was produced.
Gianluca's son, Matteo Bisol, now oversees operations at Venissa, and he met me off the boat to show me around Mazzorbo. In contrast to the tumbledown vineyards of San Michele, Venissa is a swanky commercial enterprise – a Michelin-starred restaurant and luxurious lodgings have been added to their portfolio in recent years. However, they share one of Laguna nel Bicchiere's fundamental principles. "We're really serious about the quality of the wine," Matteo told me. "But for us, it represents something way bigger: bringing back a part of the history of Venice to the lagoon after we almost lost this wine."
The rediscovery of the dorona has ignited a revival in Venetian wine. Laguna nel Bicchiere now grows a mixture of dorona and other, non-indigenous, grapes, and produces mixed-grape wines. Venissa's whites are made with 100% dorona grapes, and their vineyard is the only one dedicated solely to its commercial production. The limitations of the lagoon mean it will always remain a boutique enterprise; the estate produces 3,500 bottles per year, which are sold mainly in the immediate area.
Venissa's dorona wine has won acclaim for its full body and bold, dry taste, thought to be very similar – thanks to the dorona grape's unique profile and traditional, organic growing methods – to the wine so prized by the doges. It carries an unmistakable hint of saltiness, and pairs extremely well with the lagoon ingredients served in Venissa's restaurant, like oysters, lavender and Sant'Erasmo honey.
Drainage ditches cross Venissa's vineyards to combat the saltwater from the lagoon (Credit: Awakening/Getty Images)
As we wandered through the vineyards, Matteo pointed out a large canal dug between the vines to rid them of floodwater from the lagoon. Crouching down, he signalled towards some tiny tufts of green, gamely sprouting amid the vines. "This is a sea herb; this one's samphire; this is erba stella [buck's horn]. These three grow only in a salt environment. If we move a little bit higher" – he pointed a few inches to the left – "here we still see some of the sea plants, but we can also see the margarita [daisy]; this is a mixed area. If we go here, this is the freshwater version: normal land, not salt land, just a few inches away. It's all very stressful for the vine, but it's important for the quality of the wine that the vine needs to struggle. No pain, no gain."
That philosophy was tested to its limits this year, which marks another milestone in the dorona grape's proud history of near-extinctions and triumphant resurrections. "We were very afraid at the beginning of this current season, because the vines are still suffering from the 2019 high tide – the second biggest ever," Matteo said. The vines survived – just – but in 2021, they struggled even more than in 2020. "All plants keep substances in reserve, which they use to survive after difficult years; we didn't know at the beginning of 2022 if the vines would have enough to survive. We were very happy, because the grapes showed us their resilience once again."
Venetian wine is an improbability; but then, so is Venice itself. "For us, the dorona is a symbol," Matteo said. "Venice is really the struggle of the human being to create a city in the middle of a lagoon. Dorona, in this terroir, in this situation – it's a great metaphor for the genius of the Venetian people, who were able to create something amazing in a situation that was almost impossible."
BBC Travel's Forgotten Foods offers hope for the world's "lost" foods through chefs and purveyors who are bringing them back to life though cooking and cultivation.
--
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.



How We Live
How We Think
More
Clarissa Holleman had always felt like teaching was her calling. But just more than a year into her first job caring for children with special needs, the 24-year-old from Hinesville, Georgia, US, was burnt out from what she calls the “high stakes” and “compassion fatigue”. She had “no life” of her own outside work, and was struggling to see a future within the education field.
When Holleman started teaching in July 2020, all her classes were remote due to the pandemic. She felt both powerless and ill-supported to help the children she was caring for. “That kind of work environment is just crazy; you have no energy left at the end of the day,” says Holleman. On top of the anxiety and exhaustion she was experiencing, there were financial issues: she wasn’t being paid during school holidays. Holleman increasingly felt that the toll the job was taking on her life was no longer worth the sense of purpose it offered.
So, in January 2022, after spending months upskilling via free LinkedIn courses, Holleman quit what had been her “dream career”. She’s now a tech recruiter at a millennial-run company, and although she doesn’t identify with her work as much anymore, she prefers it that way. Holleman has unlimited (and culturally permitted) paid time off, great work-life balance that allows for established hobbies and a better salary. “I definitely see myself staying there really long term,” she says.
For decades, the cultural mandate in many Western countries has been hustle hard for your employer, and you’ll be rewarded. If the striving is for a job you love, the pay will be satisfaction. And if the job involves climbing the rungs of a corporate ladder, the pay will be, well, big bucks. Though different in motivation, both paths share the same narrative. As a result, work has become an obsession, an identity even; something workers traditionally felt lucky to have.
But increasingly, Generation Z workers like Holleman – those born between 1997 and 2012 – are insisting we write a new script for work. Having observed older workers experience burnout, time poverty and economic insecurity at the grindstone, they’re demanding more from workplaces: bigger pay cheques, more time off, the flexibility to work remotely and greater social and environmental responsibility. Many of these values were millennial preferences, but for Gen Zers, they’ve become expectations – and they’re willing to walk away from employers if their needs aren’t met.
As a result of their war on work, Gen Zers have been dubbed entitled or anti-capitalist. Yet they’re not; Gen Zers want it all – and are willing to work hard for the right employer. But if the juice isn’t worth the squeeze, they’ll leave and find other ways to make ends meet. Many have argued they’re simply a generation responding to the social movements of their time, and using lessons hard won by older workers to inform their career choices. And some even think the youngest in the labour force have potential to bring meaningful change to the workplace along the way.
Gen Zers just “want decent pay for doing work they enjoy, and the respect that allows them to have a life outside of their jobs” –  Kathleen Gerson (Credit: Getty Images)
‘Not for me’
While there are, of course, Gen Zers aspiring to all sorts of lives, the top priority for this cohort of workers as a whole is higher pay, according to a 2022 survey by US job site CareerBuilder. That goes for Gen Zers who haven’t yet entered the workforce, too: 77% of college seniors in a 2020 job-seeker survey by recruitment platform RippleMatch said compensation would be the number one factor when evaluating offers.
This represents a significant shift in values compared to millennials. According to a 2011 global survey by professional services network PwC, millennials entering the workplace valued career progression and personal development over financial reward. They were more attracted to employers who could help them climb their ladder of choice than those with the deepest pockets.
Still, it makes sense that wages are in sharper focus now, says CareerBuilder CEO Susan Arthur. Gen Z is entering a workforce and economic landscape that is very different to before, she says. While young workers across generations tend to struggle financially early on in their careers, Gen Z faces particularly acute stressors, especially as rising inflation outpaces salary growth.
The pandemic has intensified economic precarity for all workers. Half of American Gen Zers who are old enough to work witnessed someone in their household lose a job or take a pay cut due to the Covid-19 outbreak, according to the Pew Research Center. They’ve also watched older generations go through multiple recessions and end up with huge amounts of debt, says Elizabeth Michelle, a London-based psychologist and workplace engagement consultant. “So, Gen Z are looking at all of that and thinking, ‘Not for me; I’m not going to do that’.”
But as much emphasis as there is on pay, Gen Zers are also looking to grow their careers at certain kinds of organisations. Mia Jones, a 23-year-old proposal writer from California, dreams of a workplace that’s “modern, transparent and entrepreneurial”. She values work-life balance, mental health benefits, the flexibility to work when and where she wants and companies that invest in developing workers in a diverse and inclusive environment.
Jones isn’t alone in her desire for a more humanistic type of labour. According to 2022 research by workplace training company TalentLMs, 82% of Gen Zers surveyed want mental health days, 77% consider it important that their company supports diversity, equity and inclusion efforts, and 74% would opt for either hybrid or totally remote work. After an unsatisfactory salary, burnout and lack of work-life balance was the number one reason they’d quit. Where work used to be about what employees could offer companies, says Michelle, “now it’s all about what Gen Zers are expecting from work”.
Millennials also yearned for flexibility and balance, but they were more willing to sacrifice corporate social responsibility for companies they admired as consumers; the ones that aligned with their passions and were perceived as prestigious places to work. In 2008, 86% said they’d consider leaving an employer whose values no longer met their expectations, but by 2011, that figure had plummeted to just 56%.
Jones, on the other hand, rejects the idea that an employer – reputable or otherwise – should dictate her identity. While she appreciates the skills she’s learned at work, she finds meaning and purpose outside employment, through art, making music and going to yoga. “There is nothing wrong with just focusing on existing and enjoying life,” she says. “You do not have to define yourself by your job.”
‘I’m a huge advocate for taking the leap’
With both salary and work-life balance front and centre, Gen Zers also come with another stand-out characteristic: they are the cohort most likely to quit if they’re unsatisfied at work. One 2021 study by consumer financial services company Bankrate found that 77% of the Gen Zers surveyed were on the hunt for a new job. Of millennials at the same stage in their careers, only 38% of those surveyed in 2011 said they were on the lookout for opportunities. And Gen Zers already spend less time in a role than millennials, according to CareerBuilder.
Quitting or changing careers might seem likely to nudge higher salaries further out of reach, but research finds that’s not the case. In comparison to those who stay put, the UK’s Office for National Statistics found higher wages were a key perk of job hopping for all workers.
Since switching from education to tech, Holleman's making more now than she did as a teacher. It’s not that she expected a bigger teaching salary right out of college, but in the district where she worked, Holleman would have had to wait three years for any sort of pay rise. And within her first six months as a tech recruiter her salary has already jumped by USD$10,000 (£8,000). “I’m a huge advocate for taking the leap if your mental health is suffering,” she says. “I mean, I could always go back to teaching.”
How a workplace operates also factors into whether younger workers stay or go. Gen Zers and millennials hold many of the same workplace values, says Michelle, but Gen Z seems to have more willingness to act on them – something she suspects is born of the knowledge that there are endless other ways to earn a living now, thanks to the internet. “It takes a lot less for them to leave than it did for previous generations,” she explains. Gen Zers want to see companies follow through on their mission statements, particularly in regard to social and environmental values, and if they aren’t “practising what they’re preaching, Gen Z will hold them accountable”.
Gen Zers and millennials hold many of the same workplace values, says Elizabeth Michelle, but Gen Z seems to have more willingness to act on them (Credit: Getty Images)
Beth Kennedy has witnessed this phenomenon in her workplace first-hand. Gen Zers are assertive when it comes to establishing work-life boundaries and upholding ethical standards, says the 32-year-old, who runs a marketing agency in New York City, and employs younger workers. They’re “thoughtful, compassionate and hardworking”, she explains, and they’ll call out policies and behaviours they disagree with. While millennials “were taught, and believed, that you needed to be always available for work, Gen Zers don't subscribe to that”.
Given the context of their lives, Gen Z attitudes make sense, says Kathleen Gerson, a professor of sociology, arts and science at New York University. Born into a digitally connected world, they are acutely aware of the social justice and environmental movements as well as the new-found ways of working, that are shaking up the status quo. They’re also, adds Gerson, entering a job market that – despite endless new tech-enabled career opportunities – been growing less stable and more amorphous since the 1950s.
Trust and loyalty between employers and workers has eroded, and Gen Zers have internalised that insecurity, says Gerson. What may seem like entitled behaviour – quitting and demanding changes at work – is actually employers failing to meet the demands of modern life. Gen Zers just “want decent pay for doing work they enjoy, and the respect that allows them to have a life outside of their jobs”, says Gerson.
Catalyst of change?
Gen Z is erupting into the workforce at a time of major upheaval. In the wake of the pandemic, we’re experiencing something of a power struggle between workplaces and their employees, explains Gerson, as workers push for better conditions and many companies resist their efforts. Naturally, conversations around flexibility, work-life balance and social and environmental justice are louder than ever.
The youngest workers are entering the labour market with a set of demands and the determination to act on them. Still, despite their efforts, the news is not all positive; Gerson is concerned Gen Zers are applying individual solutions to collective problems. Workers quitting or speaking up, she says, are moves that are less likely to convince employers to make changes than government legislation or union pressure that mandates benefits like higher wages and more time off. Especially, she says, considering mobility largely depends on privilege; hourly workers and those with less corporate experience have very little leverage to job hop or assert boundaries that could prevent work encroaching on life.
Plus, Gen Z workers like Jones are already reporting burnout, suggesting the hustle culture and financial burden that plagued generations before them is still taking a toll. Despite focusing on her life outside work, Jones finds her job overwhelming. “I'm dealing with a lot of stress I didn't even think to prepare myself for; navigating corporate dynamics, no structure and little support,” she says.  “I often feel overworked, underpaid and angry.” Still, she holds out hope that her generation’s vision for a new kind of labour could eventually manifest.
Despite her caveats, Gerson, who describes herself as “a short-term pessimist but a long-term optimist” about these workplace shifts, is hopeful Gen Z can catalyse change. The needle is more likely to move, she says, as millennials with similar values to Gen Z increasingly take on leadership roles and companies pressed to attract and retain talent are forced to yield to some worker demands – but she cautions that it will likely take some time before all workers benefit.
Kennedy, who has already implemented Gen Z-driven policies in her own workplace, is adamant the youngest workers are already succeeding in their quest, however. No one is expected to be contactable outside set hours, meetings feel more collaborative and inclusive, and she’s aspiring to introduce a four-day workweek. Gen Zers are asking the tough questions, says Kennedy, “and workplaces are being forced to have broader discussions and make shifts when they don't have good answers”.
In Hinesville, Holleman is thriving in her new role. Her millennial boss is understanding and flexible. The work feels meaningful, but she doesn’t think a whole lot about it while she’s not on the clock. And outside the office, she’s a Miss Georgia candidate and has plenty of time for hobbies. “I’m able to just live my life now,” she says.

Discovery
Adventure
Destinations
Collections
About us
50 Reasons to Love the World
Untold America
More
For cookbook author Saira Hamilton, a childhood visit to see her grandmother was never as simple as jumping in a car. Born to first-generation immigrants in the UK, she began each summer with a flight from Wales to Dhaka. The remainder of her complex journey to Dampara, a village nestled in the verdant paddy field-dotted Kishoreganj district in central Bangladesh, was a watery blur – involving travel by train, bus, rickshaw and flat-bottomed boat.
Amid this latticework of waterways, docks, stations and dusty roads, one immutable highlight stands out for Hamilton: the jhal muri vendor, his arrival preceded by the sound of clanging steel trays and shakers, and the delicious food she'd go on to devour.
One of the nation's most iconic snacks, jhal muri is a spiced puffed rice salad (jhal means hot in Bangla; and muri, also called moori or murmura, is puffed rice) that combines two of Bangladesh's greatest loves: rice and spice. (The third, of course, is fish.)
"I think it's fair to say jhal muri is a street-food classic found all over Bangladesh. It's very vibrant in taste and truly speaks to the predominant palate," said Hamilton. In her cookbook, My Bangladesh Kitchen, the humble snack stands proudly as the first recipe – a quintessential Bangladeshi culinary experience.
Its core ingredient is muri, which is traditionally made by "frying" rice in hot salt or sand, and is firmly rooted in the tapestry of food cultures in Bangladesh, featuring prominently in both daily life and auspicious occasions such as the iftar meal during Ramadan for Muslims or the Puja period during Durgapuja for Hindus.
The core ingredient of jhal muri is puffed rice, which is mixed with a range of hot and sour ingredients (Credit: Mtreasure/Getty Images)
But the bland muri gets the signature Bangladeshi fireworks – the "jhal" in jhal muri – from a smorgasbord of explosively hot and sour ingredients. Green chilies, red chilli powder and channa chur (a popular spicy snack mixture with dried and fried lentils, peanuts and chickpeas) provide nose-watering heat. Table salt, sendha namak (Himalayan pink salt) or kaala namak (kiln-fired, sulphurous black salt) are used – sometimes all together – for seasoning, supplemented copiously with lime juice and tamarind water to bring the mouth-puckering sharp, tangy flavour. Mint, coriander and finely diced onions, along with cucumbers (and, occasionally, tomatoes), give jhal muri its crisp tartness and garden-fresh aroma. And of course, a generous drizzle of Bangladesh's omnipresent mustard oil brings everything together.
The ubiquity of the dish's ingredients means that similar creations can be found in other places. Bhel puri in West Bengal, churumuri in Karnataka and chatpatay in Nepal all closely resemble the beloved Bangladeshi snack. What sets Bangladeshi jhal muri apart, however, is the ratio of wet to dry ingredients (bhel puri, for instance, may be wetter and have more yellow chickpeas) and Bangladesh's enthusiastic embrace of intense spice. "It's heat you feel in your nose, not your throat," Hamilton said. Some locals believe the piquancy triggers a sweating response and helps them cool off in sweltering humidity.
Due to muri's long history in South Asian cuisine,it's difficult to pinpoint the exact moment muri was first drenched in such fiery and titillating flavours and took on a life of its own – or cite an undisputed place of origin. Muri has somehow just always existed and been consumed in different variations. 
"[The] point is, muri has been a staple in Bengal from time immemorial, often acting as a [preserved] substitute for rice [during lean periods],"explained food writer and historian, Pritha Sen. Hamilton agreed: "Rice in Bangladesh is used for absolutely everything – desserts, breakfast, lunch and dinner. I imagine one day someone wondered what else we could use it for."
The jhal-muri wallah is often as much of a draw as the snack, with some vendors commanding cult followings (Credit: Arindam Ghosh/Getty Images)
That's the kind of inventiveness and pragmatism jhal muri embodies. Packed in a newspaper cone called a thonga and mixed in a steel shaker or a modest plastic mugga (a small pitcher), it's generally sold at the affordable price of 10-20 taka (£0.09-£0.19). Thongas are both portable and practical – used both as a bowl and later as a napkin to wipe spicy seasonings off one's hand. Rectangles of cardboard or magazine paper are usually supplied as a scoop.
For many Bangladeshis though, part of the charm of visiting the jhal muri-wallah (vendor) lies in the theatricality. "Ingredients are put into a steel shaker with a lid, and then dramatically shaken and banged on the tray until they're mixed together, with all the aplomb of a fancy mixologist in a cocktail bar," Hamilton said. Since single portions are made to order, "There's [also] this sense of it being a personal gesture, like, 'I've done this just for you'," she said.
Some muri-wallahs command an almost cult-like following due to their signature spice blend, with everyone from students to office workers queuing up for a fix. Arnab Mitra, an Indian entrepreneur and extensive traveller, has sampled variants of the snack in more than 20 cities across four countries. He says jhal muri in Bangladesh's second largest city, Chittagong, is the spiciest – and noticed a unique phenomenon he terms "the muri-wallah's swag".
"An established muri-wallah is famous. And he knows it," said Mitra. "Typically, he'll be wearing a lungi (an Indian men's sarong). He may be shirtless or clad in a vest, yet he has a certain self-assuredness about him, as if he's saying, 'Here I am, this simple dude. But you will stop your Mercedes and come eat from me, because I can turn simple ingredients into magic.'" 
Chef Angus Denoon Duncan has been selling jhal muri in England for the past 17 years (Credit: Angus Denoon Duncan)
British chef Angus Denoon Duncan agrees. Cheap ingredients are treated with care, attention and imbued with a little mystery, he said, and with that mystery comes its unique charm. "I'm interested in the ways to make good food cheap, I love the beauty of an action perfected over years."
Captivated by the snack during multiple visits to Kolkata to film a video about South Asian street food, Duncan has been selling jhal muri in England for the past 17 years, using the social media handle jhalmuriexpress.
The reason he started was prosaic: "I was living on the road at the time and needed a business I could run from the boot of a car or on public transport. It [also had to be] cheap and easy to produce." But the reason he continued speaks to the DNA of the snack itself. "Never have I seen food break down boundaries like jhal muri. The first time I made it in public, at a market in rural UK with a wide demographic of different people, everybody got it," he said, adding that jhal muri is, "food made fresh and brought to life in front of one's eyes on the level playing field of a street corner."
Still, it's difficult to re-create the Bangladeshi street food experience in London as there's a specific sense of community and solidarity in the way jhal muri is consumed.
"It's great to eat jhal muri while hanging out with friends, because its sour, spicy and sweet taste with crispy feel creates an exuberant atmosphere," said Dhaka-based architect Nishat Tasnim Auroni, who notes that the easy recipe and accessible ingredients mean many households also prepare it at home to enjoy together.
In Saira Hamilton's cookbook, My Bangladesh Kitchen, jhal muri stands proudly as the first recipe (Credit: Ian Garlick / Lorenz Books/Anness Publishing Ltd)
Dr Latiful Bari, a food safety and hygiene expert from the University of Dhaka, says love for the snack is etched deeply in the country's collective identity: "Ask somebody what they'd like to have with their evening cup of tea, and if the answer is jhal muri, understand they are Bengali nationals." 
Locals also have developed unspoken rules of etiquette. Using a spoon is a cardinal sin and reveals amateur status, said Mitra. And, according to Hamilton, the gesture of tipping a small heap of jhal muri into one's hands before tossing it into the mouth with fluidity, precision and a bit of abandon is hard for a non-Bangladeshi to master.
Like its resilient people, it's gutsy and spirited food. Because when the muri-wallah gruffly asks, "How much jhal?", it's as if he's asking whether one is game enough, daring enough – Bengali enough – to handle it.
While some vendors experiment with upscale ingredients, such as boiled egg or quail, for purists, jhal muri will always be a robust vegetarian (and vegan) dish, where unassuming ingredients are turned into a sublime and satiating symphony. "I think [this gentrification] is a fad," said Mitra. "Jhal muri is eclectic, not some homogenous, Michelin star chef-approved mixture. In authentic jhal muri, no two bites – even from the same thonga – are the same. [Expensive meat add-ons] just don't have that element of thrill." 
Ultimately, Bangladesh's spicy snack is an ode to ingenuity and finding mystique in the mundane through an artful balancing act. Too dry, and it tastes like cardboard, said Hamilton, and if you make it ahead of time or get the liquid ratio wrong, it runs the risk of becoming stale or soggy. But done right? "It's a whole experience in itself," she said, "You get a little bit of everything." 
--
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

How We Live
How We Think
More
When Lindsay Compton set up her own consultancy business in 2019, working from home seemed like the best option. As a military wife who has moved eight times in the past seven years, and a mother of two young children, she needed something flexible.
“It also seemed like quite a good model for being able to deliver really specialist knowledge and not have overheads that were too high,” says the UK-based Compton. But three years later – having built a team of 11 remote workers at Canny Comms, spread from Saudi Arabia to Chester – she admits she’s “desperate” to get back to an office. 
“I feel like a teenager working in my very bland spare room, with washing hanging just out of view of the computer camera,” she says. Compton believes offices come with multiple benefits, including enabling colleagues to feed off each other's energy. “Having an office space where you have good light and a good environment can just make you feel a little inspired, and I think it enables you to be a bit more brave.”
Yes, lots of people looking to bag a remote working role right now – but there are also plenty of people who are just as keen to get back to the office. According to a 2022 study by PwC, 11% of US workers would prefer to work full-time in the office, and 62% said they’d like to spend at least some time there. More than half (51%) of managers are also confident their employees would be keen to return to the office full-time, according to GoodHire.
The motivations of these people might vary – some long for the sociability of the office, while others prefer a clear boundary between work and home. But regardless, companies will need to work out how to accommodate the needs of people who want to be in offices as well as those who don’t, as they map out their post-pandemic working models.
‘I miss catching up with people’
While many people love the flexibility that remote work brings, for others the loss of an office environment and the social contact it provides can be a major blow.
“I would never apply for a home or remote-working role,” says Abi Smith, business manager at food producer Spice Kitchen. The 30-year-old was “lucky enough” to spend just six weeks working from home during the pandemic while briefly furloughed from her previous role, and since then has worked full-time in her Liverpool office. She even values the daily commute. “Even when I was furloughed for a few weeks… not having a routine where you get up, leave the house, and socialise and interact with other people throughout the day, I think that can massively affect your mental health. Not to leave your house for long periods of time, I don’t think it’s good for you.”
Working from home can be isolating for many people, who crave the proximity of others during the workday (Credit: Getty Images)
Carol, who works in donor support at a major US charity, says she was devastated when the organisation made the decision to close its city office and move all staff to remote working. “I live in a small flat where there isn’t a spare room so I spend all day on my laptop on the couch,” she says. “Though I can spend all day on video calls with people, it just doesn’t feel the same as when we were all together in an office. My days lack variety, and I just miss catching up with people in person, and finding out how they’d spent their weekend or what they were working on.”
This loss of connection and lack of structure can have a profound impact for some people. According to a May 2021 study by the American Psychiatric Association, nearly two-thirds of people who spend at least some time working from home say they’ve felt isolated or lonely from time to time. For 17%, that’s a constant feeling. Individual family circumstances might feed into how acutely workers miss the office too; studies have shown that during lockdown, people living with family members or a partner experienced far fewer problems with their mental health.   
‘Office equals work mode’
It isn’t only wellbeing and social contact that some workers fear is at stake if they spend all day at home, though. It’s also their career prospects. 
Only 40% of UK workers surveyed by employment and HR specialists WorkNest are confident that office-based and home-based staff will be rewarded equally in the next 12 months, according to research shared with BBC Worklife. And of full-time remote workers, two thirds are concerned about missing out on development opportunities by being based at home, according to PwC.
Michal Laszuk, a 27-year-old based in Warsaw, Poland, associates being in the office with delivering a better quality of work. Laszuk spent a lot of time working at home during the pandemic in his previous role, but when he started his new job as a community manager for passport and visa service PhotoAid he was allowed to choose how he worked. He immediately chose the office.
“I would compare working in an office to learning at a university campus,” he says. “Your brain automatically switches to a ‘work mode’ when you're surrounded by colleagues who are hard at work. The smell of ink from the printer, the silent tapping on the keyboards, the quiet chatter in the coffee room, all of that truly helps. It's the atmosphere of the place that puts you in the working mood and raises your productivity.”
Working in an office also provides a formal start and end point to the working day, he believes – useful boundaries as more and more home-workers report difficulty ring-fencing personal and professional lives. “I have always preferred to be able to just switch on at the office and off at home. The current remote work trend has had its share of victims.”
Can companies find a balance?
Now that people have very diverse views on how and where they would like to work in the wake of the pandemic, firms are running into challenges as they grapple with new policies.
There’s no doubt the pandemic accelerated a shift to remote work in some industries, and with that comes a risk that those who would prefer to be in an office could end up having their voices drowned out in the public debate, says Paula Allen, global leader and senior vice-president of research and wellbeing at Canadian company LifeWorks.
“As many employers focus on more remote working and adapting to long-term changes such as virtual meetings, it can feel that those who prefer working in the office are being marginalised,” she says. 
Victoria McLean, UK-based founder & CEO of career consultancy City CV, says that businesses are navigating tricky circumstances in which it can be almost impossible to keep everyone happy. “A lot of businesses I talk to are now offering hybrid working, but have one day a week when everyone has to be in the office. This seems to be a good balance of flexible working with having everyone regularly together.”
"I can spend all day on video calls with people, it just doesn’t feel the same as when we were all together in an office" – Carol (Credit: Getty Images)
For those stuck working at home and loathing it, McLean recommends taking regular breaks from the computer, telling line managers when you’re struggling and filling the day with lots of personal connection, be it chat rooms or video calls with colleagues. Plus, “set a boundary between your work and personal life so you're not 'always on'”. 
Allen says companies need to create a culture of communication and flexibility to meet employees’ needs. For those businesses requiring people to work remotely, that includes creating more opportunities for staff to connect via company-wide socials, regular check-ins from line managers and turning video calling into the default mode of catching up rather than email. “It encourages employees to stay connected and helps reduce loneliness and fatigue,” she says.
Compton says she’s hopeful she and her family will be able to make their home in Larkhill, north of Salisbury, a more permanent base after years moving around. So, as well as spending time working at a local military co-working hub, she’s also on the hunt for a nearby office. The demands of a young family mean she isn’t about to ditch the spare room completely, she admits, but she wants to establish an office where she and staff can come and collaborative creatively for a few days per week when they can. 
As the business grows, she’s also keen to recruit workers who are early in their careers, and wants to be able to offer them a place to enjoy all the benefits an office brings. “I think of all the things I soaked up in the office and opportunities that came up from being in an environment where it was all happening,” she says. Remote working can give you a limited perspective, she believes. “Society has got quite a challenge on its hands if we all work in our bedrooms. There’s a real danger in that.”

How We Live
How We Think
More
Like many people, public speaking once filled me with a sense of dread. As a writer I felt much more comfortable expressing myself on the page, rather than from centre stage. 
Strangely, I found that the feelings of anxiety themselves were perfectly tolerable; instead, I was preoccupied with the ways that others would perceive my nervous energy. A slight wobble of the voice, the unconscious biting of my lip – I assumed that I’d be judged harshly for any non-verbal signal that betrayed my lack of confidence. I was experiencing anxiety about my anxiety – a double whammy of worry that made the whole task feel much more daunting. 
You might have noticed this yourself before a job interview or important work meeting in front of senior colleagues. And the more you try to suppress your feelings, the harder they bounce back. 
According to a striking new study, however, these concerns may be unwarranted. Jamie Whitehouse, a research fellow at Nottingham Trent University in the UK, has shown that visible signs of stress are often appealing, leaving others predisposed to like us and treat us warmly. If so, we need not try so hard to maintain a calm-and-collected poker face – safe in the knowledge that people will relate well to our emotional authenticity. 
Magnanimous monkeys 
Whitehouse’s interest in stress is rooted in evolutionary theory. Stress is typically accompanied by many internal physiological changes which help us to prepare the body for a challenge. A racing heart, for example, helps to deliver oxygen to the brain and body, which will mean we can react with greater speed. 
It is easy to see why these changes are adaptive. Yet many primates, when they are stressed, also reveal characteristic 'displacement' behaviours – such as nervous scratching of the skin – which don’t seem to serve any obvious purpose in handling the situation causing their discomfort. So why would they evolve? 
One possibility is that these behaviours help smooth over social interactions within the group. Primate groups are often complex, with alliances between members and established hierarchies, and meeting a potentially hostile individual could be an important source of stress. The displacement behaviours may act as a subtle signal that shows this discomfort and reduces the risk of a needless confrontation. For the higher-ranking individual, it could be the cockier rivals who would most need taking down a peg or two, after all – not necessarily those who are already nervy.
In 2017 Whitehouse found some initial evidence supporting this idea. Observing a group of 45 rhesus macaques in Punta Santiago, Puerto Rico, he found that individuals tended to show more nervous scratching when they were around higher-ranking individuals and relative strangers with whom they did not already have a strong social bond. And that, in turn, seemed to change the nature of the interaction – resulting in gentler behaviour from the other monkey. 
In the spotlight 
Inspired by this finding, Whitehouse decided to test whether humans’ displays of stress might also alter individuals’ responses to us – perhaps through an empathic response. 
In addition to the skin scratching seen in other primates, humans have many subtle behaviours associated with anxiety, including touching our face and hair, twisting the mouth, licking lips and biting nails – all of which might signal our sense of vulnerability and evoke a warmer reaction in others. 
To find out if this was true, Whitehouse’s team first asked 23 participants to undergo the “Trier Social Stress Test” – an anxiety-inducing routine in which the participants must undergo a fake job interview, with a three-minute speech about why they are the ideal candidate and an on-the-spot mental arithmetic test. 
A further 133 participants were then asked to rate videos of the fake interviews – with questions about how stressed the person appeared to be, and how much they liked the person they saw. Psychologists, meanwhile, counted how many times the participants showed non-verbal signs of stress. 
As he had expected, the people rating the videos were able to predict how stressed the interviewees felt, and this seemed to come from those characteristic non-verbal signals. Most importantly, those perceptions then influenced the raters’ judgements of the interviewees’ likeability – for the better. The more the interviewees showed signs of stress, the more appealing they were to the people watching their videos. 
“This tells us that these behaviours are not just functionless by-products of stress, but actually have communicative functions,” Whitehouse says.
Our body language can expose our levels of stress - but this can bring us benefits, the research indicates (Credit: Getty)
Red-faced apologies
Whitehouse’s study chimes with experiments examining the effects of blushing from embarrassment. Many people feel uncomfortable with their shame being broadcast so overtly – but like the nervous mannerisms that Whitehouse studied, our reddening faces can actually improve the way we are perceived by others. 
Consider a recent study by Christopher Thorstenson, an assistant professor at the Rochester Institute of Technology in New York state. In a series of experiments, he presented photos of embarrassed faces accompanied by vignettes describing socially awkward situations, and then questioned participants about the people’s reactions. The participants were told, for example, “You catch these people telling a lie. Which face looks more embarrassed?” and “These people apologise for cheating on a test. Whose apology is more sincere?” 
Thorstenson found that a slight blush to the face increased the participants’ rating of embarrassment and sincerity, and it increased the likelihood that they would forgive the person for the transgression. “It signals appeasement to others,” he says – and unlike other non-verbal cues, like facial expressions, a blush cannot be faked easily. It is therefore seen as a sign of honesty which, in turn, makes you more likeable. 
Whether we are nervously biting our lips or glowing like a neon sign, it can pay to show some emotional authenticity. 
Missed cues 
Leah Mayo, an assistant professor at the Center for Social and Affective Neuroscience of Linköping University in Sweden, is intrigued by Whitehouse’s results. Her research has examined the characteristic facial expressions that are associated with stress, and she suspects that people’s responses to our non-verbal signals will depend on context. When someone sees us giving a speech or presentation, for example, it is obvious why we might be feeling nervous – and this knowledge of the situation leads the other person to feel more empathetic. “In that case, you could get a ‘tend-and-befriend’ response,” she agrees. 
But the reaction might not be the same if someone saw us scowling and jittery in the office, without any clues about the source of our worries, Mayo adds. In these situations, observers may easily misread stress signals for hostility or anger – and a further explanation may be necessary to help them read the cues correctly. 
Clearly, we should be careful about making too many broad generalisations from this research. Whitehouse, however, hopes that his research can at least offer a breath of relief for anyone who is nervous about a presentation or a job interview – the specific context of his study. “A nice take-home from this research is that it’s sometimes OK to be stressed and look stressed,” he says. “You don’t have to try so hard to suppress it.” Provided that you can still reveal your knowledge and competence, you won’t be judged harshly for betraying your nerves. 
When you allow your feelings to be more transparent, you may also find that the whole experience feels less overwhelming. Whitehouse points to a separate study which found that people who show more overt stress tend to get over their discomfort more quickly than those who keep their anxiety hidden. The altered attitudes of others could offer one mechanism, he suggests. “Producing stress behaviours may elicit a more co-operative response, which may in turn allow that individual to recover from stress much more quickly.” 
There is also strong evidence that our mindset about stress can determine its consequences: people who see anxiety as energising tend to perform better in difficult tasks than those who fear the feelings and assume that they are inherently debilitating. A recognition of its social value could just be one more reason to view our discomfort a little more positively. 
I’ve certainly found that this attitude can help with my public speaking. By learning to accept my pre-talk nerves, I have stopped feeling anxious about my anxiety. As a result, I find that I can focus more of my mental energy on the message I want to deliver – safe in the knowledge that my audience will react more warmly than I could have previously imagined.
David Robson is a science writer and author of The Expectation Effect: How Your Mindset Can Transform Your Life, published by Canongate (UK) and Henry Holt (USA) in early 2022. He is @d_a_robson on Twitter.

"This was an opportunity not to be missed," he said. 
Mr Cooper, a professional photographer and keen amateur astronomer, said he was in the right place at the right time.
"There's a very narrow band where you, the space station and sun are all in a straight line and it's about three miles wide," he said.
"I'd checked the data three days before and it was going to miss my house, I checked the day before and it was going to be over my house, so I was lucky."
The space station was about 250 miles (400km) away when above his house and travelling at about 17,000 mph (27,300km).
Mr Cooper said his very high speed video camera was shooting at 80 frames a second, compared to a normal camera speed of 25 frames.
He added: "It's important to say I use a specialist telescope with a filter because you should never look at the sun without a filter - it can lead to permanent blindness."
Find BBC News: East of England on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter. If you have a story suggestion email eastofenglandnews@bbc.co.uk
.
'You can be visually impaired and artistic'
'Photography really did save my life'
Northern Lights create coastal showcase
Photographer captures 'life through windows'
Photographer snaps Moon meteoroid strike
Jamie Cooper Photography
International Space Station, NASA
Corby's family's desperate bidÂ to raise Â£500kÂ for life-savingÂ treatment for their little girl
New family-run cocktail bar serving brunch opens in Northampton IN PICTURES
Police investigation into explosives used to blown open Wellingborough Co-op til...
Gin maker launches wildlife documentary filmed in a pub garden
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

Art
Books
Music
TV
Style
Identities
Designed
The Collection
More
In the cold winter of 2019-2020, in the Shaheen Bagh neighbourhood in Delhi, calls for inquilab (revolution) and azadi (freedom) rang out. People were protesting against the Indian government passing the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), which provides citizenship to non-Muslim illegal immigrants from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. (Yet to be implemented because of pandemic delays, it has been alleged by critics to be part of the "Hindu nationalist" agenda of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) aimed at marginalising India's Muslim population, though the government has said it is simply a way of helping those fleeing religious persecution.)
More like this:
–      The street music that won’t be silenced
–      How drill took over the world
–      The new wave of provocative Indian TV
As the protests intensified, crowds kept vigil at the Muslim locality of Shaheen Bagh for days and nights on end, even as the police cracked down on student protestors at the city's Jawaharlal Nehru and Jamia Millia Islamia Universities.
Arivarasu Kalainesan, better known as Arivu, is among the rappers who have raised a clarion call of protest (Credit: Kalpana Ambedkar)
Amid this, a young journalism student at Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia, Shumais Nazar, joined voices with Manosh Kochi, studying at Azharul Uloom Arabic College in Ernakulam, in the southern state of Kerala, to declare that "inquilab is the new Hindustani beat". This came on the track Streetocracy, a rap track by the pair in support of the anti-CAA protests.
Meanwhile, down south in Chennai, singer Arivarasu Kalainesan, popularly known as Arivu, raised a clarion call for protest with the track sanda seivom (let’s fight) which featured the lyrics "Naa yaaru, nee yaaru/ Un paatan endhooru/ Thondi edukkumaam NRC" ("Who are you to tell me who I am?/Who are you? Who is your grandfather?/The NRC is coming to dig up all that") – referring to the controversial National Register of Citizens (NRC) that was recently updated by the government to determine who is a legal citizen. The NRC has also been accused of being a tool by which to deny rights to many long-term Muslim migrants, although the government has said its use is a necessary measure to help identify illegal immigrants from Bangladesh.
Around the same time, Sumit Roy from Kolkata wrote and recorded “Go protest” in the early hours of the morning, in response to the pushback against student protestors from the government, in which he declaimed: "Poora desh cheeke/ chowkidar chor hai" ("The whole country is shouting/ Those who are the guards, are the ones looting)". That particular line refers to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who has referred to himself in campaigns as the nation's chowdikar or 'watchman'.
And further up in the northeast state of Assam, amidst curfews and lockdowns, rapper VAN M (pronounced Venom) declared "Assam aaj jal raha/ khoon mera khaul raha" ("my blood is boiling/ as I see my state burning")
These rappers collectively coming out in force against the CAA follows the rise within India of hip-hop as protest music. In Gully Boy, the 2019 Bollywood movie about rappers in Mumbai's Dharavi slums, when the protagonist Murad (played by actor Ranveer Singh) is asked by his friend and mentor MC Sher to sing his protest poetry in front of a group, he demurs and says he is not "comfortable" performing. To which MC Sher replies, "If everything was comfortable in the world, then why would anyone make rap?"
The urgent issues being raised
Chuck D, rapper of the popular band Public Enemy, once famously referred to rap (a term used interchangeably with "hip-hop" in India) as "the black CNN". He was referring to the fact that hip-hop and rap began in the African-American community in the New York City borough of the Bronx, as a tool for broadcasting issues of social injustice, racism and discrimination.
The Shaheen Bagh protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act were the catalyst for a number of hip-hop musicians (Credit: Getty Images)
In the last few years, young people in India have similarly begun to use rap as a means of dissent, even as human rights organisations have alleged that the Indian government has increasingly come down hard on critics of its regime. What they are speaking about is somewhat similar to African-American rappers, ranging from discrimination and marginalisation to governmental apathy. "I use rap to convey the anger inside me, the anger I have had for many years. Rap allows me to speak about my own life experiences," Arivu, who speaks for the Dalit community that he belongs to, tells BBC Culture. Dalits were previously known by the reprehensible term 'Untouchables', and are still considered the lowest in India's insidious caste system: the oppression and violence associated with the caste system is the topic, above all, that has exercised rappers in India. Arivu says that he is inspired by Nina Simone's words that "it's an artist's duty to reflect the times in which we live."
Protest music and poetry is not new in India, and has been used during the Independence movement of the first half of the 20th Century, and through the years since, by activists across the country to speak out against perceived social and political injustice. But no musical genre has caught the popular imagination in India in recent times the way rap has, with popular songs gaining thousands upon thousands of views in a matter of days.
One of the earliest such protest rap songs was I Protest (2010) by Roushan Illahi, or MC Kash, about the ongoing violence in Kashmir Valley in India's only Muslim-majority state. Other Kashmiri rappers have come and gone, while elsewhere in the country, young people have rapped about acid attacks on women, farmer suicides because of crop failures, atrocities against Dalits, and politicians who think of their people only at election time. Rapper Duleswar Tandi, who goes by the name Dule Rocker, even released a song about poor migrants having  to walk back to their hometowns from the cities where they had been working following the sudden and stringent pandemic lockdown imposed in India in April 2020. "Sarkar, jawab de" it went, meaning “government, answer us".
"All over the world, it is only the communities who have been pushed to the margins who ask difficult questions through art, and that's what is happening in India right now," comments classical musician and activist TM Krishna. "Many of these communities have no choice but to raise their voices and challenge the listener." As Arivu says: "Rap is a people's art – it does not belong to the elite and that is what attracts me."
There have also been rap tracks about environmental issues, one of the most significant being 2015's Kodaikanal Won't, a riff on Nicki Minaj's Anaconda, which was a protest against alleged mercury poisoning at Unilever's thermometer factory in the hill town of Kodaikanal in Tamil Nadu. The catchy rap by Chennai's Sonia Ashraf that rhymed "hill station" with "contamination" and "devastation" was released in August 2015. Then in March 2016 the Dutch multinational company, while denying wrongdoing, agreed to settle with 591 ex-employees who claimed they had been harmed by working with mercury there – 15 years after this company shut up shop, but within just a few months of the song going viral.
Social activist Nityanand Jayaraman, who has been involved in the protest since the beginning, tells BBC Culture that mainstream media showed no interest in reporting this story, and so they had to find a way to reach the company, and specifically the CEO. "Our voices from India were not being heard, and so we wanted young, white people globally to put the pressure on him. And this rap video worked." It worked, he adds, because "facts don’t appeal to people, but art has the power to affect your feelings, and shake your value system." Indeed, Nicki Minaj herself reacted to it on Twitter, and the video and the issue blew up overnight.
Rapper EPR Iyer calls himself the “newspaper rapper” for the way he brings attention to newsworthy issues (Credit: Sreedip Debnath)
Krishna – who himself rapped in the 2018 follow-up video Kodaikanal Still Won't – says that rap works as protest because "it is direct and in your face, it demands attention and dares the listener to ignore it. Rap artists deliberately use language that makes the listener uncomfortable, because the idea is to ask uncomfortable questions." Krishna adds that such artists are talking to multiple audiences: coaxing their peers to step up and speak up; telling elders in their community that it is time to stop mutely enduring injustice; and challenging larger institutions, including the upper class and the government.
A watershed moment?
Indian protest rap arguably came of age in the wake of the anti CAA and NCR movement in late 2019. Talking about why he dropped Sanda Seivom in support of the protests, Arivu says: "They [the government] are trying to divide us on the basis of language and religion, and I won't take it." Sumangala Damodaran, professor of Economics, Development Studies and Popular Music Studies at Ambedkar University, Delhi, and an accomplished musician, who took part in the CAA protests herself, describes rap as speaking truth to power. She says that it allows the artists to use their voice and their body to connect instantly and directly with their audiences. "It is all the more powerful because much of it comes from personal experience," she explains.
Eventually, the pandemic put an abrupt end to these protests, and temporarily paused the CAA narrative. But then came the tidal wave of the farmers' protest, in which many thousands marched in opposition to agricultural reforms, which again played out on the open streets of Delhi in the bitter winter months of 2020.
Kolkata Rapper EPR Iyer's Ekla Cholo Re, released earlier that year in solidarity with struggling farmers, gained more attention during the protest. He calls himself the "newspaper rapper", because he uses his music to become the voice of the voiceless. "We are part of the system that we keep complaining about, so what can we do about it? My way is to speak up for people's rights through rap," he tells BBC Culture. Arivu adds that rap allows him to talk about things that affect both him personally – such as the way upper castes treat lower castes – and the people around him – such as the way he says CAA discriminates against Indian Muslims.
Protest rap has also been so popular in India because most of the artists have chosen to rap in their own regional languages – whether Tamil or Punjabi or Assamese. This not only allows them to express themselves fluently but also connect better with their peers in the hinterlands. (One of the notable exceptions is MC Kash, who used English to make audiences outside India aware of the situation in Kashmir). It is also interesting that these young rappers have drawn from the traditional music forms of their own region or community. Krishna says that there is no single uniform rap style in India. "For instance, Tamil rap has its own characteristics, it derives from local koothu and gaana tradition. These rappers are not just copying African-American rap, but are making it their own," he says.
India's young rappers are taking on society's Goliaths through their music. And they say they have nothing to fear. As Arivu puts it, "Privileged people may not understand this, but for millions of people, our daily life itself is a struggle. If rap lets me talk about this struggle, then why should I be afraid of anything?"
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

