When wildfires ravaged Abby Rose's farm in January 2017, every inch of her land was burned. Following many years of drought in Chile, temperatures exceeded 40C (104F) that summer and strong winds spread flames uncontrollably across southern and central regions for weeks. 
"Fires were raging, it was terrifying and being on the frontline of devastation like that completely changed my understanding of farming," says Rose, who recalls struggling in a thick cloud of smoke as she fought to protect her 300-hectare (1.2-sq-mile) family farm in the Loncomilla Valley. "It was the closest I have ever been to thinking what a war zone must be like."
During those fires – a national disaster made all the more extreme by the intensifying climate crisis – all 8,000 of her young olive trees burned just before their first commercial harvest was due to take place. Almost 90% of her olive crops died. It was a "total wipeout", she says, and financially devastating.
Climate change has increased the number of large wildfires occurring each year and increased the length of the fire season in which wildfires are more likely. Since the Chilean blaze in 2017, major wildfires have also raged in the Amazon, California and Australia, with farmers paying the cost through lost livestock and crops. And it's not just fires – major weather disasters caused by climate change, including floods, droughts and storms, have increased five-fold in the past five decades.
If the trend for more disasters continues, it will take a combination of innovation and smarter farming to mitigate those losses. Farmers like Rose are learning to adapt. 
Instead of olives, Rose now grows almonds and pistachios, which are both more drought-resistant. She also grazes sheep, which enrich the soil beneath the trees with their faeces. "We had to think differently about how the farm would go forward, so we encourage more biodiversity and keep the cover green for as long as possible throughout the year because that tends not to burn," says Rose. "We had no choice but to respond quickly and adapt to more regenerative practices."
The solutions for farming in a changing climate can be both impressively scientific and surprisingly simple.
Today, droughts continue in Chile, but the Rose family are rebuilding a fire-resilient farm that will be much better prepared in the long term thanks to a regenerative farming approach. 
The term "regenerative agriculture" includes a spectrum of farming practices, from the no-till movement to companion planting, but at its heart are techniques that have been used by farmers for centuries, and are now considered as important for reversing the climate impact of agriculture. 
The interest in regenerative agriculture has received a boost recently, as environmental scientists estimate it could help to avoid carbon emissions, improve soil health, conserve water, as well as protect against future climate disasters. Rose is using livestock to enrich the soil on her farm – a practice that could help to avoid or sequester up to 42 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) emissions by 2050. Other regenerative agriculture practices, like using green manure and organic farming, could help to sequester a further 14-22 gigatonnes of CO2e.
But on the other hand, says Rose, it's not all about looking backwards. Modern technology has the potential to be a major part of a transition to ecologically friendly farming that leaves less of an environmental footprint. Farmers like her are using smartphones, solar water pumps, robotics for precision weeding, self-driving tractors, drones and even satellites to help them achieve this aim. The drive to reduced-carbon farming and disaster resilience needs to be both traditional and modern.
Smartphones also open up new channels for selling produce directly to customers. A mobile app called Krishi Janani, created for and founded by women, links regenerative farmers in India to their local marketplace. Founder Usha Devi Venkatachalam explains how this "tech with a traditional twist" enables food sovereignty but doesn't overshadow it. "For us, the answer is not to look at tech as the solution, but to look at the farmers who have this wisdom and see how tech provides us with the opportunity to promote that so it can be practised across different regions in ways that suit those landscapes."
Through Krishi Janani, more than 10,000 farmers in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu can share best practices among themselves and tailor their regenerative approaches to each region. Shoppers can now more easily find out more about the local, seasonal food on offer and speak to a women-only team of sales agents who deliver produce once a week. 
"The people can help share the stories about the food and that's facilitated by tech. But you don't trust the tech, you trust the farmer," says Venkatachalam. "There is a very strong temptation to look at science and big-tech solutions to solve our problems but we don't pay enough attention to small solutions that already work, especially if they come from cultures and communities that aren't English, French or Spanish-speaking. Sometimes indigenous tribes and smaller communities have the answers."
Now, this new knowledge transfer and information flow is changing for the better. Rose says that smartphones give farmers access to information in a more democratised way. Many farmers are inspired to try new practices after listening to stories about regenerative agriculture through podcasts or hearing about first-hand experiences in lively Facebook groups or private WhatsApp chats. Rose herself has launched her own podcast – Farmerama Radio – in an effort to share her stories and others from around the world about the growing regenerative farming movement.
How do farmers around the world know that they are comparing data accurately? Deciphering which technology helps and which hinders a transition to more sustainable agriculture is important, and the farming world needs a robust way of charting its progress, says Patrick Holden, founding director of the Sustainable Food Trust, a UK-based environmental charity. This is where big data can help. 
"Farmers want to know whether their farming system has better sustainability outcomes than last year – that includes our soil health, water use, biodiversity, nutrient cycling, socio- and cultural impacts," explains Holden.
For six years, the Sustainable Food Trust has been working with retailers, banks, food companies, NGOs and governments to develop ways to measure sustainability indicators on farms. Only then can all farms be compared, argues Holden. "Of course, you can't have one biodiversity measurement for every country on Earth but you can have a common framework that allows for regional differentiation. We want to be a catalyst towards creating a globally harmonised way of measuring farming sustainability impacts. That's a precondition for reaching an agreement about the role of agriculture in addressing climate change."
Big data from farms has already been used to precisely measure soil quality and the position of the crop (whether it is uphill or downhill within a field, for example), and how these relate to variations in yields in response to climate change. Data from satellites, aircraft, drones, remote sensors and combine harvesters has been used by researchers from Michigan State University, US, to identify areas within individual fields where yields are poor. Using this data, better predictions can be made about the effects of forecast weather.
It is not just the weather that farmers need to predict. With climate change, there will also be an increase in the number of extreme natural disasters. The total number of disaster events worldwide has been increasing in recent decades, with floods, storms and extreme temperature among the most common types of event. In the graphic below you can see that instances of flooding increased 44% between 1980 and 2019, for example. In total, disasters were estimated to cause $1.6tn (£1.2tn) of damage between 1980 and 1999, and $3tn (£2.3tn) between 2000 and 2019.
Between 2007 and 2016, the US economy lost $536m (£406m) because of fluctuating yields caused by climate variability across the Midwest. Bumper years followed by poor years caused by variations in rainfall made predicting harvests more difficult, affecting about 25% of the corn and soybean crops in this area. But with the right big data, spots that are more prone to variability can be identified.
One of the advances that big data might unlock is in identifying hybridised crops that suit regenerative agriculture practices like no-till farming. Reduced tillage might help farms that have had a season of low rainfall, as the practice helps to conserve water.
Tillage involves digging or turning over the uppermost layer of soil to kill off weeds and prepare the ground for planting. However, tillage also exposes roots from the previous crop to the air – these would otherwise be left in the soil – which facilitates the release of carbon and other nutrients like nitrogen. It also dries out the soil, meaning the land might require more water and fertiliser to prepare it for the new season. A no-till movement is gaining in popularity as a way to reduce carbon emissions (perhaps by up to 13 gigatonnes), but requires plants that have deeper roots to find nutrients.
In the video below, researchers at the Land Institute in Kansas, US, are developing wheat, rice and sorghum hybrids that are better suited to no-till farming.
Your browser does not support HTML5 video.
00:00 / 00:00
advertisement
advertisement
As more companies realise that nature, biodiversity or ecosystem services such as the provision of nutritious food have to be valued as assets, financial technology (or "fintech") could become a crucial piece of this jigsaw puzzle. 
Investment will speed up this transition, says Samantha Sutton who works for ReNature, a Dutch consultancy that finances nature-positive farm projects. "It's about seeing an investment as profitable aside from just economic return, and data is driving everything because this all hinges on the monitoring and evaluation of projects to make sure we're improving soil health and biodiversity."
While some companies might simply tick a box by planting trees or offsetting carbon emissions, Sutton believes that regenerative agriculture can trigger a massive positive structural change for entire supply chains. She says that ReNature runs community education programmes and sets up model farms or small-scale pilots around the globe, which not only help corporates figure out if something is scalable, but also set an inspiring example to other farmers in the local community. 
"Our food system is flawed – it's in the company's best interests to try to be part of the solution." She adds technology could make regenerative agriculture scalable for huge farms too. "Regenerative practices can be labour intensive but as more farming practices become automated, the barriers melt away and that could convince a lot more big industrial farms to transition."
Another US-based fintech company, Cultivo, recently launched a new platform which enables investments to directly regenerate ecosystems and protect biodiversity. Chief executive Manuel Piñuela aims to restore at least 3.5 million hectares (13,500 sq miles) of land within the next five years by attracting private investment worth $1bn (£750m) to finance hi-tech solutions. Cultivo's success hinges on artificial intelligence. Satellite imagery is used to survey land, pinpoint the best locations and assess their potential as regenerative farmland, for example, by using algorithms to forecast natural capital returns before a project begins. So financial institutions can choose which of these projects or so-called nature generators to invest in once their viability has been investigated. 
Ramping up these climate-positive practices on a global scale might require big data and big investment, but for now Rose is pressing on with reducing her impact and preparing for the next climate-related emergency on her family farm. "As the climate gets more unpredictable, regenerative agriculture is showing a path of resilience," she says. 
Follow the Food is a multimedia series by BBC Future and BBC World News that investigates how agriculture is responding to the profound challenges of climate change, environmental degradation and rapidly growing populations that face our global food supply chains. Follow the Food traces emerging answers to these problems – both high-tech and low-tech, local and global – from farmers, growers and researchers across six continents.
in associationwith
Copyright © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read more

Cookies |  Ad Choices / Do Not Sell My Info


            Copyright © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read more | 
            Cookies | 
            Ad Choices / Do Not Sell My Info


How We Live
How We Think
More
When Cat, 30, was offered a fully remote role last year, she didn’t think twice about accepting. By then, Cat, who lives in London and works in environmental services, had already been working mostly remotely for some time as a result of the pandemic. She thought that being based from home wouldn’t be much of a problem.
But during the past few months, Cat has started to have second thoughts.
“Working alone all day every day, particularly when my partner is in the office, is tough,” says Cat. “Sometimes, I won’t see anyone all day, which can be very lonely. I’ve found that instead of taking breaks to chat to people in my office, I pick up my phone. All of the extra screen time has definitely had a negative impact on my wellbeing.”
Remote work has been heralded as a solution to some of the problems of our fast-paced, pre-pandemic lifestyles. For many, it’s meant the opportunity to spend more time with their children, or use time that they would have previously wasted commuting pursuing more fulfilling hobbies. But new research into remote work and wellbeing has shown mixed results – in Microsoft’s 2022 New Future of Work Report, researchers found that although remote work can improve job satisfaction, it can also lead to employees feeling “socially isolated, guilty and trying to overcompensate”.
The negative effects have come as a surprise for some employees, who are now feeling the crush, realising remote work isn’t necessarily the wellness panacea it has been touted as. Contrary to the running narrative of a mass demand for remote work, some employees are actually choosing to switch into roles with an in-office component.
But for many, these downsides are well worth it. For demographics who struggled with an office-based working life pre-pandemic, the problems that working from home bring are a small price to pay.
A ‘rapidly growing mental health crisis’
Working from home might have once been viewed as a utopia of exercise on our breaks, making healthy homecooked lunches and easily being able to make the school run. For many, however, the reality has looked very different.
From research showing that remote workers are putting in longer hours at their desk, to data suggesting that up to 80% of UK workers feel that working from home has negatively impacted their mental health, an increasingly complicated picture is emerging when it
Many people can feel isolated during remote work, but child-free millennials are particularly likely to be affected (Credit: Getty Images)
Nicola Hemmings is a workplace scientist at mental healthcare provider Koa Health. She says that the lack of human connection that Cat has struggled with is a common complaint. She points out that the pandemic sparked a “rapidly growing mental health crisis”, and that even those who have fully embraced a move to remote work might not be exempt.
“When working remotely, we miss out on the social cues of a busy office and much needed social-interactions – catching up in the corridor, or making a drink in the kitchen while checking in and asking about the weekend,” she says. “These seemingly small moments can collectively have a large impact on our wellbeing.”
Isolation isn’t the only problem remote work presents. Cat says that on top of feeling lonely, she has also found that dealing with a high volume of video calls has made her feel “self-conscious”, and that constantly seeing her own face on a screen has left her wishing that she could return to in-person meetings. “I’d prefer to have the option of an office a few times a week so that I have some human connection,” she says.
Additionally, workers in some specific groups are feeling negative effects harder. Cat is a child-free millennial, a demographic that are very likely to be affected by the struggles she describes.
One survey showed 81% of under-35s feared loneliness from long-term home working, and studies have showed heightened levels of stress and anxiety among younger workers since the shift to remote work. Hemmings says that specific circumstances more often associated with younger millennial and Gen Z workers – such as having recently entered the workforce or not having a quiet, dedicated workspace – can have a severe impact on wellbeing.
A fair trade-off
For some, however, working remotely during the pandemic has been enough of a positive gamechanger to supersede the downsides.
This is especially true for workers who have existing caring responsibilities or disabilities, whom Hemmings says have experienced a positive change to their mental health. For these people, office-based work can be extremely detrimental to wellbeing, as they juggle long commutes with intense personal commitments, or physical and mental exhaustion from dealing with the stress of getting to and from a workplace not well-suited to their needs.
Lauren, 28, says that working from home has definitely improved her wellbeing. The Pennsylvania-based mother-of-one says that although there are some downsides, such as never feeling truly offline, the positives by far outweigh the negatives. She points out that she’s now able to work in the same room as her husband and daughter while they play together, or go to doctor’s appointments for herself or her child at a time that suits her.
“For the first time in my life I don’t have the Sunday Scaries,” says Lauren, who works in technology. “I keep flexible hours, which is super helpful when you have a child. I definitely want to continue working remotely, at least until my daughter goes to school.”
For Lauren, the downsides to remote working are a fair trade-off for the added convenience and increased time with her child. Kevin Rockman, a professor of management at George Mason University’s School of Business, US, points out that although there are undeniable issues when it comes to wellbeing, the net benefits for people like Lauren have been vast.
“There is no doubt that wellbeing is stronger given remote work,” he says. “Trading commuting time for personal health, family or recreation is almost guaranteed to bring positive benefits.”
Finding the balance
The shift to remote work has been far from straightforward, and many companies are now grappling with the problem of how to design a model that works for everyone. The evidence to date indicates that people’s personal circumstances and preferences are a key factor in whether remote work brings them any benefits – and, if so, whether the value of these benefits overrides downsides like isolation and loneliness.
“Implementing remote work is really about re-imagining what it means for each and every person to be at work,” says Rockman. “Employers need to balance flexibility, giving people the tools they need to remain productive and the social needs of employees. What that ideal balance looks like will change from organisation to organisation.”
Rockman points out that different demographics will experience remote work in different ways. Research shows young mothers are most likely to benefit from working from home, and a person who lives with their partner and has a social network in their local area will probably experience fewer negative impacts on their wellbeing than someone who lives alone and is a recent transplant to a city, for example.
Despite the negatives, many workers report that the upsides of remote work, like flexibility to be with family, far outweigh drawbacks (Credit: Getty Images)
It’s also possible that what employees want from their workplace might change over time. A Gen Zer in the early stages of their career might value the social contact of the office, and their needs could be very different from a working mother or person who cares for an elderly parent. What works best isn’t necessarily a one-size-fits all solution – and will probably also be a moving target depending on the specific needs of individuals over time.
Cat isn’t currently looking for a new job, but she says that when she does, she hopes to find a role that balances both in-person and remote work. Even though she has struggled with her wellbeing while working from home, she still wouldn’t want to go back to five days in the office a week – a sign of how complex many people’s feelings about remote work really are.
As for Lauren, she sees herself moving into a hybrid job once her daughter starts school – but only if the role would be flexible enough to mean that she could still leave at midday to see her daughter at a school event or attend an appointment. “Otherwise, remote work forever doesn’t sound too bad to me.”

Discovery
Adventure
Destinations
Collections
About us
50 Reasons to Love the World
Untold America
More
Late afternoon sun seeped through the cracks of the mid-rise buildings, casting a golden glow on the gritty side streets of Metro Manila. Here, on the fringes of the Makati and Pasay business districts, kitschy jeepneys, whizzing motorcycles and rickety tricycles shuttled daily commuters through the snaking lanes. As always, the unmistakably sweet scent of charred barbecue perfumed the air, wafting from smoky coals being fanned on the roadsides.
Ihaw-Ihaw, which literally translates from Tagalog as "grill-grill", is one of the most popular cooking techniques in the Philippines. "Grilling is integral to local cuisine because a lot of rural cooking makes use of wood and charcoal," explained Chef Jordy Navarra of Toyo Eatery, named one of Asia's Top 50 Best Restaurants in 2021. "Because of this, I think the whole idea of ihaw is at the centre of a lot of Filipino food. It's a way of cooking that is simple, and can be done wherever you are, especially if you have no access to gas or electricity."
The regional incarnations of grilled seafood and meats are manifold, from the lemongrass- and annatto-marinated inasal from the Ilonggo region to the headier, peanutty satti from Zamboanga province. However, nothing is more ubiquitous than the classic, skewered version fondly known as Pinoy BBQ (Pinoy is the shortened, colloquial word for Filipino).
Grilling is one of the most popular cooking techniques in the Philippines (Credit: Scott A Woodward)
Whether bought from a street vendor, eaten at a child's birthday party or ordered at one of the country's top tables, this barbecue is an iconic favourite across the nation. "Pinoy BBQ is one of those dishes that stands out when recounting my memories of food growing up," Navarra said. "Celebratory cooking in my family's household always included some form of grilled food. My lola (grandmother) used to run a palengke (wet market), and outside it were barbecue joints that we would always buy from. To this day, it's still one of our go-to foods, whatever the occasion may be."
Though it's broadly popular, it comes in many varieties: approachable pork or chicken skewers; the more adventurous isaw (intestines); Betamax (rectangles of coagulated pig's blood that resemble the 1980s AV tapes); and Adidas (chicken feet, colloquially named after the famed sneaker brand). But all Pinoy BBQ has one thing in common: the marinade. Made with soy sauce, calamansi (an indigenous, fragrant citrus fruit), banana ketchup and lemon-lime soda, and served with a dipping sauce of spicy vinegar, the result is a chargrilled treat with the distinctive sweet and tangy flavour Filipinos love.
While there is no record of the precise origins of this unique marinade, it is widely acknowledged that the trend of preparing barbecue in this manner began in 1950s Metro Manila before expanding to other urban centres. This was at the height of American cultural influence, a phenomenon that has its roots in the American colonial period in the Philippines (1898–1946), which then flourished due to a continued strong military presence in the country. Some hypothesise that the sauce is meant to emulate the smoky, zesty and rich flavours of the barbecue glazes from the American South.
Pinoy BBQ's distinctive sweetness and caramelisation comes from two integral, albeit unusual, ingredients: ketchup and soda. These were introduced during the American Commonwealth Era in the mid 1930s and popularised post-World War Two. "Somehow, locals perceived that imported elements such as soda and ketchup would lend 'deliciousness' to a dish because they are 'imported' and 'from America'," explained Ige Ramos, food historian and author of Dila at Bandila: Search for the National Palate of the Philippines.
Pinoy BBQ's unique marinade contains soy sauce, calamansi, banana ketchup and lemon-lime soda (Credit: Scott A Woodward)
However, the scarcity of tomatoes during WW2 led to the invention, mass production and popularisation of banana ketchup, a local and less-expensive alternative to the American condiment that's made from bananas, vinegar and spices. Its sweeter profile appeals to many, making it a mainstay on the tables of all Filipino homes and giving a distinctly candied quality to the BBQ glaze.
And what of the lemon-lime soda? "I would have thought the primary purpose of using 7UP was to mask the strong smell of meat that had been exposed to the elements," Ramos said, "but street food vendors swear by the efficacy of carbonated water to tenderise cheap cuts of meat." He explained that in the marinating process, the sugar and citrus flavours create a crunchy, caramelised film on the meat, especially around the fat, after it has been grilled.
"One can also presume that it's this very marinade that defined the urban Filipino taste buds with a preference for sweet-tasting food," Ramos said.
BBQ vendors ply their trade from street side stalls at transportation hubs and simple tables and grills placed outside homes, churches and school yards – as well as at more established restaurant chains and via delivery services. Aside from its comforting taste, the appeal of barbecue lies in its value for money, with a skewer ranging from just 12 to 50 pesos (£0.18 to £0.75). According to Micky Fenix-Macabenta, president of the Food Writers Association of the Philippines, the well-loved snack is not merely something to eat, but a way of life. "Barbecue has a culture of its own," she said. "It's a place where people gather, interact and share stories. Often you'll find these stalls grouped together in a plaza or on a street corner, and late in the afternoon it's a very vibrant scene."
Ramos agrees. "There is an emotional and almost spiritual quality to barbecue," he said. "It can be shared with friends for a birthday party along with lumpiang shanghai (spring rolls) and pansit (noodles); it serves as pulutan (bar snacks) for happy hour and when dining alone, it still conjures happy memories."
Aling Bebeng's BBQ is one of the most popular street grills in Metro Manila (Credit: Scott A Woodward)
While there are myriad places to try Pinoy BBQ, and everyone has their favourite spot, Ramos recommends Aling Sosing's in Pasay. When we visited, the carinderia was packed full of ravenous diners with a long queue that wound up the street. A slim, energetic man was at the grill, darting quickly amidst the bellows of thick smoke, clicking his tongs rhythmically while flipping and dispatching charred whole tilapia, glistening pork belly strips and skewers of barbecued pork.
Established in the 1970s, the business is still family-owned, with Aling Sosing's daughter-in-law, Gemma, and granddaughter, Mimay, running the show. "My grandmother started small, serving breakfast and a few dishes like nilagang baka (boiled beef soup) for jeepney and taxi drivers," said Mimay. "Slowly, she kept adding more dishes, and people from the offices in Makati would cross over to eat here."
The mood was festive, and every table had some kind of grilled specialty, shared family-style alongside mountains of rice, bowls of broth and myriad condiments such as fresh bird's eye chilli, soy sauce and vinegar. Their skewers and liempo (pork belly) had a salty profile, with more umami than many places, making it a perfect ulam (main dish) rather than a simple snack.
Despite serving up a more savoury, high-end version of BBQ at Toyo (using three cuts of pork and an ultra-concentrated reduction glaze to highlight the meaty flavours), Navarra remains a big fan of the classic street version. "I like to discover places recommended by my colleagues, and our master bread baker, Sherwin, introduced me to Aling Bebeng's BBQ," he explained. Located on the corner of Makati's Washington and Roosevelt Streets, the small charcoal grill, flanked by a table and a few stools, is one of the most popular barbecuhans (street grills) in Metro Manila due to the extra-sweet marinade and tender, plump cuts of meat. "It's become a favourite haunt for merienda (a late afternoon snack) for the whole Toyo team," Navarra said.
At Toyo Eatery, Chef Navarra serves up a high-end version of BBQ that uses three cuts of pork and a concentrated reduction glaze (Credit: Scott A Woodward)
There's a social etiquette with unspoken rules about enjoying your Pinoy BBQ street-side. Large vats of spiced vinegar sit alongside the grill where diners can dunk their fare. Double dipping is not allowed for the tightly skewered pork BBQ, but larger chunks such as Betamax can be moved apart and re-submerged, as long as it has never touched your lips.
Whether an office worker, jeepney driver or student, people from all walks of life stand side-by-side at these stalls on a daily basis to enjoy these practical and delicious treats. Pinoy BBQ is the great equaliser. "It crosses the social divide," Fenix-Macabenta said. "If you are Filipino, you will like it because of its sweet and nostalgic flavours."  
And although it can be enjoyed anytime, anywhere, the consensus is that barbecue is best fresh off the coals, on the street. "Everyone has a shared experience when going to a barbecue stall, from picking out which skewers you want to eat, to watching and waiting as the meat is cooked, then dunking them into vinegar," said Navarra. "It's an experience that so many people can relate to, wherever in the country you are."
--
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.



Follow the Food
Inner Space
A Fair Climate
Family Tree
Best of BBC Future
Food Fictions
Towards Net Zero
Latest
More
During the summer of 1883, a caldera in the Sunda Strait, located between the islands of Java and Sumatra, became increasingly turbulent, releasing huge plumes of ash and steam into the sky. Then, on 26 August, an underwater volcano ejected approximately 25 km3 (six cubic miles) of debris, hurtling pumice ash and boiling lava flows across nearby settlements. The eruption killed tens of thousands of people. Krakatoa remains one of the most deadly underwater eruptions in history.
Nearly a century and a half later, on 15 January 2022, another underwater giant awoke from its slumber, this time off the shores of Tonga. The Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai eruption and resulting tsunami were different, however. Volcanologists were able to document the underwater mountain’s violent release in real time, and what they found confounded their expectations.
The South Pacific nation was all but cut off from the rest of the world after an undersea communications cable was severed by the explosion, but satellites captured hundreds of lightning discharges issuing forth from the volcano’s ash clouds. Remote sensors recorded powerful shock waves reverberating across the globe for days. A column of ash rose to never before seen heights, lingering in the outer reaches of the planet’s atmosphere.
The Hunga Tonga eruption remains a humanitarian disaster for the nearly 100,000 people who live in Tonga – and an unfolding tale of mystery and caution for the world. It prompted scientists to rethink their ideas on the hazards posed by the many submarine volcanoes lurking beneath the oceans. Now, the hunt is on to find these underwater seamounts in order to protect land and ocean alike.
You might also like:
With increasingly sophisticated methods of detection, volcanologists hope to improve early warning systems, determine environmental impact, mitigate hazards posed by eruptions, and aid in ecosystem recovery. Who are the people trying to find where the next underwater volcano is hiding? And where do they look next?
Volcanos in the deep sea are much more difficult to locate than those at ground level; indeed, we know more about the surface of the Moon than we do about the ocean floor. But Hunga Tonga’s eruption has galvanised the scientific community and underscored the need for further exploration of this uncharted realm. In April 2022, New Zealand’s National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (Niwa) launched an ocean voyage to the site Tonga’s dramatic eruption. Their vessel, the RV Tangaroa, surveyed thousands of square kilometers of the seafloor and collected video images and physical samples, which are now being studied back on land.
Volcanologists hope to improve early warning systems, and mitigate the environmental and economic damage caused by eruptions (Credit: Shinobu Maeda/EyeEm/Getty Images)
Given that the region is so seismically active, Niwa is in a unique position to investigate Hunga Tonga’s dramatic impact. “Before our voyage, we had only anecdotal information from the small boats that had gone out from Tonga’s mainland,” says Mike Williams, chief scientist of oceans at Niwa. Underwater volcanos often fall under their own weight. When seawater mixes with magma, this can lead to an explosive collapse, which in turn may generate a tsunami (and create noxious vapours on land). “Imagine a ringed cake tin, and one side has exploded outside of the tin,” explains Williams.  
Researchers aboard the Tangaroa had a few immediate goals: map the site, retrieve volcanic deposits to help understand the chemistry and geology of the eruption, and examine the caldera’s impact on the surrounding seabed. “We arrived at the volcano at dawn, and saw the sun rise over two jagged peaks oozing fire and doom and violence,” says Kevin Mackay, veteran volcanologist and leader of Niwa’s voyage.
Once the vessel reached the outer caldera of Hunga Tonga, a remotely operated Deep Towed Instrument System (DTIS) traveled to the seamount’s flanks. There, the unmanned vessel glided down toward the seafloor like a torpedo with wings, allowing the team to record video footage and take samples. “It was a bit scary,” says Mackay. “The constant risk of a minor eruption under our steel boat meant we could, at any moment, sink in the blink of an eye.”
The team’s trial deployment of this new instrumentation allowed them to sniff out other volcanic plumes and to document changes to Hunga Tonga’s structure, which turned out to be rather dramatic.
“Before the eruption, the caldera was about 120m (396ft) high. Now it’s a kilometer deep,” says Mackay. “Additionally, we found pyroclastic flows – turbulent, dense, violent rivulets that have flowed along the seafloor – at least 60km (37 miles) away, radiating from all angles.”
Niwa’s voyage was part of the Tonga Eruption Seabed Mapping Project, an endeavour funded by the Nippon Foundation, a non-profit based in Japan which has helped underwater research since 1962. The programme is also supported by the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (Gebco), an organisation aiming to map the world’s ocean floor by 2030. While Niwa doesn’t actively monitor submarine volcanos, the organisation has an active research programme geared toward investigating seamounts, many of which are extinct volcanoes.
Hunga Tonga's eruption remains a humanitarian disaster for the nearly 100,000 people who live in Tonga (Credit: Dana Stephenson//Getty Images)
Few submarine eruptions have been documented because they are usually hidden beneath miles of ocean water. Those that scientists have observed, however, may give us clues to future disasters. In 2018, for example, an underwater eruption off France’s Mayotte Island gave rise to a colossal new seamount, revealing a high level of seismicity in the region. Mayotte is now continuously monitored, its activity regularly updated by a group of scientists on Revosima, a coordinated platform which watches over volcanic hazards such as magma flow, water temperature and acidity, as well as seismicity.
Efforts like Revosima are particularly critical for ongoing eruptions, but they are extraordinarily expensive. Ship cruise time and operations can cost up to €50,000 day (£43,500). Securing a cable near a volcanic site (which allows for local data collection) can cost millions. Infrastructure takes years to fund and establish.
But the research is critical – not just so that we can ascertain the dangers posed to us by active volcanoes, but also so that we can develop a better understanding of their environmental impact.
The way that these natural phenomena occur can tell us about how ecosystems recover, since volcanic eruptions tend to follow similar patterns of destruction as human disturbances such as mining, ocean trawling, fishing and other extractive operations. Much of a submarine volcano’s impact may be from the stirring up of the seabed or the blanketing by sediment, for example.
“People are interested in volcanoes because they are a risk,” says Javier Escartin, bathymetric researcher at the Laboratoire de Géologie at the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris. “In general, deep volcanoes do not pose much danger; more dangerous are those near the sea surface or that emerge above it.” Approximately 1,500 potentially active volcanoes dot the globe (about 500 of which have erupted in recorded time), but those do not account for the continuous belt of volcanoes on the ocean floor – of which there are untold hundreds. Many of these are likely located along the Pacific Rim, in the so-called Ring of Fire  which circles the Pacific Ocean. Most dangerous are volcanic islands where humans reside.
“Imagine an explosion the scale of Tonga in the Mediterranean or Hawaii,” says Escartin. “The death and destruction, the damage to the economy and transportation systems… but of course we can’t study the volcanoes if we don’t know where they are.”
The RV Tangaroa has surveyed thousands of square kilometres of the seafloor near New Zealand on recent missions (Credit: Marty Melville/AFP/Getty Images)
How do volcanologists search for these as yet undiscovered submarine volcanoes, especially when bathymetric data is relatively sparse? Hydroacoustic monitoring is one answer. When a volcano erupts underwater, it produces acoustic energy: when lava as hot as 1,200C (2,192F) interacts with near-freezing seawater, it vaporises, causing an explosion of sound – from sharp cracks and thunderous booms to slow rumbles. Seismic energy is converted to underwater acoustic energy at the seafloor-water boundary, a kind of Goldilocks zone for those listening for underwater vibrations.
At depths of approximately 1,000m (3,300ft), pressure, temperature and salinity combine to slow the movement of sound through water, facilitating its transmission. This zone is known as the Sound Fixing and Ranging (Sofar) Channel (whales use this same acoustic channel to communicate with one another underwater). Hydrophones, or underwater microphones, can detect the acoustic signal from sound waves produced by a conversion of seismic energy along the Sofar channel. This acoustic data gives clues to the emplacement of lava flows, a potential warning of impending or ongoing eruptions.
Researchers understand the collapse of volcanic islands as part of their geological history, and some expect the flanks to give away and collapse into the ocean, resulting in landslides, earthquakes and major tsunamis. “Though we have not had one such major event in recorded history, consequences could be catastrophic,” says Escartin. In the meantime, geologists and volcanologists continue their underwater detective work with the “crime scenes” available to them.
Consider Axial Seamount, an active volcano off the Pacific Northwest coast of the United States, and the most active underwater volcano known. With documented eruptions in 1998, 2011, and 2015, it is also the most heavily surveyed underwater volcano in the world. Bottom pressure recorders show that Axial is slowly reflating, while remote operated vehicles have discovered new lava flows, suggesting another eruption could happen in the not-too-distant future.
The United States maintains a Volcano Disaster Assistance Program, which includes geologists, volcanologists and other experts in all aspects of volcano hazard assessment, monitoring and volcano-emergency response. Many governments have similar teams in place. Would-be amateur volcano hunters can consult the USG’s handy guide to volcanoes, including a FAQ about eruptions portrayed in movies (turns out scientists can’t actually drive across bubbling lava in real life). But the guidelines for underwater volcano-generated tsunamis are still being written.
Few submarine eruptions have been documented because they are hidden beneath the water, making detection difficult (Credit: Mary Lyn Fonua/AFP/Getty Images)
“Hunga Tonga erupted out of type,” says Mackay, “and that’s what’s confused us: this volcano didn’t behave the way textbooks say it should.” The eruption in Tonga was more explosive than a super volcano, but instead of blowing apart, the volcano remained intact, prompting volcanologists to reassess their theories about what mechanism might have caused such violence. More puzzling still was the fact that Hunga Tonga’s energy dispersed in a sheer vertical pattern rather than outward across the seafloor. “This shotgun blast into the sky was unique,” says Mackay.
Hunga Tonga’s massive explosion not only generated ocean waves, it also produced sound waves and atmospheric waves, oscillations which radiated outward. These waves reached more than 100km (60 miles) into the atmosphere and traveled outwards at a speed approximately twice as fast as a jet liner. Even more unusual, “the waves didn’t follow the traditional pattern of decay”, says Williams. “They seemed to hold more energy and create a wave that was well recorded, even as far as the Ross Ice Shelf in Antarctica.”
Researchers are still trying to piece together the series of events that created, by any metric imaginable, one of the most devastating eruptions of the century. Hunga Tonga’s explosion was estimated to have unleashed the energy equivalent of 10 million tons of TNT, a paroxysm of ash and angry seawater that practically smothered the island.
The eruption not only disrupted local infrastructure, polluting water supplies and cutting off roadways; it had ripple effects across the globe. Earth is dotted with countless other submarine volcanos, any one of which could unleash its fury without notice. By studying Hunga Tonga, we can learn more about what protective measures to take when it comes to these other underwater time bombs, ticking away.
 --
Join one million Future fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter or Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called "The Essential List" – a handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife, Travel and Reel delivered to your inbox every Friday. 

Follow the Food
Inner Space
A Fair Climate
Family Tree
Best of BBC Future
Food Fictions
Towards Net Zero
Latest
More
During World War Two, the UK ministry of agriculture encouraged gardeners to "Dig for Victory" and grow their own vegetables to help feed the country. Allotments sprung up in private gardens and public parks – even the lawns outside the Tower of London were transformed into vegetable patches.
Almost 100 years later, the "Dig for Victory" slogan has been repurposed by the UK's Royal Horticultural Society (RHS). The gardening charity aimed to mobilise the biggest gardening army since World War Two to fight the biggest threat of the 21st Century: climate change. The tools at their disposal? Planting trees, using rainwater instead of sprinklers, and making compost.
If every one of the UK's 30 million gardeners planted one medium-sized tree and let it grow to maturity, they would store the same amount of carbon as is produced by driving 284 billion miles (457 billion km), 11 million times around the planet, research by the RHS shows. If every gardener produced 190kg of compost each year, they would save the amount of carbon produced by heating half a million homes for a year.
As governments and companies race to slash their emissions, there is increasing interest in the ability of natural landscapes, such as forests, wetlands and mangroves, to protect against the risks posed by climate change. Horticulturalists say the humble garden can also serve as a powerful tool in this fight.
"Gardens are becoming shop windows for the wider environment, demonstrating the dangers of pests and threats of climate change and showing what can be done to tackle it," says Simon Toomer, curator of living collections at Kew Gardens in the UK.
To cope with climate change, gardens must become more resilient to hotter and drier conditions in the summer and more rainfall in the winter, the RHS warns.
Ponds can actually reduce the amount of carbon stored in a garden, but they have many other benefits (Credit: Alamy)
The ideal low-carbon garden has a wildness to it. It is packed with plants and teeming with life. The gardener in this sustainable haven is equally mindful of nurturing life below the ground as she is of tending to her flower displays and shrubs. She recycles every grass clipping, fallen leaf and broken twig within the garden and avoids toxic chemicals to boost plant growth, relying instead on home-made compost and living mulch to create a thriving habitat.
Wild lawns
 "In the past everyone wanted a pristine lawn, but now there's a big movement in gardening for more natural landscapes which is really quite exciting," says Justin Moat, senior research leader on Kew Gardens' Nature Unlocked programme, which explores nature-based solutions to climate change and food security.
From working with contaminated city soil to reconsidering weeds, pests and even lawns, gardening is changing as we adapt it to the realities of modern life. This series takes a look at the future of gardens in the 21st Century – and explores how it can be updated to fit with modern sensibilities and challenges, such as environmental awareness and pollution.
"We need to put up with scruffy lawns," says Moat. This may be wishful thinking, as BBC Future revealed recently: we appear addicted to manicured lawns (read more about their strange appeal and the people who think we should get rid of them).
In the UK, gardeners were recently encouraged to let nature take its course during "No Mow May". Environmentalists say if left alone, lawns could become thriving wildlife hotspots. Given that an estimated 23% of urban land is covered by lawns, there is great potential for them to help fight the global biodiversity crisis. 
Leaving the lawn mower in the shed also benefits the climate. One of the most important things gardeners can do in the short-term is reduce their energy consumption, from lawn mowers and sprinklers, says Toomer.
Operating a petrol lawn mower for one hour releases as much smog-forming pollution as driving for 160km (100 miles), says the California Air Resources Board  (CARB).
Sally Nex, a professional gardener and author of the book How to Garden the Low Carbon Way, switched her petrol mower for a battery-powered one years ago after learning how many toxic fumes it spews out.
"There's no regulation on the maximum emissions for petrol powered tools – it's really shocking," says Nex.
Effective carbon sinks don’t have to be boring – the idea is just to have an abundance of plants (Credit: Alamy)
Other gardening tools are just as polluting as mowers. Using a petrol-powered leaf blower produces the same amount of emissions as a 1,770km (1,100 mile) car journey – the distance from Los Angeles to Denver – according to CARB. 
Trapping carbon 
Moat says the Nature Unlocked programme has highlighted the "phenomenal" power soil has to transform our gardens into biodiverse havens that can help mitigate climate change.
"So much more is happening underground than above it," he says. "We need healthy soil for our food production and we need it to trap carbon."
Replenishing and restoring the world's soils – both in farming and natural landscapes – could help remove up to 5.5 billion tonnes of CO2e every year, according to a 2020 study. That is equivalent to the annual greenhouse emissions of the US, the world's second largest polluter, in 2020.
Healthy soil offsets emissions by soaking up carbon from dead plant matter. To lock in as much carbon as possible, soil needs a good balance of water, pockets of air, living organisms, such as fungi, and nutrients. Gardeners maintain this balance by constantly adding organic material to their soil.
"I compare it to a carbon checking and savings account," says Andrea Basche, assistant professor at the department of agronomy and horticulture at University of Nebraska. "You need a constant input of decaying plant matter and roots into the soil checking account to feed all the living organisms."
Gardeners shouldn't press the soil down too much or use heavy equipment when it's wet as this will cause it to become compacted, closing vital air pockets and preventing water from draining, Gush says.
If left bare and exposed to the elements, soil will degrade and its carbon stocks will deplete. Covering the bare soil with plants, such as clover, and mulches – loose coverings of biodegradeable materials – is therefore key to prevent CO2 from seeping into the atmosphere, Gush says.
A recent study by Penn State University found that cover crops were more effective at protecting corn and soybeans from pests than applying pesticides.
Mulching has transformed Nex's garden. "When I stopped digging and started mulching, I realised my topsoil was getting deeper and deeper," she says. "The soil is black and teeming with life – it's very rewarding."
Mulching also suppresses weeds, helps soil retain moisture and protects plant roots from extreme temperatures.
Even balconies can be turned into carbon sinks (Credit: Alamy)
Fallen leaves and broken twigs don't need to be removed from flower beds but can be treated as "living mulches", which are contributing vital nutrients to the soil. "Essentially leave any organic matter to feed into the soil," says Toam.
Living mulches can also reduce gardeners' reliance on nitrogen fertilisers, many of which have a high carbon footprint. Basche says farmers in Nebraska are having to use less fertiliser on their crops after growing a cover crop and using living mulches for several years. Legumes, such as beans and peas, act as a green manure by adding valuable nitrogen – vital for plant growth – to the soil when they decompose. Introducing a legume crop for one year at a cereal farm in Scotland could reduce the amount of nitrogen fertiliser needed over the entire five-year cycle by almost 50%, according to a 2021 study.
An easy way to enrich your soil is by adding homemade compost. Healthy compost should contain a 50:50 mix of materials that are rich in nitrogen, such as grass clippings and vegetable peels, and carbon, such as woody stems and paper towels.
Composting also allows you to discard any leftover food in a sustainable way. When dumped into landfill without oxygen, food waste rots and releases methane, a highly potent greenhouse gas which, although shorter-lived in the atmosphere, has a global warming impact 84 times higher than carbon dioxide (CO2) over a 20-year period.
But on a compost heap, exposed to oxygen, organic waste is converted into stable soil carbon, while retaining the water and nutrients of the original matter. Food which is composted releases just 14% the greenhouse gases of food that is thrown away.
"I dispose of all my garden waste, vegetables and peelings in the garden. Every time I harvest vegetables or prune roses, I'm removing carbon from the garden, so it's important to return that carbon to the soil," says Nex.
Compost heaps must be turned regularly – the RHS recommends once a month – to add air to the biomass and keep it moist. Garden compost can take up to two years to reach maturity, when it turns a dark brown colour, has a crumbly texture and smells like damp woodland.
Wild lawns absorb more carbon than those that are mown often, and have the added bonus of producing bee-friendly flowers (Credit: Alamy)
If you plan on buying compost, avoid one containing peat, says Gush. Peatlands cover just 3% of the planet's surface, but store twice as much carbon as all the world's forests. They lock in carbon over thousands of years, with 1cm of peat forming roughly every 10 years.
"Peat bogs are very important sinks, they have accumulated carbon over millennia," says Gush. "As soon as they are drained and the peat is exposed to the air, carbon is unlocked and released back into the atmosphere."
The UK government said last year it plans to ban the sale of peat compost to gardeners by 2024, but critics warn that the two-year delay will add more than 1.5 million tonnes of CO2 to the atmosphere – the equivalent of the annual emissions of 214,000 UK residents.
CO2 equivalent is the metric measure used to compare the emissions from various greenhouse gases on the basis of their capacity to warm the atmosphere – their global warming potential.
Plant abundance 
While some gardeners might desire a uniform look for their flower beds and lawns, growing a wide range of plants is beneficial if you are looking to transform your garden into a miniature carbon sink.
Plant diversity has been shown to increase productivity and the amount of carbon stored in the soil. "Increased plant diversity boosts carbon sequestration by optimising use of available space in a garden, both above-ground and below-ground," says Gush.
It's important to grow layer plants in your garden and grow crops with roots that will reach different depths so that they can penetrate all parts of the soil and spread nutrients around. "This facilitates maximum carbon drawdown," says Gush.
For those on a mission to transform their gardens into a carbon sink, growing long-lived trees seems like the most obvious option. To make your garden climate-resilient, the RHS recommends planting a mix of drought-tolerant trees, such as snow gum and holm oak, and ones that can withstand waterlogging, such as red maple and golden willow.
Garden trees absorb significant amounts of carbon from the atmosphere, but it also helps to have a diversity of plants (Credit: Alamy)
But trees are far from the only plants that can help offset your garden's carbon footprint. Native grasses have extensive root systems – reaching more than 2ft into the ground – and act as reservoirs for carbon, which transfers into the soil when the roots die and decompose.
Woody shrubs, such as spindle and sweet briar and herbs like rosemary and thyme, can help boost your garden's carbon stocks, Nex recommends in her book.
If you're set on sprucing up your garden with colourful crops, it's best to steer clear of annual flowers which need to be dug up every year – releasing locked-in carbon in the process – and opt for hardy perennials instead, such as peonies and sunflowers, says Nex.
Planting hedges is another worthwhile investment. A well-grown hedge, rich in biomass, helps suck carbon out of the atmosphere and into plants and soil. One study found that hedgerows store similar amounts of carbon to woodland. Hedges also harbour rich biodiversity and are teeming with wildlife. A British ecologist who monitored an old hedgerow near his home in Devon counted a remarkable 2,070 species, ranging from pollinators to lizards and mammals, visiting or residing there. 
Ponds may also play an important role in gardens' fight against climate change. One study of small, lowland ponds in north-east England found that they stored much higher rates of carbon (79 to 247g per square metre per year) compared to surrounding woodland or grassland (2-5g).
However, not all ponds act as carbon sinks. A US study found that man-made ponds collecting stormwater run-off in Florida emit more carbon than they store in their mucky sediment.
"That finding means some ponds are doing us an ecosystem 'disservice,'" Mary Lusk, the study's co-author and assistant professor of water and soil sciences at the University of Florida, said when the study was published. "Our results suggest that when they're new, [the ponds] emit large proportions of carbon from the landscape."
Ponds can also emit large amounts of potent methane into the atmosphere. One study by the University of Exeter concluded that ponds smaller than one square metre are responsible for releasing around 40% of all methane emissions from inland waters.
However, not all environmental benefits are about carbon – and ponds come with many other advantages, such as boosting biodiversity. In fact, some charities say that adding a pond to your garden is one of the best things you can do for wildlife (more on this later in the series). 
"If you are disturbing the sludge at the bottom of the pond, your pond will release more methane than it will absorb carbon," says Nex. To keep the noxious gas contained, Nex recommends removing dead foliage from your pond surface as rotting debris will give off methane and netting it in the autumn. 
Gardeners who adopt low-carbon practices will be rewarded with thriving biodiversity and borders brimming with lush plants.
"My plants now grow so much better. It's very flattering to me as I'm not doing very much!" says Nex. "It has really improved the appearance of my garden – it's quite breath-taking actually."
--
Join one million Future fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter or Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called "The Essential List" – a handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife, Travel and Reel delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Follow the Food
Inner Space
A Fair Climate
Family Tree
Best of BBC Future
Food Fictions
Towards Net Zero
Latest
More
From her organic wildflower meadow just south of Edinburgh, Sally Gouldstone harvests native botanical ingredients such as nettle, yarrow and wild carrot to make her "seed-to-skin" Seilich brand of personal care products. Gouldstone, who has a PhD in nature conservation, knows to leave most of her crop in the field so that bees and other pollinators can use them too. What she does take is transferred to a traditional copper still to produce essential oils using cold processing techniques.
Gouldstone wasn't satisfied with just telling her customers everything she did was "natural" and "sustainable". Those words seem to be used everywhere – and without evidence to back them up, she felt they could be misused.
Seilich is the UK's first company certified by the Wildlife Friendly Enterprise Network, which means that the brand adheres to species-specific conservation targets. Every certified company's targets will be slightly different depending on the key species in the local area. In Seilich's case, their certification requires them to support native species of wildflower for bumblebees, solitary bees, honeybees, hoverflies, butterflies, moths and beetles.
The Wildlife Friendly Enterprise Network helps to conserve more than 13 million hectares (130,000 sq km) of habitat worldwide, according to Christine Lippai, the executive director of this not-for-profit. They say their certification is the best way to cut through any greenwashing in the natural skincare industry while avoiding foraged ingredients that could leave wild places depleted.
"Nature is often used to sell products in the skincare and wellness industry but sometimes, businesses are simply exploiting nature for commercial benefit," says Gouldstone. "In the case of natural ingredients which are grown as crops, these systems may provide positive ecosystem services for example in supporting biodiversity, sequestering carbon, filtering water and so on, but when it comes to harvest time these benefits are lost in their entirety. For example, stored carbon is released as the soil is disturbed and wildlife habitat is destroyed before the creatures that depend on it have a chance to complete their lifecycle. But with a few tweaks, these systems could provide long-term benefits."
In supermarkets and mainstream online retailers, far beyond the blossoming Seilich field margins, there are an alarming number of mixed messages and conflicting claims that contribute to consumer confusion.
If crops are harvested before the invertebrates that depend on them have completed their lifecycles, any benefits might be lost (Credit: Getty Images)
If you want to do your bit for biodiversity and the climate, are you better off buying natural products – whose credentials might or might not be questionable – or synthetic ones produced in a factory? The answer is not as clear cut as you may think.
Chemicals that cause harm to human health or to the environment can be found in everyday household products, from cleaning sprays and food packaging to furniture and cookware. Some toxins end up inside our bodies or stay in the soil, water and air that surrounds us for decades and sometimes longer. Some naturally occurring ingredients can have powerful effects on our bodies. Botanicals such as tea tree oil, eucalyptus and rosemary can trigger allergic reactions or skin irritation, and people have varying degrees of sensitivity. Natural products are not necessarily free of harmful chemicals, and synthetics ones are not always worse for us.
It can sometimes be confusing to know which products are natural and which are synthetic. One product might contain a mix of natural and synthetic constituents, while some chemicals are processed in order to mimic naturally occurring ones. The degree to which something is natural depends on how it was sourced and processed. Ingredients can be sourced from plants, minerals, marine resources or animals, or synthetically derived from fossil fuels. Then there's a spectrum of modification processes.
Your instinct might be to think naturally occurring ingredients must be better for the environment than synthetics manufactured in a lab. But is that really the case?
Regenerative or organic farming practices used to cultivate natural ingredients can support biodiversity and improve soil health, but, depending on how, when and where something is harvested, it might also increase some greenhouse gas emissions.
Manufacturers of lab-produced synthetics often argue that their methods don't exhaust the planet of its resources and that they're able to produce substances on a larger, more commercially viable scale without limitations from scarce natural ingredients. In some instances, sourcing natural ingredients isn't feasible or ethical. For example, the use of horseshoe crabs as a source for limulus amebocyte lysate (an important compound used for blood tests) has been criticised by campaigners. A synthetically derived but chemically identical alternative is being developed.
Squalane, a natural oil found in the livers of sharks, is used to make cosmetics and personal care products such as deodorants, skincare and sun creams. Another shark oil known as squalene is used as an adjuvant to increase efficacy of some vaccines. The sourcing of these two ingredients threatens shark populations, and alternatives have been derived from olive oil but the availability and price of that supply fluctuates depending on weather-dependent harvests.
Naturally-sourced products might put greater demands on the environment than a synthetic alternative (Credit: Getty Images)
Now, there's another solution. Scientists at a Californian biotech company called Amyris have developed pharmaceutical-grade synthetic equivalents made from ethically sourced sugar cane certified by BonSucro. Squalane is "nature's best moisturiser" according to Mike Rytokoski, president of technology access for Amyris, which now produces more than half of the squalane used in beauty products across the world.
Making synthetic squalane using a fermentation-based process guarantees greater purity, a longer shelf life and a more stable price compared to sourcing from sharks or olive trees. "The latest advances in biotechnology enable us to meet the growing demand for clean, sustainable ingredients not by depleting scarce natural resources, but through the creation of bio-identical ingredients through clean chemistry," said Rytokoski who expects green biotech to transform the beauty industry over the coming decade. "The most powerful driver for this transition [to greener chemistry solutions] is the consumer," he added. "Today's consumers are looking for products made with ingredients that are safer, more sustainable, ethically sourced and don't compromise on performance."
Buzzwords like eco-friendly, sustainable and natural aren't regulated, so they might be meaningless when it comes to claims on product labelling.
Nature-inspired is also flimsy – phrases like this are often accompanied by images of flowers, leaves or waterfalls to give the sense of something being wholesome but it’s just marketing jargon.
Watch out for claims that something is "chemical-free" – it implies chemicals are "bad" but even water is a chemical.
Another case in point is Indian sandalwood, a fragrance used in beauty products. Each sandalwood tree takes 30 years to reach full maturity before its essential oil can be harvested, and overharvesting puts this plant at risk of extinction. In the lab, Amyris has created a more affordable and bio-identical sandalwood molecule from widely abundant sugarcane using fermentation technology.
But the majority of synthetic chemicals are made at scale in factories from fossil fuels using energy-intensive processes creating hazardous waste and toxic emissions. The chemicals industry is the production sector that uses the most energy in the world, resulting in vast greenhouse gas emissions which fuel the climate crisis. Petrochemicals are used to make everything from packaging and clothing to laundry detergents and fertiliser. Plastics are made from petrochemicals too and 98% of single-use plastics are manufactured from fossil fuels.
You might also like:
Green chemist Richard Blackburn produces cosmetics, haircare and skincare ranges for his brand Dr Craft which are made from an untapped resource – food waste. The products are created using an energy-efficient and toxin-free extraction process. In his lab at the University of Leeds, the professor of sustainable materials designs mandarin cleansers using dried leftover peel from China's favourite fruit, bodycare products made with grape skin extracts or hair toners made with left over blackcurrent skins from British drink manufacturer Ribena. But, as Blackburn explained, natural isn't automatically better: "Dedicating lots of land to growing crops to make cosmetics is a terrible idea; we should be feeding the world first. But while we're making food, there are great resources. So it's about looking for sustainable sources and interesting chemistries that reliably demonstrate an activity that we can put into a material."
Blackburn says that many people can be left feeling confused by chemical terms, but shouldn’t be. "Nature is doing chemistry all the time. Instead of being frightened of chemistry, people should be frightened of what the full lifecycle issues are." In the case of mandarins, 10 million tonnes of peel get incinerated every year. The processes he uses makes the remaining peel biodegradable so it's a win-win.
Every formulation is a compromise between price, effectiveness, aesthetics, performance and ethics. It's a trade-off in which the environment often loses out. "If your hero ingredient has got a great sustainability story, don't then let the rest of your product be the same old rubbish we've been using forever," says Blackburn, who designs the whole range with that in mind.
Quality control is a priority in terms of safety too. The Dr Craft team looks at every extraction in great detail using state-of-the-art chemical analysis. "When we extract an ingredient from mandarin peel, for example, we know how much of it we have got in the extract, but at the same time we don't want to unintentionally concentrate another ingredient that might occur naturally that then causes a problem," says Blackburn. "So we test it to make sure we’re not including anything we don't want as well. We're combining world-class chemical analytical facilities and knowledge with sustainability principles in a cosmetic lab."
By designing out waste, finding regenerative solutions and developing sustainable alternatives, pioneers like Gouldstone, Rytokoski and Blackburn are leading the way towards a more circular economy based on chemical ingredients that are good for us and beneficial to the environment. 
Back in Scotland, Gouldstone explained that for decades, the consumption narrative has focused on negative human impacts. She insists that we can have a positive and regenerative impact: "Seilich shows that's possible. Because the plants we grow are native, they grow easily so it's really low-input farming that's absolutely scalable."
Gouldstone adds the debate between synthetics and natural ingredients ultimately depends on finding a balance between human health and the health of the environment. "Those are not the same thing. What's best for us isn't always what's best for the planet. We need to start thinking about the environmental footprints of every ingredient at a deeper level."
* Anna Turns is an environmental journalist and the author of Go Toxic Free: Easy and Sustainable Ways to Reduce Chemical Pollution
--
Join one million Future fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter or Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called "The Essential List" – a handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife, Travel and Reel delivered to your inbox every Friday.

One of the oldest medical texts in the world is the Ebers Papyrus, a 110-page-long compilation of treatments and cures written in around 1500 BC. The text, found between the legs of a mummified body in an Egyptian tomb, has instructions on which plants to consume to treat various diseases, giving 811 prescriptions for a wide range of disorders from mental illnesses to crocodile bites.
Later came "the Hippocratic Corpus" often attributed to the ancient Greek physician Hippocrates, who is widely regarded as the father of modern Western medicine (although scholars today think the collection was written by numerous healers who followed Hippocrates). Remedies included honey to treat insomnia and infected wounds, winter cherry to improve eyesight and cure toothache, basil used to soften the bowel and help with inflammation, and gum arabic for birth control. In total, 40% of the remedies in the collection were made from 44 plants – 34 of which were also consumed as food.
The use of foods to help ensure a long life has been addressed in traditional Chinese, Mediterranean and Ayurvedic medicine and many more ancient texts. Even today, these continue to inspire contemporary wellness trends. And in some parts of the world, indigenous people and tribal communities continue to utilise hundreds of edible plants as medicine by including them in their diet.
The majority of the world's population, however, rely on modern healthcare systems in which food has a relatively small role to play in treating or preventing disease. Instead, food has been largely vilified as an underlying cause of metabolic and cardiovascular diseases through overconsumption and poor diet. But there is now growing consensus that a healthy diet may not only be a way of staving off these health problems, it has the power to treat diseases too. 
How can we improve the diets of people around the world to prevent disease? Might food once again be used as medicine?
Many everyday edible plants have inspired medicines that you might find at home. Their abilities to synthesise compounds that are useful to us make them helpful chemistry aides. "Plants are actually brilliant chemists, they've already done much of the work for humans," says Melanie-Jayne Howes, a research leader in phytochemistry and pharmacognosy (the study of drugs from natural origin) at the Royal Botanic Gardens Kew in the UK.
"Rather than having to start from scratch to synthesise a new drug, which can involve a lot of time and effort, and a lot of chemical resources, it can be more efficient to use a plant chemical as the starting material to design and develop a drug, because the steps involved to produce that particular drug may be reduced," adds Howes.
The first discoveries of certain chemicals in edible plants that inspired the development of new drugs might have been accidental or serendipitous in some cases, or based on how those plants were used traditionally, but their occurrence in widely grown edible crops can help scientists source them more easily. 
Below you will see some examples of common crops and the medicines that are derived or inspired by their chemistry.
(The information provided below is intended for general interest and is not intended to be used as medical advice. If you have a medical condition listed below, always consult your doctor.)
"I would define 'food as medicine' as the incorporation of food and nutrition into the healthcare system," says Dariush Mozaffarian, dean of the Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy at Tufts University in Massachusetts, US. "And the science says very clearly that that can be done to both cure and prevent diseases. Food and nutrition are the leading cause of poor health in almost every country in the world. Yet this is largely ignored by healthcare systems, by healthcare discussions and by healthcare financing."
But scientists are also unravelling ways of using food to change the course of disease by delivering medically tailored meals to chronically ill patients or prescribing specific produce to those who have diet-sensitive conditions like diabetes, obesity or high-blood pressure. Delivering meals matched to the nutritional needs of cancer, HIV and diabetes patients, for example, has been shown to almost halve subsequent hospital admissions of those receiving the tailored diet and reduce their overall healthcare costs by up to 16%. Researchers in the US are also running trials where carefully chosen fresh food is prescribed to patients with type 2 diabetes and low-income mothers – an approach that has become known as a "farmacy" – to help improve their health. Many hospitals include specialist dieticians among their staff to help improve the recovery of their patients through better nutrition.
But the concept of treating food as medicine could have a far wider impact on human health too.
Just 10 foods are estimated to play a role in nearly half of all US deaths from heart disease, stroke, and type 2 diabetes each year. These deaths occur due to people eating too few nuts, seeds, seafood omega-3, vegetables, fruits and grains, or eating too much sodium, processed meat and sugary beverages.
Historically, in most developed nations healthcare advice has focused on "bad" foods and limiting the consumption of potentially harmful ingredients like sugar and salt. But there is a growing awareness that even in wealthy countries, large portions of the population are not getting access to foods with the nutrients they need to stay healthy.  
The world was already not on track to meet the goal set by the World Health Organization (WHO) of ending global hunger by 2030, but the Covid-19 pandemic has set back that goal even farther. Malnutrition – which covers all forms of inadequate diet, including lacking essential nutrients from your diet and obesity – is a problem that affects people all over the world, including in developed countries like the US and UK. The WHO estimates that two billion people suffer from malnutrition, and 928 million people – 12% of the world's population – were severely food insecure in 2020. This figure is 148 million higher than in 2019. 


"Food insecurity is directly linked to chronic medical conditions," says Hilary Seligman from the University of California San Francisco, US. "This is because people living in food-insecure households may have poorer dietary intake. Because healthier foods cost more. And the stress of food insecurity and less healthy diets create inflammation in the body. When the household is focused on accessing foods, other health-promoting behaviours like physical activity and refilling medications are less likely to be priorities." 
Food insecurity also puts immense pressure on healthcare systems. Seligman and her colleagues found that food insecurity is closely associated with higher healthcare use, including emergency department visits and inpatient admissions. Those with the highest healthcare costs were often also food insecure. 
In the US, the costs to the healthcare system of cardiovascular disease are estimated to be $316bn (£239bn) each year, and $327bn (£247bn) annually for diabetes. 
"If you think about how much money each country spends on healthcare yet ignores food in that investment, it actually explains a lot about where we are today with global epidemics of obesity, prediabetes and diabetes," says Mozaffarian, adding: "There is no way we can get rid of the rising healthcare costs around the world unless we fix food first."  
Advocates of using food as medicine believe that by increasing access, availability and knowledge around healthier eating, some chronic diseases can be eliminated or slowed down while significantly reducing healthcare costs around the world. 
But there are certain challenges. Existing programmes in the US focus on relatively small, already ill populations, and are designed to last only a couple of weeks or a couple of months, Seligman says. In the US, an individual admitted to the hospital with heart failure might receive medically tailored meals for six weeks or a child enrolled in a weight management clinic may receive vouchers for fruits and vegetables that last for three months. However, the benefits of a dietary intervention might take years or decades to achieve, meaning the patient must continue to change their lifestyle without medical support.
"If we can support a child with healthier dietary intake throughout their childhood, we will generate enormous benefits in the long-term that are likely to be cost-effective. But they won't happen quickly. For example, we may be averting cases of diabetes 30 years later, or delaying the onset of obesity by a decade," Seligman notes.
The pandemic has brought renewed interest in healthier eating, but as Follow the Food has highlighted previously accessing good quality, nutritious food is not easy for everyone, even in developed countries. Often healthy foods are expensive, meaning only those who have the means and privilege to afford diverse dietary preferences can access them. The challenge is how to give those who are less well-off access to nutrient packed foods too. Some innovators are trying to boost the nutrients in staple crops around the world.
There is already a strong market for healthier eating, particularly with organic goods, suggesting that people believe organic produce is better for their wellbeing even though there is a lack of evidence that organic foods are any healthier than the alternatives. So, there is good reason to think that fortified foods would also be popular with consumers.
Technology and service businesses were quick to discover the pandemic-driven trend for health foods, while findings on the protective role of a healthy immune system against infectious diseases like Covid-19 further increased interest in healthy eating. 
Scientists at Cranfield University are developing a new variety of tomato to be more nutritious, which you can see in the video clip below. 
Your browser does not support HTML5 video.
00:00 / 00:00
advertisement
advertisement
"I think diversifying diets is the ultimate solution," says Howarth Bouis, a winner of the World Food Prize and founder of HarvestPlus, a non-governmental organisation dedicated to eradicating "hidden hunger". "Efforts have to be made in that direction… But if you only work on dietary diversity, it's going to take decades and decades because basically you have got to raise people's incomes so they can afford diverse diets." 
In Africa, many of the cereals and root vegetables that form the dietary staples lack vital micronutrients. The result is the problem called hidden hunger, where what can seem like plentiful food availability in reality lacks necessary vitamins and minerals. An estimated 19% of the population in Africa are currently undernourished. In east Africa, for example, 35% of women of reproductive age suffer from anemia – ranging from 19% in Rwanda to 54% in Mozambique – with dietary iron deficiency being a major cause. Among children, iron deficiency is even worse.
To tackle this problem, HarvestPlus has started using a process called "biofortification" in Brazil, Africa and India, which focuses on a root cause of hidden hunger, literally and figuratively. By injecting necessary vitamins and minerals into crops, it aims to strengthen their nutritional value before people start eating them. 
"The idea I had was, if people are eating these large amounts of food staples day in and day out, let's try to load more of what they need into those staples," says Bouis. "Let's get agriculture to provide minerals and vitamins that people need. Let's close that gap in the food supply."
Adding vitamins or minerals to food items such as milk or cereal is a common practice. However, this is a costly process and these items are already out of reach to those who are most deficient. Enriching the crops themselves is what makes biofortification unique. So far, HarvestPlus has reached an estimated 10 million farming households in 60 countries. From rice to wheat to bananas, there are now 290 varieties of 12 biofortified crops which provide higher amounts of vitamin A, iron or zinc.
Poverty, inequality and the industrialisation of our food system have led to a global nutrition crisis that will last for generations. According to the WHO, 22% (149.2 million) of children under five years old were affected by stunting in 2020, 6.7% (45.4 million) suffered from wasting and 5.7% (38.9 million) were overweight. 
While deficiency is more severe in Asia and Africa, many communities suffer from malnutrition even in the wealthiest countries like the US or the UK. This affects entire generations' wellbeing and participation to society, say Mozaffarian and Seligman, causing immense pressure on healthcare systems, and increasing deadly levels of obesity, cancer and heart diseases. But this is not an irreversible trend. 
Physicians, scientists and innovators around the world are rethinking how we approach food. Whether it's plant breeding, genetically engineering crops, informing communities about diverse diets, or utilising food as a pre-emptive tool against potential diseases, many interventions are underway. 
Some of these may have just begun, but it's already clear that food has enormous potential to transform our health and wellbeing. 
Follow the Food is a multimedia series by BBC Future and BBC World News that investigates how agriculture is responding to the profound challenges of climate change, environmental degradation and rapidly growing populations that face our global food supply chains. Follow the Food traces emerging answers to these problems – both high-tech and low-tech, local and global – from farmers, growers and researchers across six continents.
in associationwith
Copyright © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read more

Cookies |  Ad Choices / Do Not Sell My Info


            Copyright © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read more | 
            Cookies | 
            Ad Choices / Do Not Sell My Info


Follow the Food
Inner Space
A Fair Climate
Family Tree
Best of BBC Future
Food Fictions
Towards Net Zero
Latest
More
On dark nights when the Moon is hidden and the clouds are at bay, Kevin Hughes sits at the bottom of his garden and gazes up at a velvety black sky. In contrast to his childhood growing up in London amidst the glare of orange sodium-vapour lights, he usually sees hundreds – and, as his eyes adjust, thousands – of stars studding the night sky.
Hughes lives in Cornwall, a peninsula in the southwestern tip of England that juts out into the Atlantic Ocean. His home is in West Penwith, a region renowned for its rugged moors, granite tors and mystic stone circles. Dark skies are a portal to this heritage: "These are the same stars that cavemen in furs and woolly mammoths would look at in the Neolithic [era]," says Hughes. 
Although the landscape around them is undergoing change, with new houses, hotels and developments springing up, residents of West Penwith can feel safe in the knowledge that their night skies will likely be protected for generations to come. This is because in December 2021, the region became a Dark Sky Park: an international marker of exceptionally low light pollution.
Hughes, a former parish councillor who is standing for town council again in September, had the idea to apply for Dark Sky status in 2013 when an album from one of his pop heroes "flicked a lightbulb" in his mind.
"One of my favourite singers is Enya, and she released an album called Dark Sky Island," he says. "It's about Sark in the Channel Islands, which has absolutely no street lighting or cars. All the songs on that album are about navigating by the stars."
He began researching the International Dark-Sky Association (IDA), a body that recognises and accredits dark-sky areas worldwide.
Founded in Arizona in 1988, the IDA was set up by two astronomers to protect night environments from skyglow – excessive, artificial light directed upwards into the sky.
Globally, light pollution has increased by at least 49% over 25 years. Amidst mounting concern from ecologists and astronomers in the 1980s, the IDA was the first recognised authority in the dark sky movement, and remains the largest today.
You might also like:
Since granting Flagstaff, Arizona, the prestigious title of the very first International Dark Sky Place in 2001, the body has supported applications in 49 countries, from Japan to Hungary. It now counts more than 190 sites in its dark sky program, protecting over 110,000sq km (42,471sq miles) of dark places around the globe, including dark sky reserves, communities, islands and sanctuaries.
The status is seen as a seal of approval which can be used by communities as a basis for further conservation, tourism, education or marketing campaigns. And as the benefits of dark skies, including to human health, wildlife and the environment, become better documented, many rural areas are now seeking IDA recognition. The UK currently has the highest concentration of dark sky areas in the world, triggering a "domino effect" as communities race to conserve the darkness.
A starry night sky at Porthgwara Beach in Cornwall (Credit: Chris Colyer)
But proving night skies are pristine – or up to the standard of IDA accreditation – is no easy feat.
It took Hughes and a steering group of parish councillors, amateur astronomers and dedicated residents seven years to achieve dark sky status for West Penwith.
As evidence, the group had to undertake a "sky quality assessment", which involved submitting light meter readings in the darkest areas of the 135sq km (52sq mile) region.
They launched a community campaign, convincing residents to convert to "dark-sky friendly" lighting – fixtures which are shielded, or angled down, rather than beaming up. Local companies and councils were encouraged to rethink their lighting strategies, for example by turning off floodlights and street lights after certain times.
The colour of light is critical too. LED lighting – despite its reputation for energy efficiency – often contains high proportions of blue light in its spectrum, which creates a harsh glare. Simply replacing bulbs with narrow-spectrum or low-colour temperature alternatives, can minimise harmful light. Kelvin (K), is the scale used to judge colour temperature, and typically ranges from 2700-5000K. The gold standard is to install lighting with a colour temperature no higher than 3,000K, in keeping with the IDA's lighting recommendations.
With these guidelines community campaigners hope to educate rather than enforce: "It's not about turning off Christmas lights, it's about changing lights when they go," says Hughes.
West Penwith followed in the footsteps of nearby areas Bodmin and Exmoor, which have managed to cinch sought-after dark-sky status in the last 11 years. Other regions of Cornwall have shown interest in following suit, creating the potential to carve out a "dark corridor" through the south west of England. "Our aspiration is to slowly build a whole patchwork of dark areas," says Hughes. "And as other districts start seeing the benefits, they see this as a win win. There's no major cost involved, just lots of time to get the registration."
The Countryside Charity (CPRE) facilitates the growing dark sky movement in the UK, including by writing letters of support for applications. In 2016, it created a "night blight" map of Britain, using satellite data to survey the scale of light pollution. The charity found that 22% of England has pristine skies, and perhaps the capacity to be IDA accredited.
It also has a strong focus on citizen science, with members of the public encouraged to take part in an annual Star Count each February.
Kevin Hughes, a former parish councillor, had the idea to bid for dark sky designation for West Penwith in 2013 (Credit: Frankie Adkins)
"A very simple way for people to get involved is to look up at the night sky and count the number of stars they can see in the Orion constellation," says Emma Marrington, CPRE's dark sky campaigner. "That can help build up a picture of what the nation's views are from the ground."
If you see 10 stars or fewer in one constellation, you are likely in an area with severe light pollution, notes Marrington. "But if you've got more than 30 stars, then you've got a truly dark sky." 
Members of the public submit their results via the charity's website. The results of the 2021 Star Count showed severe light pollution had decreased in the UK by around 10% from the year before. One reason to explain this shift is the "lockdown effect", as human activity dwindled during the Covid-19 pandemic, especially in urban areas.
This period of darkness may even have led to a wide spectrum of accidental health benefits.
Research has shown that exposure to artificial light at night (Alan) may cause negative health effects. Our circadian rhythm is at the root of this, acting as part of the body’s internal clock, which is necessary for functions such as our sleep-wake cycle. This is mediated by melatonin, often referred to as the sleep hormone. One 2018 study of older adults found that increasing levels of outdoor nocturnal lighting increased their self-administration of hypnotic drugs.
Light of any kind can suppress the secretion of melatonin, but blue light at night does so more harmfully.
"The biological clock is more sensitive to blue light than longer wavelength light, or warmer colours," says Derk-Jan Dijk, professor of sleep and physiology at the University of Surrey.
In recent years, the blue light content of 'artificial' light has increased, he notes. Exposure to light during the day is not detrimental, but Alan can have adverse consequences. 
"If we're exposed to too much light in the evening, our biological clock will delay," Dijk says. "When it's 11pm our biological clock thinks it's only 10pm, but we might not be sleepy yet, so we go to sleep late."
The next morning, however, we still have to be awake bright and early to make it to the office or school on time. This can create a cycle of sleep deprivation, disrupting an internal clock that's been ticking away for millennia.
A 2017 study found a correlation between exposure to light at night and depressive symptoms. A chronic lack of sleep can even influence how cells form and function. New evidence has linked exposure to too much light at night to coronary heart disease, diabetes and certain cancers, especially breast, lung, colorectal and prostate cancers.
Cornwall residents take part in a walk to celebrate International Dark Skies Week 2022 (Credit: Frankie Adkins)
Animals can also feel the ramifications of artificial light at night. "In many cases, the consequence of the exposure to artificial light can be as severe as death," says Marco Barbieri, the scientific advisor at the Convention on Migratory Species.
Take insects, which are in rapid decline around the world. Habitat loss, pesticide use, invasive species and climate change are all key drivers, but research has also suggested that artificial light is another, often overlooked, factor of the insect apocalypse, affecting aspects of insect development, foraging reproduction and even predation. The same goes for some sea creatures, with one study finding light pollution reduces the nesting success of loggerhead turtles by 20%.
One of the greatest victims is the bird population. Migrating birds can be attracted to lights when flying at lower altitudes, and may become disoriented and end up circling in an illuminated area. "This unnatural light-induced behaviour can mean they end up depleting their energy reserves and puts them at risk of exhaustion, predation and lethal collision," says Barbieri.
Up to a billion birds are thought to die from building collisions each year in the US, and bright lights play a hand in this. Light pollution can also impact bird migration patterns, leading them to miss optimal climate conditions for foraging and nesting.
In Cumbria, UK – an area with excellent nighttime sky quality – ecologists charted the effects of varying levels of light pollution by tracking the singing behaviour of robins. Over a three-month period, samples of birdsong were taken in paired sites consisting of one light and one dark site.
The study's findings indicated that artificial lighting, especially uncontrolled or unshielded lighting fixtures, caused earlier singing and calling in robins and other songbird species. Both song repertoire and UV light are used by animals for mate selection and if mating strategies are changed by light levels, females run the risk of choosing lesser fit males.
According to Jack Ellerby, project officer for Cumbria Dark Skies, fieldwork tracing the impact of light pollution and wildlife tends to fall under the radar, because the effects on animals are more incremental than that of other pollution, such as sewage, oil spills or plastic litter.
While light pollution can't be blamed for the entirety of wildlife behavioural change, Stephanie Holt, a bat expert at the UK's Natural History Museum, believes it may be a "tipping point". She notes that some of the most important impacts of lighting on invertebrates are still largely unknown. “[A]s the cornerstone of all of our ecosystems, we should be targeting research and conservation in that direction," she says. 
However, lighting legislation, at least in the UK, is slow to get off the ground, says Holt. As few ecologists are employed at the planning authority level, artificial lighting schemes are often swept to the back of the pile of government priorities, Holt says. However, a spokesperson from the UK's Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) said the government has taken action to address the issue of light pollution across a number of areas, including through the planning system. ”We continue to study the impact of artificial light on insects and wider biodiversity,” they added.
Elsewhere in the world, strides are being taken to protect wildlife at night. In the Netherlands, LED street light schemes in towns and cities are supporting rare bats species, while France has adopted one of the most progressive light pollution policies to date. Enshrined in the 2018 law are technical requirements for the design and operation of outdoor lighting installations used in both public and private property.
UK campaigners are hoping that 2020's first meeting of the All Party Parliamentary Group for Dark Skies, which resulted in a 10-point policy plan for improving provisions for dark skies, could be the country's gateway into artificial lighting control.
In the meantime, the baton is held by individuals, who can lobby local politicians and authorities, create nocturnal corridors for wildlife, and ensure that their own homes and offices do not contribute to additional sources of light pollution, says Holt.
The Milky Way rises over Lanyon Quoit, a neolithic burial chamber in Land's End, Cornwall (Credit: David Clapp/Getty)
Dark sky accreditation has paid off for Northumberland National Park near the Scottish border, not least by significantly raising the financial value of the area. It became the UK's largest Dark Sky Park in 2013, after a strong community push. Any development in the 1,050-sq-km (405-sq-mile) park must take into account redrawn lighting management plans, and 96% of the park now benefits from low levels of light pollution.
Northumberland was already home to a handful of observatories and amateur astronomers before it began "tapping into an emerging zeitgeist of people wanting to go stargazing", says Duncan Wise, visitor development and tourism officer at the park. But the growth in astro-tourism has been "exponential", he says. The visitor economy used to be very seasonal, between April and October, but now extends year-round to include the stargazing season, between October and March.
Hotels, B&Bs and restaurants have capitalised on this, incorporating dark skies as part of their marketing campaigns. One Inn near Hadrian's Wall – where the Aurora Borealis will occasionally set the sky alight – has an observatory on-site, and offers a "stargazing, supper and slumber" package for visitors. 
A 2018 study commissioned to pinpoint the value that astro-tourism brought into Northumberland National Park found it amounted to £25m ($32m) a year.
Wise believes dark skies have the power to be "memory-making", and provide tourists with an experience that's life-enhancing. "Looking through the lens of a telescope and seeing Saturn for the first time with the rings clearly defined is a momentous occasion. You can't underestimate that wow factor people are looking for," he says. "Everyone should have the opportunity to experience that once in their lifetime."
Archaeoastronomer Carolyn Kennet studies the astronomical knowledge of prehistoric cultures (Credit: Frankie Adkins)
Back in West Penwith, a programme of educational dark sky events is just getting off the ground.
On an overcast afternoon, a group of 30 people clamber through the bracken and gorse on an ascent up a craggy hill. They've gathered to celebrate International Dark-Sky Week – held during the week of the new moon in April, when people worldwide turn off their lights to marvel at the night sky with less light pollution.
The event is led by Carolyn Kennett, a local archaeoastronomer, who studies the astronomical knowledge of prehistoric cultures. Although they seem random at first glance, the careful positioning of the weathered stone monuments align with solar and lunar cycles. These offer clues to how our predecessors grappled with the mysteries of the sky, without the help of modern technology, says Kennet.
"When we gaze up into a non-light polluted sky we observe the same cosmos our ancestors would have looked upon. This allows us to reach back in time and gain an understanding of their relationship with the night sky," she says.
Kennett believes that failing to protect these dark, yet illuminating, skies means losing the opportunity to understand this deep-rooted relationship, as well as to look up in wonder at ourselves.
"We'll be taking this away from future generations, as these ancient dark sky spaces are eroded."
The emissions from travel it took to report this story were 30kg CO2. The digital emissions from this story are an estimated 1.2g to 3.6g CO2 per page view. Find out more about how we calculated this figure here.
---
Join one million Future fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter or Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called "The Essential List" – a handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife, Travel and Reel delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Follow the Food
Inner Space
A Fair Climate
Family Tree
Best of BBC Future
Food Fictions
Towards Net Zero
Latest
More
You’re a typical American in 1870. You live on a rural farm. If you’re a man, you likely began a lifetime of manual labour as a teen, which will end when you’re disabled or dead. If you’re a woman, you spend your time on labour-intensive housework. If you're Black or any other minority, life is even harder.
You’re isolated from the world, with no telephone or postal service. When night falls, you live by candlelight. You defecate in an outhouse.
One day, you fall asleep and wake up in 1940. Life is totally different. Your home is "networked" – you have electricity, gas, telephone, water, and sewer connections. You marvel at new forms of entertainment, like the phonograph, radio, and motion picture. The Empire State Building looms over New York, surrounded by other impossibly tall buildings. You might own a car, and if you don’t, you have met people who do. Some of the wealthiest people you encounter have even flown in a plane.
These transformations emerged thanks to a "special century" of unusually high economic growth between 1870 and 1970. They were documented in the economic historian Robert Gordon’s 2016 book, The Rise and Fall of American Growth – and are detailed in a forthcoming book by the philosopher William MacAskill called What We Owe The Future. And it wasn’t just a US story – the industrialised nations experienced dizzying transformations during the early 20th Century.
A vision of the future from the 1940s - a world where home automation boosted leisure time (Credit: Getty Images)
For most of history, the world improved at a sluggish pace, if at all. Civilisations rose and fell. Fortunes were amassed and squandered. Almost every person in the world lived in what we would now call extreme poverty. For thousands of years, global wealth – at least our best approximations of it – barely budged.
But beginning around 150-200 years ago, everything changed. The world economy suddenly began to grow exponentially. Global life expectancy climbed from less than 30 years to more than 70 years. Literacy, extreme poverty, infant mortality, and even height improved in a similarly dramatic fashion. The story may not be universally positive, nor have the benefits been equally distributed, but by many measures, economic growth and advances in science and technology have changed the way of life for billions of people.
What explains this sudden explosion in relative wealth and technological power? What happens if it slows down, or stagnates? And if so, can we do something about it? These are key questions of "progress studies", a nascent self-styled academic field and intellectual movement, which aims to dissect the causes of human progress in order to better advance it.
Founded by an influential economist and a billionaire entrepreneur, this community tends to define progress in terms of scientific or technological advancement, and economic growth – and therefore their ideas and beliefs are not without their critics. So, what does the progress studies movement believe, and what do they want to see happen in the future?
You may also like:
One of the first ways to understand the progress studies movement is to understand its fears. Over the past few years, a number of researchers and economists have raised concerns that scientific and technological progress could be slowing down, which they worry will cause economic growth to stagnate.
To illustrate this more tangibly, Gordon invites his readers to reflect on the rate of progress between the mid-late 20th Century and 2020s. Imagine after that first nap as a typical American, you had taken a second one in 1940, waking up in the 2020s. Your fridge now has a freezer, and your new microwave lets you reheat your leftovers. You are refreshed by air conditioning. You are far more likely to own a car now, and it’s safer and easier to drive. You have a computer, TV, and smartphone. These are impressive inventions, and some seem like magic, but over time, you realise that your living standards haven't transformed quite as much as when you woke up in 1940.  
Faster, cheaper, better? (Credit: Getty Images)
Gordon claims that the staggering changes in the US of 1870-1970 were built on transformative, one-time innovations, and therefore Americans can't expect similar levels of growth to return anytime soon, if ever. The remarkable thing is "not that growth is slowing down but that it was so rapid for so long", he writes. In Gordon’s view, this slowdown isn’t anyone’s fault: "American growth slowed down after 1970 not because inventors had lost their spark or were devoid of new ideas, but because the basic elements of a modern standard of living had by then already been achieved along so many dimensions."
Gordon builds on fears made famous by economist Tyler Cowen in his 2011 book, The Great Stagnation. Cowen similarly argues that the US ate most of the "low-hanging fruit" that enabled consistent growth in American median incomes, and that the country can’t expect to grow like it used to.
So, have all the low-hanging fruit gone? Are "ideas" getting harder to find? A team of economists from Stanford and MIT posed this exact question in a 2020 paper. They found that research and development efforts have significantly increased, while per-researcher productivity has declined. In other words, we’re getting less for our time and money. A lot less. In his analysis of the paper, MacAskill estimates that each doubling of technological advancement requires four-times as much research effort as the previous doubling.
Why? Some from the progress community point to sclerotic funding bureaucracies, which eat nearly half of researcher time and create perverse incentives. This may explain some of the drop-off, but the paper authors found that US research productivity has declined more than 40 times since the 1930s. Is it plausible that US scientific funding became that much less efficient?
Instead, the authors favour Gordon and Cowen's low-hanging fruit arguments: we’ve found the easy discoveries and now put more effort towards what remains. For instance, compare the insights that Albert Einstein made as a patent clerk, or that Marie Curie unlocked in a rudimentary lab, to multibillion-dollar megaprojects like the Large Hadron Collider or James Webb Space Telescope.
We have partially compensated for this decline by increasing the share of the population going towards research, but this, of course, can’t go on forever. Global population growth may help, but this is expected to slow and then reverse before the end of the century. It's also possible that artificial intelligence (AI) could help reverse the decline – or even initiate a new era of explosive growth – but some researchers fear that superintelligent AI could bring other risks that harm progress, or worse.
Is progress slowing down? And if so, what should we do about it? (Credit: Getty Images)
The stagnation hypothesis is not universally accepted. Ideas can be combined and recombined, creating a combinatorial explosion of new innovations, an effect that counters the gobbling of low-hanging fruit. And some have pointed out that if you measure research productivity and benefits differently, the picture is much rosier.
Nonetheless, fear of stagnation is a central motivation for many people in the progress community. Unlike Gordon, however, they are optimistic about their capacity to change it – which leads us to the story of how the progress studies movement was founded.
The origin of progress studies
Around 2016, Cowen received an out-of-the-blue email from Irish billionaire Patrick Collison, who was interested in his book, The Great Stagnation. A few years earlier, Collison had cofounded the online payments company Stripe and now wanted to talk about bigger issues. The pair had a few dinners together in San Francisco and hit it off.
Both Cowen and Collison are infovores. Collison has posted his entire nearly 800-volume bookshelf to his personal site (though he admits he’s only read about half of them). Cowen’s practice of ruthlessly scouring books for the information value they contain and abandoning them – sometimes after five minutes – may make some completionists shudder.
Cowen’s information-production is nearly as prolific as his consumption. The 60-year-old economist has authored nearly 20 books, 40 papers, six years of Bloomberg columns, over 150 episodes of his podcast, and nearly 20 years of blog posts on his popular economics blog Marginal Revolution. During our conversation, Cowen’s voice was hoarse from the marathon of interviews he conducted to promote his most recent book. In 2020, Cowen ranked 17th on a list of the top 100 most influential economists.
Collison, nearly three decades younger and running the fourth-most valuable private startup in the world, has written less, but still found time to publish collections of links on topics like air pollution, culture, growth, Silicon Valley history, and, of course, progress. Stripe’s nearly $100bn (£83bn/€95bn) valuation puts Collison’s net worth north of $11bn (£9bn/€10.5bn). The online payments company combines the lofty "change the world" rhetoric of Silicon Valley startups with the mundane, competent pipes-building of an infrastructure company.
During the pair's meetings, Cowen tells me, "we were both talking about the ideas, finding we had common ideas, and somehow hit upon the notion of an article". So, in 2019, they co-authored an essay in The Atlantic, which argued for "a new science of progress".
"There is no broad-based intellectual movement focused on understanding the dynamics of progress, or targeting the deeper goal of speeding it up. We believe that it deserves a dedicated field of study," they wrote. "We suggest inaugurating the discipline of 'progress studies.'"
Science and technology have brought great changes to human life - many of them undoubtedly positive (Credit: Getty Images)
Their essay generated criticism. Classicist Amy Pistone tweeted that this was just another example of Silicon Valley reinventing the wheel (or in this case, the humanities). Historian Monica Black tweeted that they ignore the harms of "progress", a term whose subjectivity means it will reflect the biases of the people invoking it. And Shannon Dea and Ted McCormick, professors of philosophy and history respectively, wrote that, "'progress' is a situated and often interested claim about human efforts, not a natural good or a divine gift. It needs critical assessment, not headlong zeal".
But between Cowen’s intellectual heft and Collison’s ample fortune, progress studies stuck. The pair believe that, unlike past academic fields, progress studies should prescribe action, writing that it, "is closer to medicine than biology: the goal is to treat, not merely to understand".
What progress studies believes
Since Cowen and Collison inaugurated the field, others have elaborated on what progress studies could look like, and its core principles. Among the most influential is entrepreneur Jason Crawford, who had been writing about progress for years before "progress studies" was coined. His blog, the Roots of Progress, explores examples of scientific and technological development, like why internal combustion beat steam. He also opines on ideas like why progress studies is a "moral imperative" and why people are more "smart, rich and free" than their ancestors.
Crawford has sought to systematise what progress studies means. He argues that the movement holds three premises to be true. First, that progress is real. Material living standards have enormously improved in the last 200 years or so, and that, for whatever reason, "something obviously went very right". Second, that the good from progress is defined in humanistic terms: "that which helps us lead better lives: longer, healthier, happier lives; lives of more choice and opportunity; lives in which we can thrive and flourish." Finally, that societies have the capacity to speed it up or slow it down: "continued progress is possible, but not guaranteed."
When described like this, progress studies' beliefs seem so broad that almost anything could fall under its sprawling umbrella. After all, many movements claim to be in favour of improving human welfare. So what exactly is progress studies for and against? It's still early days, but there are emerging common themes. 
For one, progress studies doesn't desire a world where humans live more harmoniously with nature. As Crawford writes: "Humanism says that when improving human life requires altering the environment, humanity takes moral precedence over nature." It doesn’t necessarily want a world with less inequality and prefers to focus more on growing the pie than on how it’s divided. It also doesn't care much for societal norms that stand in the way of what it conceives of as progress – even ones shared by all cultures. (For example, in the magazine Works in Progress, the researcher Aria Babu recently made a case for artificial wombs to end the burdensome norm of pregnancy.)
Many scientists spend a lot of time on administration, rather than doing science - should we seek to change that? (Credit: Getty Images)
While Crawford and other leaders of the progress community are careful to include squishier things like moral advancement in their definitions of progress, in practice, the organisations and writers that make up the community almost exclusively focus on material advancements, such as boosting economic growth, improving and accelerating scientific research, and increasing housing supply ("Yimby-ism") and immigration (particularly "high-skilled").
The worldview of the progress community can also be inferred from not just what they focus on but where. Progress studies broadly prioritises growth on the technological frontier in rich, democratic countries like the US, rather than the catch-up growth that makes poor countries wealthier. This would seem to be at odds with the movement's concern over stagnating growth and human flourishing: after all, most of the world's poorest people live in economies that are failing to grow. The movement, to date, has also been relatively uncurious about the enormous economic growth seen in China since the 1980s, which lifted 800 million people out of poverty (although Cowen, to his credit, has made it a priority to understand China's growth better.)
The typical progress adherent – at least so far – lives in the San Francisco Bay Area and likely works in tech (the Bay Area meetup channel in the progress Slack has three-times more members than any other city). The influence of people like the investor Peter Thiel, who famously declared, "we wanted flying cars, instead we got 140 characters", is significant in these communities.
Given this, it’s perhaps not surprising that the progress community is more excited about revolutionising scientific grantmaking (see "Improving Science") than digging into the development economics literature on why some countries remain poor.
Many of the greatest scientists in the world spend nearly half their working time applying for funding, a process that diminishes creativity, collaboration and interdisciplinary approaches and encourages poor research practices. 
What would a better funding model look like? This is the question the progress-inspired Arc Institute wants to answer. The non-profit research organisation aims to deploy its $650m (£537m/€620m) in funding to "accelerate scientific progress and understand the root causes of complex diseases". Arc investigators will receive full funding for their laboratories for eight years, with no strings attached. Stanford biochemist Silvana Konermann leads the Institute, which is funded in part by Patrick Collison (who is also married to Konermann). 
Ultimately, Arc aims to lead by example. Collison relayed his hopes that "other funders, other institutions, other stakeholders in our prevailing systems, are compelled to themselves pursue other experiments and other models".
Crawford and Cowen, the two leading intellectual figures of the progress community, come from the objectivist and libertarian traditions, respectively. On a panel at AynRandCon, Crawford described progress studies as adjacent to objectivism, the philosophical system outlined in 20th Century philosopher Ayn Rand’s fiction. Objectivism posits that pursuing one’s own happiness is the proper moral purpose of life and advocates for laissez-faire capitalism, among other things. Crawford also hopes progress studies will lead to "political debates framed in terms of progress and growth, rather than primarily or exclusively in terms of redistribution". 
Crawford and Cowen also have a specific view of what kind of well-being they are aiming to encourage through progress. It's not happiness – or even the more established metric of "life satisfaction" – instead, their top priority is increasing "GDP per capita". Cowen’s 2018 book, Stubborn Attachments, argues that “sustainable economic growth” should be the world's civilisational north star. As progress studiers routinely point out, GDP per capita correlates positively with all kinds of things they see as desirable, like consumption, leisure, longevity, and even moral progress. What this account leaves out is that GDP per capita has long been an objective for governments. And as critics routinely point out, it also correlates with less desirable changes like increased fossil fuel and meat consumption. Also, while GDP per capita does correlate with self-reported happiness at first, globally and within countries, average happiness levels stubbornly stay put as nations get richer.
In sum, progress studies deploys a framing and language for progress that appears to be global and all-encompassing, but in practice, it is underpinned by a particular set of social and political worldviews. It's only one idea of progress, and one idea of what human flourishing means.
Progress and risk
Another fundamental belief of the progress community is that faster technological progress is better. But what if it’s not?
Humanity survived natural extinction threats for hundreds of thousands of years and only gained the power to theoretically end our species in 1945, following the Manhattan Project. The atomic bomb and the unprecedented destruction caused by the war it ended highlight the dark side of progress.
Holden Karnofsky, who leads the foundation Open Philanthropy’s work on improving the long-term future, thinks that, on balance, technology has made human life better in recent history. But he, "doesn’t necessarily think that translates to the future". He worries that accelerating technological development may increase risks of catastrophes that would wipe out or permanently cripple humanity (existential risks).
Pointing to rates of violent death, Karnofsky says, "you could tell a story where instead of things getting better, what we're seeing is that a lot of what's bad is getting concentrated into unlikely, infrequent but enormously bad events". (The 20th Century was the third bloodiest of the last 2,500 years, by his accounting.)
What is the best response to climate change? For progress studies, stopping growth is not the priority (Credit: Getty Images)
Karnofsky wants the progress community to question one of its fundamental premises, saying that it’s important to ask, “do we want more scientific and technological advancement? What kinds do we want?”. (He has been “encouraged” by how much engagement he’s seen from the progress community on these questions.)
While trying to find the crux between progress and the risks it raises, Crawford writes: "My take is that tech progress is default good, but we should be watchful for bad consequences and address specific risks." Likening humanity to passengers on a road trip in, "a car traveling down the highway of progress", Crawford posits that existential risk researchers think, "that the car is out of control and that we need a better grip on the steering wheel".
"We should not accelerate until we can steer better, and maybe we should even slow down in order to avoid crashing," he adds. On the other hand, progress studies, "thinks we're already slowing down, and so wants to put significant attention into re-accelerating". 
"Sure, we probably need better steering too, but that's secondary," he says.
This philosophical difference has practical implications. Consider biotechnology, perhaps the greatest source of existential risk in the near future. Biotech advances, like the plummeting cost of DNA synthesis, have made it easier than ever to make diseases more transmissible and deadly. Many progress studiers favour broadly accelerating biotech research by reforming funding models and loosening restrictions on researchers, pointing to the diseases that can be cured with our new knowledge. But the fruits of faster progress in this domain could also advantage bad actors or increase the risk of catastrophic accidents. Risk-oriented approaches to biotech, like those funded by Open Philanthropy, focus on developing defensive capabilities first, like tests that can detect novel pathogens or better PPE.
Or consider the progress-focused approach to tackling climate change, which differs significantly from environmentalist movements (see "Climate Differences"). Crawford has suggested that with, "some highly advanced kind of nanotechnology that gave us essentially, like, terraforming capacity, climate change would be a non-issue. We’d just be in control of the climate." However, he doesn't acknowledge until challenged that this technology may increase risks more than it mitigates them.
The past two centuries of growth have been powered by burning carbon, which will most harm people in poverty and future generations. The "degrowth" movement points to these facts as reasons we should deliberately slow economic growth. Pro-growthers respond that dozens of countries have managed to decouple their growth and emissions, and cheap, large-scale carbon-removal can extend the trend. 
The problem? Carbon-removal is expensive, and there’s barely a market for it. A progress-inspired approach? An advanced market commitment (AMC), which guarantees a market for a not-yet-existing technology, which would, in theory, spur large investments in carbon-removal. In April, Stripe launched a carbon-removal AMC with $925m (£764m/€882m) committed by large corporations. Stripe's climate lead, Nan Ransohoff, helms the project. 
The idea combines different elements of progress studies: a belief in the capacity of technological solutions to big problems, the recognition of a market failure, and significant private funding.
This exchange reveals something important about the intuitions that underlie a lot of the thinking in the progress community. There is an entrepreneurial bias towards action. The prospective benefits of a new technology dominate considerations of what a bad actor might do with it. The fear of missing out overwhelms the fear of losing everything.
Crawford does discuss safety as an important priority and a core part of progress. But, ultimately, as he acknowledges, thoughts about safety and risk are tacked on to progress studies, rather than baked into its DNA.
The future of progress studies
In their Atlantic manifesto, Cowen and Collison subtly reference Karl Marx’s famous quote: "The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways. The point, however, is to change it." Despite the name, then, they are not content to merely study progress; they want action. (Cowen says that Marx was "obsessed with progress studies".)
In February, Crawford outlined his vision of a thriving progress movement in the next 10 years, hoping for, among other things, academic recognition of progress studies as a valuable interdisciplinary field and a progress studies curriculum in every high school in the world. Crawford sees progress studies as much more than a political movement, telling me: "I think the change we need is at a much deeper, philosophic level."
Ultimately, the progress community wants its followers to believe that they can do better. Multiple sources paraphrased the slogan "a better world is possible" in our discussions. For Crawford, the vision of that world animates him: "I want humanity to regain its self-esteem and its ambition, to figuratively and literally reach for the stars. I want us to dream of flying cars, fusion energy, nanotech manufacturing, terraforming planets, exploring the galaxy. So it's not just about policy, but about people's fundamental attitudes towards humanity and our place in nature." 
If you fell asleep for another 70 years, might Crawford's world await you? Would you be living a happier, richer life? Perhaps. But whether you consider this vision to be progress or not will probably depend on your definition of what progress actually means.
--
Garrison Lovely is a freelance journalist and the host of the podcast The Most Interesting People I Know. He tweets at @garrisonlovely.
Further reading: 
The Rise and Fall of American Growth, by Robert GordonWhat We Owe The Future, by William MacAskillThe Great Stagnation, by Tyler CowenStubborn Attachments, by Tyler Cowen

Follow the Food
Inner Space
A Fair Climate
Family Tree
Best of BBC Future
Food Fictions
Towards Net Zero
Latest
More
Of the 8,300 million tonnes of virgin plastic produced up to the end of 2015, 6,300 million tonnes has been discarded. Most of that plastic waste is still with us, entombed in landfills or polluting the environment. Microplastics have been found in Antarctic sea ice, in the guts of animals that live in the deepest ocean trenches, and in drinking water around the world. In fact, plastic waste is now so widespread that researchers have suggested it could be used as a geological indicator of the Anthropocene.
But what if we could wave a magic wand and remove all plastics from our lives? For the sake of the planet, it would be a tempting prospect – but we'd quickly find out just how far plastic has seeped into every aspect of our existence. Is life as we know it even possible without plastic?
Humans have been using plastic-like materials, such as shellac – made from a resin secreted by lac insects – for thousands of years. But plastics as we know them today are a 20th Century invention: Bakelite, the first plastic made from fossil fuels, was invented in 1907. It wasn't until after World War Two that production of synthetic plastics for use outside the military really took off. Since then, plastic production has increased almost every year, from two million tonnes in 1950 to 380 million tonnes in 2015. If it continues at this rate, plastic could account for 20% of oil production by 2050.
Today, the packaging industry is by far the biggest user of virgin plastic. But we also use plastic in plenty of longer-lasting ways too: it's in our buildings, transport, and other vital infrastructure, not to mention our furniture, appliances, TVs, carpets, phones, clothes, and countless other everyday objects.
All this means a world entirely without plastic is unrealistic. But imagining how our lives would change if we suddenly lost access to plastic can help us figure out how to forge a new, more sustainable relationship with it.
In hospitals, the loss of plastic would be devastating. "Imagine trying to run a dialysis unit with no plastic," says Sharon George, senior lecturer in environmental sustainability and green technology at Keele University in the UK.
Plastic is used in gloves, tubing, syringes, blood bags, sample tubes and more. Since the discovery of variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (vCJD) in 1996 – caused by misfolded proteins called prions that can survive normal hospital sterilisation processes – standard reusable surgical instruments have even been replaced by single-use versions for some operations. According to one study, a single tonsillectomy operation in a UK hospital can result in more than 100 separate pieces of plastic waste. While some surgeons have argued that single-use plastic is overused in hospitals, right now many plastic medical items are essential, and lives would be lost without them.
Some everyday plastic items are also vital for protecting health. Condoms and diaphragms are on the World Health Organization's list of essential medicines, and face masks – including plastic-based surgical masks and respirators, as well as reusable cloth masks – have helped slow the spread of the Covid-19 virus. "A mask that you have for Covid is related to our safety and the safety of others," says George. "The impact of taking that away could be loss of life, if you took it away on a big scale."
In hospitals, the loss of plastic would be devastating (Credit: Kseniia Zatevakhina/ Alamy)
Our food system would also quickly unravel. We use packaging to protect food from damage in transit and preserve it long enough to reach supermarket shelves, but also for communication and marketing. "I cannot imagine how [plastic] would be replaced completely in our system," says Eleni Iacovidou, a lecturer in environmental management at Brunel University London.
It's not just consumers that would need to change their habits – supermarket supply chains are optimised for selling packaged produce, and would need overhauling. In the meantime, highly perishable goods with long journeys between farm and supermarket, such as asparagus, green beans, and berries, might end up left in fields, unpicked.
If we could solve those supply chain issues, fruit and vegetables could be sold loose, but we might need to shop more frequently. Research by UK waste reduction charity WRAP found that plastic packaging extended the shelf life of broccoli by a week when kept in the fridge, and bananas 1.8 days at room temperature – though for apples, cucumber, and potatoes, the plastic made no difference. In fact, the research found that food waste could even be reduced by selling fruit and veg loose, as it allowed people to buy only what they needed.
Even tins of tomatoes and beans would be out – they have an inner plastic coating to protect the food – so we'd have to buy dried pulses in paper bags and cook them at home instead. "People have relied too much on getting the thing they need in the most convenient and easy way," says Iacovidou. "I think we need to get a little bit uncomfortable."
Swapping out plastic packaging would have knock-on environmental effects. While glass has some advantages over plastic, such as being endlessly recyclable, a one litre glass bottle can weigh as much as 800g compared to a 40g plastic one. This results in glass bottles having a higher overall environmental impact compared to plastic containers for milk, fruit juice, and fizzy drinks, for example. When those heavier bottles and jars need to be transported over long distances, carbon emissions grow even more. And if the vehicles they're transported in don't contain plastic, they themselves will be heavier, which means even more emissions.
In some ways, though, changing food packaging would be the easy part. You might buy milk in a glass bottle, but plastic tubing is used in the dairy industry to get that milk from cow to bottle. Even if you buy vegetables loose, sheets of plastic mulch may have helped the farmer who grew them save water and keep away weeds. Without plastic, industrial agriculture as we know it would be impossible.
Instead, we'd need shorter food chains – think farm shops and community-supported agriculture. But with over half of the global population now living in cities, this would require huge changes in where and how we grow food. It wouldn't be an impossible task, says Iacovidou, but "we have to devote the time to do it, and we have to also cut the amount of things that we eat".
If we ditch synthetic clothing materials, cotton production would have to be scaled up significantly (Credit: Getty Images)
Living without plastic would also require a shift in how we dress. In 2018, 62% of the textile fibres produced worldwide were synthetic, made from petrochemicals. While cotton and other natural fibres like hemp would be good substitutes for some of our clothing, scaling up production to match current demand would come with a cost. Cotton already grows on 2.5% of arable land worldwide, but the crop accounts for 16% of insecticide use, risking the health of farmers and contaminating water supplies. Without plastic, we'd need to ditch fast fashion in favour of more durable items we can wear again and again.
We'd also quickly run out of shoes. Before widespread synthetic plastics came along, shoes were often made out of leather. But today there are many more people on Earth, and we get through many more pairs each: 20.5 billion pairs of footwear were manufactured in 2020. "We couldn't go to leather shoes for every person on the planet… that's just not feasible," says George.
There would be upsides to a world without plastic, though: we'd escape the harmful effects it has on our health.
Turning oil and gas into plastic releases toxic gases that pollute the air and impact local communities. What's more, chemicals added during the production of plastics can disrupt the endocrine system, which produces hormones that regulate our growth and development. Two of the most well-studied of these endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) are phthalates, used to soften plastic but also found in many cosmetics, and bisphenol A (BPA), used to harden plastic and commonly used in the lining of tins.
"While these phthalates or BPA are important for the structure of the plastic, they are not chemically bound to it," says Shanna Swan, professor of environmental medicine and public health at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York. That means when these chemicals are used in food packaging, they can leach into the food itself – and end up in our bodies.
Some phthalates can lower testosterone production, reducing sperm counts and increasing fertility problems in men. BPA, on the other hand, mimics oestrogen and has been linked with an increased risk of reproductive problems in women. But the effects extend beyond fertility. "The breadth of the potentially disruptive influences of EDCs is striking," writes Swan in her book, Count Down. "They have been linked to numerous adverse health effects in almost all biological systems, not just the reproductive system but also the immunological, neurological, metabolic, and cardiovascular systems."
Exposure to EDCs during critical periods of foetal growth can have long-lasting effects. "If the mother is pregnant, and she is exposed to plastics or other chemicals that alter the development of her foetus, those changes are lifelong, irreversible changes," says Swan. This means that, while going cold turkey on plastics would reduce our exposure, their effects would still be felt for at least the next two generations. "Your grandmother's exposure is relevant to your reproductive health and your health in general," says Swan.
Plastics have been found in Antarctic sea ice and in the guts of animals living in the deep ocean (Credit: Getty Images)
At some point, we'd want to address the plastic that's already in the oceans. Could we ever clean it all up? "You have some materials that are on the seafloor and they're not going to go anywhere, they're just part of the ecosystem," says Chelsea Rochman, assistant professor in the department of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Toronto. But with the floating plastics, she says, we have a fighting chance.
Researchers now think that most plastics floating in the ocean will eventually get washed up or buried along our shorelines. At the moment some of those shoreline plastics are removed with trash-traps and old fashioned beach cleans. Keeping that removal up would make a difference to marine wildlife. "You would have fewer animals washing up on the beach with plastics in their bellies, and less entanglement," says Rochman. "A lot of what's being ingested by animals is not the stuff that's in the deep sea, it's the coastal stuff."
Taking out bigger pieces of plastic waste would also stop them breaking up into microplastics. Most of the microplastics found away from coastlines are from the 1990s or earlier, suggesting that bigger pieces take decades to break down. That means if we simply stopped adding new plastic pollution to the oceans tomorrow, microplastics would continue to increase over the next decades – but by removing the existing debris as well, we could stop that surge. "Maybe we reach a time where every animal we pull out of the water doesn't have microplastics in it," says Rochman.
In a plastic-free world, making new kinds of plastic out of plants might start to look tempting.
Bio-based plastics that have many of the same qualities as petrochemical plastics are already in use. Corn starch-based polylactic acid (PLA), for example, is used to make straws are almost indistinguishable from their fossil fuel plastic counterparts – unlike paper straws that can end up soggy before you finish your drink. Bio-based plastics can be made from the edible parts of plants like sugar or corn, or from plant material that isn't fit for consumption, like bagasse, the pulp left over after crushing sugarcane. Some, but not all, bio-based plastics are biodegradable or compostable. But most of those plastics still need careful processing, often in industrial composting facilities, to ensure they don't persist in the environment – we can't just throw them into the sea and hope for the best.
Even if we did create the infrastructure to compost them, bio-based plastics might not be better for the environment – at least not right away. "I think initially we'd see all impacts increase," says Stuart Walker, a research fellow at the University of Exeter and author of a recent review looking at environmental impacts of bio-based and fossil fuel plastics.
Supermarket supply chains are optimised for selling packaged produce and would need overhauling if we stopped using plastic (Credit: Getty Images)
Clearing land for crops would impact ecosystems and biodiversity. Fertilisers and pesticides come with carbon emissions attached and can pollute local rivers and lakes. One study found that replacing fossil fuel plastics with bio-based alternatives could require between 300 and 1650 billion cubic metres of water (300-1650 trillion litres) each year, which is between 3 and 18% of the global average water footprint. Food crops could end up being used to produce plastic instead, risking food security. Once they have been grown, crops need more refining to reach the bio-based equivalent of crude oil, which requires energy, resulting in carbon emissions.
You might also like: 
But trying to compare the environmental impacts of bio-plastics with conventional ones is tricky, not least because fossil fuel-based plastics have a head start. "We've been making these things for so long at such scale that we're really good at it," says Walker. "In time it would shift and we'd see that with bioplastics, the emissions would reduce." As countries around the world decarbonise their electricity supplies, the carbon emissions from producing bio-based plastics would decrease further.
However, making plastic from plants wouldn't necessarily solve health problems stemming from the material. While research on the topic is scarce, it's likely that similar additives to those used in conventional plastics would also be used in bio-based alternatives, Iacovidou says. This is because the properties the materials need are the same. "The fate of the additives is what concerns me the most," she says. If bio-based plastics are mixed with food waste and composted, whatever is in the plastic enters our food system.
It's clear that replacing one material with another won't solve all our plastic problems.
The emissions from travel it took to report this story were 0kg CO2. The digital emissions from this story are an estimated 1.2g to 3.6g CO2 per page view. Find out more about how we calculated this figure here.
There's already a push to figure out which plastics are unnecessary, avoidable, and problematic, with several countries, including the US, UK, Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Islands region, aiming to phase these out. To go even further than that, we could decide to only use plastics that we really, truly need. In a recent book chapter, George describes a framework to help us figure out which plastics are vital. By considering whether the item fulfils an essential need – such as food, shelter, or medicine – and also whether reducing the amount of material, or replacing the plastic with something else, would affect its use, we can start to see which plastics we can and cannot live without.
But these essential plastics are context-specific and not set in stone. In some places, the only safe drinking water comes in plastic, for example. "That means we need to develop drinking water infrastructure there so that we don't have to rely on packaged water, but right now that [plastic] is necessary," says Jenna Jambeck, professor of environmental engineering at the University of Georgia.
Thinking through the whole life cycle of any new materials, including what we do with them when they no longer serve their purpose, would be essential. "We’ve kind of forgotten that recycling isn't the gold standard of what we can do with stuff when we’re finished with it," says Walker.
Along with colleagues at the University of Sheffield, he investigated the environmental impacts of disposable and reusable takeaway containers. They found that a durable plastic container would only need to be used between two and three times to be better, in terms of climate impact, than a single-use polypropylene one, even taking into account washing. Stainless steel containers reached the same break-even point after 13 uses – takeaways, thankfully, wouldn't need to be a thing of the past in a plastic-free world.
The biggest shift we'd face, then, would be re-evaluating our throwaway culture. We'd need to change not just how we consume items – from clothes and food to washing machines and phones – but how we produce them too. "We're too quick to buy something cheap and disposable, where we ought to be making things so they are compatible, and there's more standardisation, so things can be swapped out and mended," says George.
Without plastic, we might even have to change the way we talk about ourselves. "Consumer is inherently a single-use term," says Walker. In a world where packaging is reused and repurposed, not thrown out, we might become citizens instead.
Perhaps we'd also discover that, for all the genuine good plastic has done, not all of the lifestyle changes it has enabled have been positive. If it's plastic packaging that allows us to grab lunch to eat on the go, and plastic-heavy devices that mean we are always contactable, without it our schedules might need to be a little less frantic. "If that was all taken away, life would slow down," says Jambeck. "Would that be such a bad thing?"
--
Join one million Future fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter or Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called "The Essential List" – a handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife, Travel and Reel delivered to your inbox every Friday.

If you are in the UK and you can see Ads, or if you’re outside the UK and you've seen what you believe to be inappropriate Ads on the International Services, please read this FAQ for advice. Alternatively, you can contact BBC Studios (who are responsible for the advertising) via: https://www.bbcstudios.com/contact/contact-us/.
 
BBC Global News, a BBC Studios company, is responsible for the Ads you see on the International Services.  Depending on your cookie and data settings, some of these Ads may be personalised based on information known or inferred about you and your interests.  This personalisation helps us to show you more relevant Ads. It also means we can receive more revenue from our advertisers, allowing us to invest more in great content.
We will also show you Ads relevant to the content you are consuming (contextual advertising).  For example, if you are reading an article about travel then we might show you Ads for airlines.
To create an ad profile for personalisation, unique identifiers (IDs) are used to tell your device apart from others – such as an ID stored by a cookie, or your Mobile Ad ID (a unique code set by your mobile operating system). You can opt-out from these IDs being used for ad personalisation by following the instructions below.
Broadly speaking, our advertising is managed in two ways:
1. In-house with the help of contracted data processors
Our premium advertising is managed in-house using a platform provided by Permutive, a specialist privacy-centric advertising platform.  The platform is driven by our own “first party” data that we have collected from you or your device.  This data includes registration information collected when you sign-up for our services (e.g. BBC Account), data based on what you consume when using our services (e.g. articles read, adverts clicked on), technographic information (e.g. browser, device and Internet Service Provider) and your location (at a country level).  We then use this data to put you into cohorts with other users with shared characteristics (age, interests). These cohorts are then used to select relevant Ads to show to you.
We sometimes work directly with our advertiser clients to enable them to use their own customer data to personalise their Ads.  They may do this by matching data to known customers or to look for ‘lookalike’ customers based on similar characteristics.  When we do this, we use specialist technologies to keep data separated and secure, and we do not directly share or enrich our own data sets via this process.
We also work with specialists to make sure real people (not bots) are seeing Ads, and to make sure our website is safe.
We do not share your registration data or “cohorts” with advertisers or anyone else (except our contracted suppliers who process data under our instruction).
2.  Automated advertising trading and personalisation
We and our advertisers also work with a range of advertising and data companies (“Advertising Vendors”) to show you Ads, both personalised and non-personalised. This includes specialist platforms and networks to: sell our ad space in online auctions, select and deliver the Ads, and collate and manage the data needed to personalise Ads. Generally, these companies will be acting as separate data controllers or may be acting under the instruction of their advertiser client rather than us.
Advertising Vendors will use data shared by your device alongside profile data inferred from your internet browsing and marketing information that they may hold about you. See FAQs 1 & 2 for more.
 
If you are in the EEA, when you first accessed the International Services, we will have asked your permission to use cookies and data for commercial purposes. We will automatically refresh this permission every 12 months or sooner if (i) we add new Advertising Vendors to the services, (ii) you or your browser delete the cookie which stores your preference or (iii) on occasion when we are required to update our technology or technology provider.
To manage your cookies and the use of your data by our Advertising Vendors, click on “Manage commercial data preferences” below. Please be aware that if you have previously changed your commercial cookie settings, clicking the blue button will reset your choices.
You can also opt-out by changing your browser or device settings. You can learn how to do this in FAQ 7 below.
If you opt-out or make any changes to your browser settings, you will continue to see non-personalised and contextual Ads. Some data, such as your IP address, will be used to show you a non-personalised ad even if you opt-out. We may also use your IP address to measure the effectiveness of Ads, to limit how many times you see an ad, and to make sure humans, not robots, are seeing the ad.
 
You can opt-out from the use of your data by us and our Advertising Vendors to personalise advertising by clicking below.
 Manage commercial data preferences 
Signed in users can also opt out of the use of registration data for advertising purposes by turning off personalisation in their Account settings, here: https://account.bbc.com/account/settings/privacy.
 
The following data may be shared when Ads are requested and delivered by the International Services:
Our own in-house advertising will also use your registration data and browsing behaviour on the International Services to attribute interests and characteristics to you.
In addition, advertising delivered via our Advertising Vendors will also include the use of data that has been collated and synced across multiple sites and sources. This may include the advertiser’s own marketing database, demographics (e.g. from data brokers and credit reference agencies), online cross-site browsing behaviour, social media data, and offline data (e.g. loyalty card and retail transactions).
* Your IP Address is a number allocated to your device by your Internet Service Provider that enables websites to know where to send their content to you. Usually this is a dynamic number that changes frequently (e.g. every 24 hours) unless you have requested a static IP Address.
**Your Mobile Ad ID is a random, alphanumeric identifier generated by your device manufacturer. Mobile apps do not use cookies and will use this identifier in its place.  You can reset it or turn it off in your device settings. 
As explained, we and our advertisers work with a range of Advertising Vendors to show you Ads, both personalised and non-personalised. This includes specialist platforms and networks to: sell our ad space in online auctions, select and deliver the Ads and collate and manage the data needed to personalise Ads.  We also work with specialists to make sure real people are seeing Ads, and to make sure our website is safe.
Advertising Vendors may also use cookies they dropped on your device when you were browsing other (non-BBC) websites. This helps them to show you Ads for things that might be relevant to your interests based on what you looked at on other websites. They also do this to see whether you have already seen a particular ad and to limit how many of their Ads you see across the internet. And if you take part in market research, the research company can record that you have seen a particular ad.
The cookies (or equivalent ID) and data sent with the Ads make personalised advertising possible. They also enable advertisers to monitor the effectiveness of their Ads.
Advertising Vendors may work together to share data so that they can better personalise their Ads.  To do this, they use a technology known as cookie syncing which works by cross-matching a cookie ID assigned to you by vendor A with a cookie ID held in vendor B’s database. That cookie may have certain interests and demographical information attributed to it, which is then shared with vendor A.
We do our best to protect our users’ data and ensure it is used in accordance with our policies. For example, we aim to work with Advertising Vendors that actively participate in recognised self-regulatory frameworks (such as the EDAA, DAA or NAI). We also place contractual limits on how data collected about people using our Services is used. And we regularly audit our site to look for malware and unsafe cookies.
We contract with a number of Advertising Vendors to deliver advertising across our International Services.   These companies are separately responsible for the data they collect and use about you; they are separate “data controllers”. 
We also allow pre-approved specialist companies to use cookies or pixels for limited purposes on behalf of our advertisers. We check these specialist companies meet our quality standards before we place them on our pre-approved list; access the list of these specialist companies.
The vendors active on our site can change from time-to-time. Please check the list of third parties in the Commercial Cookie Settings platform.
We also work with a company called Permutive for our in-house data management and Ads personalisation. Permutive is operating in the capacity of a data processor and does not use data for their own purposes.
Any company that has dropped a cookie on your device can track your online browsing activity. We and our Advertising Vendors may attempt to match your browsing activity on one device, such as your laptop, with your browsing activity on another device, such as your smartphone, so that we can limit the number of times you see a particular ad (across your devices) and to personalise the advertising we show you.
To do this we use data, such as your browsing patterns, geo-location and mobile Ad ID and match it with other information about the browser and devices that you appear to use.
Sometimes we buy ad space on other websites and services to run Ads for our advertisers. For example, we might show you an ad before a BBC News video on our social media channels. That ad could be personalised in the same way as when you use the International Services.
Our content may be published on websites and apps owned by other companies, such as Apple News, MSN, Facebook and YouTube.  These companies may collect and use data about your interactions with our content on their services, including for the purposes of showing you personalised Ads.  To find out what they do with your data please refer to the privacy notice and terms of use for the relevant service.
If at any time you do not want your data, such as your cookie ID and browsing behaviour, to be used for personalised advertising on our websites/apps, you can "opt out" or change your browser settings. You can learn how to do this below. If you opt-out or make any changes to your browser settings, you will continue to see Ads that may be less relevant to you. Some data, such as your IP address, will be used to show you a non-personalised ad even if you opt-out. We may also use your IP address to measure the effectiveness of (non-personalised) Ads, to limit how many times you see an ad, and to make sure humans, not robots, are seeing the ad.
You can opt-out from the use of your data by us and our Advertising Vendors to personalise advertising by clicking on ‘Manage my commercial data settings’ towards the top of this page.
You can also prevent your cookie ID and browsing data being tracked and used for personalised advertising purposes by changing your browser settings, browsing in ‘private mode’ or by using browser add-ons available on the internet. Visit the relevant support page for your browser, or use the help function on your browser.
Mobile apps don’t use cookies. Instead, your Mobile Ad ID is used to recognise your device and collect information about your app browsing to show you personalised Ads. Typical IDs are AdID (Android) and IDFA (Apple). Follow the instructions below to reset or turn off this ID.
Apple allows users running iOS 14 and above to disable the IDFA the first time the BBC News app is opened. Select “Ask App Not to Track” when prompted.
To change your preference, go to Settings > Privacy > Tracking  
Users running older versions of iOS:
Visit the Apple support page for more information.
Visit the Google support page for more information.
For users in the EU, we provide additional settings to control which Advertising Vendors we share data with and for what purposes. Follow the instructions shown when the BBC News app is opened for the first time or, to reset your preferences within the app settings screen, go to:
Menu > Settings > Privacy Settings / Do Not Sell My Info
As described in this notice, we allow our Advertising Vendors to collect a limited amount of information about you, such as your IP address, device identifiers, location and browsing data to show you targeted advertising.  Such sharing of this type of data may constitute a “sale” of “personal information” for the purposes of the California Consumer Privacy Act 2018 (“CCPA”). You can opt-out of any future “sale” of your personal information by following the instructions detailed in this notice.
If you have previously opted-out of the use of your data in accordance with the above, you can opt back in by: (i) changing your Commercial Cookies Settings or by changing any of the other control measures described below in this notice and (ii) confirming your choice by continuing to use our site/app.
The advertising industry has developed a number of consumer and business initiatives in Europe, the US and other regions, including those listed below. These initiatives require participating members (which may include our Advertising Vendors) to comply with a self-regulatory framework, which set out best practice principles, consumer guides, and opt-out tools.
If you have any questions or concerns, please contact the BBC Studios Data Protection Officer: dataprotection@bbc.com.

