Joanna Stern is an Emmy Award-winning journalist who has spent the better part of two decades covering gadgets and apps, and helping people make smarter tech decisions. Her documentary “E-Ternal: A Tech Quest to Live Forever” won the 2021 Emmy in the category of outstanding science, technology or environmental coverage.
Ms. Stern is a CNBC contributor and often appears on national television and radio programs. Before joining the Journal in 2013, she was the technology editor at ABC News and before that a reviewer and editor at The Verge. She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and lives in New Jersey with her wife, sons and dog.
Colleagues in the conference room. Others in the living room. Hybrid work made meetings even worse. Now Microsoft, Google, Zoom and others are trying to solve the problems
Joanna Stern
June 15, 2022
An exploration of features missing from our iPhone software and what we hope to see from Apple when it announces the next iOS at WWDC.

Joanna Stern
June 5, 2022
As Apple phases out its last iPod, these die-hards cling to their old-school music players because…well, they have their reasons!
Joanna Stern
May 11, 2022
The iPod helped remake the tech giant and usher in a new era for music. Apple said its iPod Touch will only be available while supplies last. 
Allison Prang and Joanna Stern
May 10, 2022
Peggy Johnson, CEO of AR goggle maker Magic Leap, talks about the real metaverse, how the tech is used on the job, and the innovation needed for non-nerdy glasses.
Joanna Stern
May 6, 2022
With this flying camera, Snapchat’s creators take the stress out of piloting a remote-controlled aircraft for aerial photography. Just bring extra batteries.
Joanna Stern
April 28, 2022
During the iPhone’s first 15 years, its keyboard software has evolved, but it still sometimes flubs your lines. Here’s how it works and what you can do about it.
Joanna Stern
April 27, 2022
Amazon’s first roving at-home helper promises to deliver you a drink, guard your home and entertain you. Here’s what it was like to live with it for two weeks.
Joanna Stern | Photographs by Gabby Jones for The Wall Street Journal 
April 6, 2022
A new setting lets you view your Instagram feed in the order photos were actually posted, but Meta will still push you back to its algorithms when it can.
Joanna Stern
March 23, 2022
The sharp new monitor makes a good case for people who are all in on Macs, but the screen doesn’t stand out against competitors and the webcam is bad.
Joanna Stern
March 17, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
