
https://www.wsj.com/articles/brandtech-group-takes-majority-stake-in-e-commerce-marketing-platform-11655290801
Brandtech Group, a marketing technology company founded by former Havas Group Chief Executive David Jones, has acquired a majority stake in e-commerce software firm Acorn Intelligence Ltd.
The price was at least $50 million, a person familiar with the deal said.
Brandtech Group, which provides digital and mobile marketing services to clients such as Adidas,










            Microsoft


      and










            Meta Platforms,


      hopes the acquisition will help it win more work expanding brands’ e-commerce businesses and building internal teams to manage those operations, Mr. Jones said.
Acorn Intelligence, or Acorn-i, is a software-as-a-service company that helps brands market their products on e-commerce platforms. Its services include gathering data on consumer behavior to use in marketing campaigns, analyzing the performance of those campaigns and automating some aspects of their execution. Acorn Intelligence’s software can automatically cut a brand’s spending as inventory runs low, for example, so the company doesn’t advertise products that aren’t in stock, said Ross Caveille, co-founder of the company.
 CMO Today delivers the most important news of the day for media and marketing professionals. 
Mr. Caveille and partner Claire Leon spent several years working on










            Amazon.com Inc.’s


      advertising technology business, but left the tech giant in 2019 to start a firm that expands on the services Amazon offers to brands using its platform, they said.
Acorn Intelligence has offices in the U.K. and New York. It says it serves around 100 clients, including fragrance maker Neom Ltd. and collagen supplement company Nutraformis Ltd., some of which rely heavily on direct-to-consumer marketing.
Virginie Douin, who joined Brandtech Group as a partner in 2021 after running global agency sales and partnerships at Amazon, led the acquisition. Ms. Douin said she was attracted to Acorn Intelligence because unlike many e-commerce specialty firms, it provides both analytics and campaign management services, and doesn’t focus exclusively on Amazon.
“We are already producing tons of e-commerce assets for our customers, and what Acorn-i will do is help us measure, with more accuracy, in real-time and in a more automated fashion, the quality of the services that we provide,” Ms. Douin said.
Brandtech Group aims to connect clients’ e-commerce work with the rest of their marketing activities so they can use a single platform to manage as many different elements as possible, executives said.
Acorn-i will also collaborate with Oliver, an agency that Brandtech Group acquired in 2019 that helps companies build internal marketing teams.
“E-commerce is too important to leave in a silo,” Mr. Jones said.
Since Mr. Jones founded Brandtech Group as You & Mr Jones in 2015, the company has acquired digital marketing properties including influencer marketing firm theAmplify and made investments in companies including image-sharing company










            Pinterest,


      content creation platform VidMob and Niantic, developer of the hit mobile game Pokémon Go.
Write to Patrick Coffee at patrick.coffee@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
From investing in AI and data trusts to educating themselves on blockchain and quantum technology, executives have a range of options to earn digital trust and safeguard relationships, reputation, and revenue.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
From investing in AI and data trusts to educating themselves on blockchain and quantum technology, executives have a range of options to earn digital trust and safeguard relationships, reputation, and revenue.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

