
https://www.wsj.com/articles/customer-experience-is-getting-worse-11654639388
The second year of Covid-19 will be remembered by many consumers as the era in which they couldn’t order stuff they needed, waited months for shipped items, and took hours to reach a customer service representative on the phone.
Now it’s official: The quality of customer experience offered by consumer-facing brands and government agencies declined in the year through April 2022.
That’s according to










            Forrester Research Inc.’s


      latest annual study on customer experience, which analyzed 96,211 U.S. consumers’ perceptions of 221 companies and federal agencies. Forrester derived customer experience scores of 0 to 100 from respondents’ answers to questions such as how easy a brand is to work with and how likely they are to use a brand again.
The average customer experience score, or CX score, in the 2022 survey was 71.3, down from 72.0 in 2021, Forrester found. CX Index scores had been steadily rising before this year’s slump.
Companies and agencies rated “good” declined to 22% of the pool from 25%, while the share of “poor” and “OK” scores increased.
Nineteen percent of brands in the year through April 2022 saw their customer experience rating fall, Forrester found—the highest proportion to drop in one year since the inception of the current CX Index methodology in 2016. Ten percent of brands saw their customer experience ratings improve.
The decline reverses the progress shown in last year’s index, when 21% of the companies in the survey raised their scores, and 12% saw those scores slide, despite the strains of the pandemic and lockdowns.
Macroeconomic pressures on companies, such as staffing shortages and delays in the supply chain, have likely contributed to a declining quality of customer experience across most industries, said Pete Jacques, principal analyst at Forrester and co-author of the index’s accompanying report.
“The changes suggest to us that there are some companies reaching the point where they’re just having a hard time keeping up with these customers’ changing expectations, or are just distracted by all the other things that they need to be focusing on,” he said.
Consumers who might have been more forgiving earlier in the pandemic are also likely running out of patience, Mr. Jacques said.
“There probably is also an element of, ‘We’ve all been suffering through this through the past few years; we’re now tired of having to wait a long time to get a call answered or a problem resolved’,” he said.
With a “very poor” CX score of 48.6, a decline from 2021’s 54.1, the Internal Revenue Service was found to have the worst customer experience of all brands and agencies surveyed, and suffered one of the steepest year-over-year declines. The agency, which last year hired its first chief taxpayer experience officer, didn’t immediately return requests for comment.
Auto manufacturers that have been rocked by supply-chain shortages and airlines and hotels trying to restabilize staffing levels also saw their industry averages drop by a significant amount.
The investment industry was the only sector to improve the quality of its customer experience overall.
“What we saw these [investment] firms doing was really reaching out to their advisers, and giving them the tools and the messaging that they needed to be able to provide support to their clients,” Mr. Jacques said.
No companies were rated excellent, which requires a score of 85 or higher, for the sixth year in a row. But pet-care company










            Chewy Inc.


      claimed the top customer experience rating for the second consecutive year with a score of 83.0.
The company in 2021 introduced a number of new offerings for retail customers and veterinarians, and expanded its telehealth offering nationwide, a Chewy spokeswoman said.
Write to Katie Deighton at katie.deighton@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
From investing in AI and data trusts to educating themselves on blockchain and quantum technology, executives have a range of options to earn digital trust and safeguard relationships, reputation, and revenue.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
From investing in AI and data trusts to educating themselves on blockchain and quantum technology, executives have a range of options to earn digital trust and safeguard relationships, reputation, and revenue.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

