President Biden on Thursday urged lawmakers to move forward with legislation addressing gun violence in the U.S., calling on Congress to reinstate an assault-weapons ban or raise the age to purchase such firearms to 21, and introduce new red-flag laws and increased background checks. Photo: Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock
President Biden called the availability of Covid-19 vaccines for young children a “monumental step,” speaking a few days after the CDC recommended that children as young as 6 months receive the newly authorized shots. Photo: Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images
In a televised event Friday, Vice President Mike Pence was administered the Pfizer-BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine. Second lady Karen Pence and Surgeon General Jerome Adams also received the vaccine. Photo: Andrew Harnik/Associated Press
At LinkedIn's new flagship office, desks are no longer the primary focus. With dozens of different work settings and conference room setups, the company is using its office as a hub for its hybrid workforce. WSJ gets an exclusive look inside. Photo: Karl Mollohan for The Wall Street Journal
Journal Editorial Report: The week's best and worst from Kim Strassel, Allysia Finley and Dan Henninger Images: Three Lions/Getty Images/AP/AFP Composite: Mark Kelly
Rock legend Carlos Santana is recovering after passing out during a concert in Michigan Tuesday evening. His upcoming show for Wednesday in Pennsylvania has been postponed, according to his manager. Photo: Allen Berezovsky/Getty Images
WSJ’s Dion Rabouin breaks down how inflation rises and why the Federal Reserve, Congress, the president and large corporations can all be held accountable. Illustration: Ryan Trefes
Electric-scooter rental companies are hitting speed bumps in the U.S. over safety and other concerns. But in Tel Aviv, one in 10 residents has rented a Bird e-scooter, and the city appears to be embracing them. WSJ’s Jason Bellini takes a look at the challenges and potential lessons of the e-scooter craze.

Luxury home tours on YouTube are exploding, and transforming the way high-end real estate is discovered and sometimes sold. YouTube personality Enes Yilmazer walks us through the making of a video for his channel, which gets an average of 15 million views a month. Photo: Michal Czerwonka for The Wall Street Journal
Take a look at how mental health apps are using Artificial Intelligence (AI) to digest a large set of data, predict if users exhibit any mental health issues, and provide additional insights to clinicians.
