Scott McCartney is the author and creator of the weekly Middle Seat column on airlines and travel in The Wall Street Journal, as well as the Middle Seat Terminal blog.
Mr. McCartney has been on the airline and aviation beat for more than 18 years and makes numerous radio and television appearances. He was part of the Journal’s team that won the Pulitzer Prize for breaking news reporting for coverage of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. His transportation coverage in 2000 won a George Polk award and the Deadline Club award from the New York City Chapter of the Society of Professional Journalists. In 2003, The Middle Seat was named the best online column by the Online News Association. It has consistently been one of the most popular features on the Journal’s Web site.
He is the author of four books, the most recent of which was ``The Wall Street Journal Guide to Power Travel: How To Arrive With Your Dignity, Sanity and Wallet Intact.’’
A native of Boston and graduate of Duke University, Mr. McCartney spent 11 years with The Associated Press before joining the Journal. He is an instrument-rated, multi-engine private pilot, and lives in Dallas.
Scott McCartney charted the highs and lows of flying for 20 years in his column. Here’s what he’s learned along the way. 
Scott McCartney
December 22, 2021
As Scott McCartney wraps up his time in the Middle Seat, he looks at the many ways that travel has worsened—and the few things that have gotten better. 
Scott McCartney
December 15, 2021
Sudden border closures. Quarantines. Given the new risks, the days of improvised trips for business or pleasure have become endangered in the Covid-19 era. 
Scott McCartney
December 8, 2021
Travelers in wheelchairs often find planes more inaccessible than other forms of transportation.
Scott McCartney
December 1, 2021
Spending now can be more important for points and status than actual flying under some new travel-rewards programs. 
Scott McCartney
November 17, 2021
A million U.S. travelers have coped with canceled flights in recent months, with more likely this holiday season. One plane’s misbegotten path helps explain why this keeps happening. 
Scott McCartney  | Graphics by Emma Brown
November 10, 2021
Staffing shortages have already disrupted travelers’ plans, and things could well get worse with more people planning to fly between Thanksgiving and New Year’s. 
Scott McCartney
November 2, 2021
Guests are finding that perks they have long expected, like free breakfast or drinks, are still being advertised even when they aren’t always available anymore. 
Scott McCartney
October 20, 2021
Fliers and airlines have for years complained about the size of bins used for carry-on bags. Boeing and Airbus did something about it. 
Scott McCartney
October 13, 2021
Travelers usually miss these slight changes to the rules, but over time the tweaks have eroded customer rights. 
Scott McCartney
October 6, 2021
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
