Advertisement
Supported by
The Tony Awards were held Sunday at Radio City Music Hall.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Compiled by Rachel Sherman
The Tony Awards were back at Radio City Music Hall for the first time since June 2019. The awards ceremony, which honors the plays and musicals staged on Broadway and resumed its traditional calendar after a long pandemic disruption, honored work that opened on Broadway between Feb. 20, 2020, and May 4, 2022. (“Girl From the North Country” opened on March 5, 2020, just a week before theaters shut down for the pandemic.)
Ariana DeBose, the former Broadway understudy turned Oscar winner, hosted the three-hour broadcast portion of the Tony Awards on CBS, which was preceded by a one-hour segment hosted by Darren Criss and Julianne Hough on Paramount+. “A Strange Loop” won best musical and “The Lehman Trilogy” was awarded best play at a glittering ceremony celebrating Broadway’s comeback. Myles Frost won his first Tony for best leading actor in a musical for “MJ,” his Broadway (and professional acting) debut. And there were performances from some of the past year’s most prominent musicals: “Company,” “Girl From the North Country” and “Paradise Square,” among others. 
A complete list of winners is below.
Best Musical
“A Strange Loop”
Best Revival of a Musical
“Company”
Best Play
“The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Revival of a Play
“Take Me Out”
Best Book of a Musical
Michael R. Jackson, “A Strange Loop”
Best Original Score
“Six: The Musical,” music and lyrics by Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss
Best Direction of a Play
Sam Mendes, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Direction of a Musical
Marianne Elliott, “Company”
Best Leading Actor in a Play
Simon Russell Beale, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Leading Actress in a Play
Deirdre O’Connell, “Dana. H”
Best Leading Actor in a Musical
Myles Frost, “MJ”
Best Leading Actress in a Musical
Joaquina Kalukango, “Paradise Square”
Best Featured Actor in a Play
Jesse Tyler Ferguson, “Take Me Out”
Best Featured Actress in a Play
Phylicia Rashad, “Skeleton Crew”
Best Featured Actor in a Musical
Matt Doyle, “Company”
Best Featured Actress in a Musical
Patti LuPone, “Company”
Best Scenic Design of a Play
Es Devlin, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Scenic Design of a Musical
Bunny Christie, “Company”
Best Costume Design of a Play
Montana Levi Blanco, “The Skin of Our Teeth”
Best Costume Design of a Musical
Gabriella Slade, “Six: The Musical”
Best Lighting Design of a Play
Jon Clark, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Lighting Design of a Musical
Natasha Katz, “MJ”
Best Sound Design of a Play
Mikhail Fiksel, “Dana H.”
Best Sound Design of a Musical
Gareth Owen, “MJ”
Best Choreography
Christopher Wheeldon, “MJ”
Best Orchestrations
Simon Hale, “Girl From the North Country”
Special Tony Award for Lifetime Achievement
Angela Lansbury
Isabelle Stevenson Award
Robert E. Wankel
Regional Theater Tony Award
Court Theater (Chicago)
Special Tony Award
James C. Nicola
Tony Honors for Excellence in the Theater
Asian American Performers Action CoalitionBroadway for AllFeinstein’s/54 BelowEmily GrishmanUnited Scenic Artists, Local USA 829, IATSE
Advertisement
