A damning new documentary sheds light on experiments done on US soldiers from the 50s to the 70s and the devastating effects
In the documentary Dr Delirium and The Edgewood Experiments, Dr James Ketchum explains his role and reasoning during notorious cold war-era, Manchurian Candidate-grade human experiments that lasted from the 50s to the 70s.
Ketchum died in 2019. In a decade-old, never-before-seen interview conducted by Dr Delirium director and executive producer Nick Brigden, Ketchum appears frail but lucid. He’s aware of naysayers who can trot out unflattering details about Edgewood, like how he was working alongside Nazi “talent” recruited for their expertise on human experimentation. But he’s confident that he’s on the right side of history with experiments that were harmful to test subjects while serving a greater good.
“He was a brilliant scientist,” Brigden tells the Guardian on a Zoom call, recalling the days he spent at Ketchum’s home in Santa Rosa, California. “But he had some blinders on; stuff that he didn’t want to see or he couldn’t see of his own actions and behaviors, and how that affected a great number of people.”
Edgewood Arsenal was a classified US army facility in Maryland where recruits were subjected to sarin, VX, teargas, LSD and PCP. There, Ketchum was administering psychotropic drugs on young soldiers. Brigden’s film unearths archival footage of men going temporarily blind, reduced to babbling or completely dysfunctional logs, or worse, ready to commit violence upon themselves. Ketchum’s experiments would home in on BZ, a potent concoction that would keep subjects in a state of nightmarish delirium for up to three days.
We’re only discovering the traumatic and lingering physical effects that those drugs had in recent years because a tight lid had been kept on what went down at Edgewood. For decades, the veterans suffered in silence.
Brigden’s film, which is streaming on Discovery+, cushions and counters Ketchum’s accounts with investigative reports and moving testimonies from veterans who survived Edgewood while carrying the psychological scars from their time there.
“From their point of view, they weren’t properly informed of the experiments that they were signing up for,” says Brigden. “They were told that they were going to be testing army equipment. There was no mention of drugs. But once they got into Edgewood, from what I’ve heard from these vets, they were threatened with court martials if they didn’t participate.”
But according to Ketchum, he was classing up the joint, bringing “scientific rigor” to data collection at Edgewood, where soldiers were previously being drugged without warning and left to their own devices without safety precautions like padded cells. Ketchum also remained steadfast that his work aimed to save lives at a time when scientists and soldiers were under pressure from an assumed cold war threat; the belief that the Soviets had already advanced their chemical weapons capabilities. Ketchum’s experiments were being justified “under the banner of national security”, says Brigden.
“It’s a lot of gray areas here,” says Brigden, “I think the military needed to know the potential these drugs had on our troops. Were there any antidotes that they could find? As Ketchum would say, Edgewood started off as a defensive research program. But with any kind of chemical weapon program, you have to have an offensive side to it to have a defensive.”
Somewhere along the way the goalposts moved from developing a defensive strategy to leaning in on psycho chemicals as an effective weapon. Even in that, Ketchum saw their humanitarian benefit, at least as far as warfare was concerned. “Instead of ripping apart someone with a machine gun, you just float a gas of incapacitating drugs and then capture them alive,” says Brigden, reiterating Ketchum’s arguments. He adds that such a method would have been particularly appealing during the Vietnam war, when occupying US forces had a hard time distinguishing between civilians and guerrilla combatants.
“There’s a deeper story to tell with Ketchum,” says Brigden, referring to the scientist’s complicated and conflicted history and the long arm of his legacy. There’s enough to fill a miniseries. But Brigden’s canvas is a feature-length doc branded under Discovery’s Undiscovered series, and styled accordingly. The film moves at a clipped pace while delivering information in sensational cable-TV style, banging hard on sound effects (cymbals, drum pads and synthesizer) that wouldn’t be out of place on Survivor.
“If this was on PBS [or HBO], it would look and feel a lot different,” says Brigden. “Our client was Discovery Channel. They have a certain audience. They have a certain aesthetic that I knew walking in. I hope it’s not too sensational. But it’s always a fine line when you’re doing documentaries for a cable network, where there’s a fine line between entertainment and being informative.”
The style doesn’t overwhelm the content, particularly when dealing with the veterans who appear in the film, speaking to both their experiences volunteering at Edgewood and the lingering flashbacks, nightmares and physical effects. If Ketchum’s interview is the documentary’s “spine” as the director calls it, the interviews with the veterans are at its heart.
Much of the information in Dr Delirium has been revealed because veterans who endured Edgewood took part in a class action lawsuit filed by Morrison & Foerster against the US army, Department of Defense and CIA. “They were looking for the DoD and our government to acknowledge that this program happened,” says Brigden. Up to that point, the veterans, who are unnamed in the doc, couldn’t even tell their families why they would be “waking up and thrashing every night”. They were suing not for financial reward but so they could be released from secrecy oaths and access VA medical benefits that were being denied. They couldn’t get treatment for ailments stemming from a classified experiment. “They didn’t even know the drugs they were given.”
The film brings the vets together for on-camera conversations at Boulder Crest, a rustic and serene retreat for veterans coping with PTSD. “I thought that was important because they never really sat together and shared and compared their stories,” says Brigden. “A lot of them had never spoken about this stuff on camera or even with other vets. And a lot of them were still wrestling with the ghosts of Edgewood.”
Their testimonies, describing the torment and neglect they endured, are framed in stark contrast to Ketchum’s interview, where he calmly describes his humane methodology. Brigden isn’t entirely convinced by the latter.
Brigden says he stayed in touch with Ketchum for years after and the doctor became more forthcoming. When Brigden questioned why after 20 years experimenting and discovering BZ as the ideal incapacitating agent, would they continue experimenting on soldiers for another five or six more years. “Candidly, he said to me, he just found it fascinating. And he liked the lifestyle as well. There was a lot going on there.”
Dr Delirium and The Edgewood Experiments is now available on Discovery+ with a UK date to be announced
