Phoenix reported 114F, Las Vegas soared to 109F and Denver hit 100F, while inland areas of California reached triple digits
A dangerous heat swept across the American south-west over the weekend as potentially deadly heat set temperatures soaring to record levels in numerous major US cities in the region.
Phoenix, Las Vegas, Denver and California’s Death Valley all posted record temperatures on Saturday.
High heat is normal during summertime in the desert, but weather forecasters say that does not mean people should feel at ease as the temperature spikes bake the area. Excessive heat causes more deaths in the US than other weather-related disasters, including hurricanes, floods and tornadoes combined.
Scientists also say more frequent and intense heatwaves are likely in the future because of the climate crisis and a deepening drought in the American west.
The National Weather Service in Phoenix reported a temperature of 114F (46C), tying the record high for the date set back in 1918.
Las Vegas tied a record for the day set in 1956, with temperatures soaring to 109F (43C). The National Weather Service said there was a chance the high temperatures in both cities could rise even more.
In Colorado, Denver hit 100F (38C), tying a record set in 2013 for both the high temperature and the earliest calendar day to reach 100F.
Temperatures in several inland areas of California reached triple digits by the afternoon, with a record high for 11 June of 122F (50C) reached in Death Valley.
Excessive heat warnings and heat advisories were issued for parts of Northern California through the Central Valley and down to the south-eastern deserts.
The National Weather Service also predicted 114F (46C) in Palm Springs and temperatures around 100F (38C) across the San Joaquin Valley and the Sacramento area.
Heat was expected to extend to inland portions of the San Francisco Bay Area but most of the California coastal zones remained free of heat advisories.
The scorching heat in northern California was expected to subside on Saturday evening. Heat advisories in parts of southern California were extended through Sunday.
Meteorologists warned of very high “heat risk” in south-central Arizona through the weekend. The high temperatures were likely to approach record-breaking territory – anywhere between 110F (43C) and 115F (46C). They have urged the public to limit outdoor activities.
Parts of New Mexico and Texas also were also to see triple digits.
Meanwhile, in Alaska a large fire burning in the tundra continued to move toward an Alaska Native village on Saturday, but fire managers said its pace had slowed. The East Fork fire remained about 5 miles (8km) from the Yup’ik village of St Mary’s, a statement from the Alaska Wildland Fire Information said.
The fire was listed at 169sq miles (438sq km) in size, more than double the last estimate.
The tundra is a treeless area covered with low-lying plants, and the fire was being fed by extremely dry grass and brush filled with alders and willow.
The Associated Press contributed to this report
