State security ministry trying to motivate the public, says state media, as it claims foreign threats have risen
Chinese citizens can get cash rewards of more than 100,000 yuan (£12,000) and special certificates for providing tipoffs about suspected foreign spies and breaches of national security, under measures introduced by the country’s ministry of state security this week.
Rewards for exposing foreign espionage activities or other security violations have existed for years in China. The new measures, according to a state media outlet, are aimed at standardising rewards and motivating the public at a time of intensifying “threats” from foreign intelligence agencies and other quarters.
“The formulation of the measures is conducive to fully mobilising the enthusiasm of the general public to support and assist in national security work, widely rallying the hearts, morale, wisdom and strength of the people,” the ministry representative said, according to the Legal Daily.
Beijing has in recent years been encouraging a whole-of-society approach to protecting national security. The ministry of state security also noted this week that “foreign intelligence agencies and all kinds of hostile forces have visibly intensified their infiltration activities” in China. It warned that these activities “pose a severe threat to [China’s] national security”.
Citizens could get “spiritual rewards”, in the form of certificates of appreciation, or “material rewards” of cash up to more than 100,000 yuan, depending on the value of the tipoff, the ministry said in a notice.
State security agencies would check the report to see if it was true and whether it offered new information before deciding on the reward, it said. But the ministry of security also noted that it had a mechanism to prevent citizens from abusing the system by fabricating evidence and making “malicious” complaints.
People could lodge reports through a hotline or website, by post, in person, or any other way, the ministry said. When more than one person offered the same tip, the one who reported it first would be first in line for a reward but others could also qualify.
China is already accused by human rights advocacy groups of using Orwellian levels of surveillance against its own citizens. Under its “social credit” system, for example, people can be blacklisted for transgressions such as smoking on trains, using expired tickets or failing to pay fines, as well as spreading false information or causing trouble on flights.
In the past few years, China also escalated its national security education, with posters warning young rank-and-file female state employees about the danger of dating handsome foreigners who could turn out to be spies.
With Reuters
