Queues start well before dawn in Sydney, where hundreds wait to pick up, renew or seek answers about their mislaid documents
Wrapped up warm against the winter cold, Fiona Brandt could be found on Tuesday afternoon sitting on a camping chair outside a nondescript office building in central Sydney.
She had been there since 6am and was frustrated. “You’re in no man’s land here just waiting, waiting, waiting,” she said. “There’s no doubt there’s people here who are going to miss their flight.”
Brandt was one of hundreds of people queueing outside of the Sydney Passport Office waiting to pick up, renew or inquire about had happened to their passports.
At 1pm, two lines – one for inquiries and the other for passport pickups – could be seen wrapping around the building all the way to an intersection between Little Regent and Lee streets several hundred metres away.
Many in line had put in their applications weeks or months before. But a combination of Covid-induced staff shortages and increased demand following the reopening of the international border had led to delays and chaos in the system which show no signs of abating.
Brandt was hoping to travel to New Zealand on Monday and had planned to renew her son’s passport well in advance of her departure date but said she had a niche query that required human assistance. She said days of “continually ringing from 8am to 5pm” failed to get her anywhere, with the phone line often cutting out before even ringing.
“I finally managed to get through to somebody last Wednesday who started the fast-tracking for my son and told me: ‘Someone will call you in 48 hours so you can make the payment over the phone’, but till now I have not got the call and now I am here in desperation before I fly out.”
Brandt said even if she got through, she would likely have to return at 5am the next day to complete the process. She had found comfort in the camaraderie with others in line who were bonding over their frustration. Many had set up camping chairs, and groups of strangers sat in circles chatting in the courtyard in front of the office.
Bobby Omran, who had come to pick up his daughter’s passport, said he and his fellow queuers had been saving each other’s spots so they could go to the bathroom and extend their car parking.
“Seriously, the least they could do is put in portable toilets. We have been having to go to McDonald’s and KFC across the road,” he said.
Like Brandt, Omran had attempted to apply for a new passport well in advance, submitting the application for both his children at the start of April. But after only receiving his son’s passport, he came to the office to inquire about his daughter’s.
“Last Tuesday I got here at quarter to five in the morning. And there was a lady with two newborn twins. She was waiting in the freezing cold. You know what time she got in? Just before me at two o’clock. This is not a system,” he said.
After finally getting in, Omran said he was shocked to discover his daughter’s passport had not even been touched. He was told to come back on 21 June, and given a small piece of scrap paper with the date and the officer’s number in case he forgot or needed help.
A spokesperson from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said “unprecedented high demand for its passport services” following the reopening of borders had caused some pressure on the system, but said the vast majority of applications were still being delivered within a six-week timeframe.
“So far this financial year, the Australian Passport Office (APO) has issued over 1.3 million passports, which is more than double the total number we issued during the previous financial year (603,464 in 2021). The APO has issued just over 1 million of these passports since 1 November last year.
“We normally receive between 7,000–9,000 applications per working day. Currently, we are receiving 13,000–17,000 applications per working day.”
The spokesperson said it was normal for multiple applications lodged by one person to arrive at different times as all applications were assessed individually. They also recommended people who were in a hurry use the priority service, which they say would have passports ready for collection or delivery within two days.
However, as Peter Clarke discovered, things are often less simple in practice. Clarke and his wife had renewed their passports ahead of a trip to Fiji to celebrate his wife’s 70th birthday. Despite their preparations, they found themselves waiting in line since 8am.
“I’m just here to collect a passport that was sent here in error. We asked for it to be sent home through certified mail. Mine arrived but my wife’s is here. No idea why. And we put them in together, we’re on the same piece of paper. So they are creating their own problems, to be honest with you,” Clarke said.
In an interview with ABC radio, the assistant minister for foreign affairs, Tim Watts, said the current chaos was the result of previous governments’ failure to plan for an “expected” surge post-lockdown. 
He said the government had now committed 70 extra staff in call centres, with 320 more to be added next week alongside a further 300 staff members for processing. Watts promised to have an additional 1,100 staff by September and said concierge services were being planned to help the lines move faster.
For now, however, there was an alternate option available to those with the funds. “Line up for you” services on Airtasker have become a popular method of getting around the dreaded wait. For $150, people can opt to have someone take their place in line for four hours while they go about their business. The contractor the Guardian spoke to was almost booked out for the week. It may not be the best solution, but for those with work and family commitments, it may be the only one available.
