Gen John Allen gave a ‘false version of events’ about his work for Gulf state in 2020 interview, court documents allege
The FBI has seized electronic data from John Allen, a retired four-star marine general and former leader of US and Nato forces in Afghanistan who authorities say made false statements and withheld “incriminating” documents about his role in an illegal foreign lobbying campaign on behalf of Qatar.
Allen is now president of the Brookings Institution, a prominent Washington thinktank, which said on Wednesday it had placed him on administrative leave.
On Wednesday, federal court filings obtained by the Associated Press and the New York Times outlined a potential criminal case against him.
Investigations of illegal lobbying on behalf of Middle Eastern countries has already ensnared Tom Barrack, a Trump donor who pleaded not guilty to illegal lobbying on behalf of the United Arab Emirates; Richard G Olson, a former ambassador to the UAE and Pakistan who pleaded guilty to federal charges last week; and Imaad Zuberi, a political donor jailed for 12 years on corruption charges.
Several members of Congress have been interviewed.
Olson argued he cooperated with investigators and pleaded guilty to misdemeanour charges carrying prison time on the understanding authorities were also pursuing charges against Allen.
In May, an attorney for Olson said in court: “If in fact there is no case against Gen John Allen, we think that that is a significant piece of information for sentencing, just as we believe that an inducement to enter into this plea agreement is important to the court.”
News of the potential case against Allen caused an immediate stir.
Steve Schmidt, a former Republican operative and co-founder of the anti-Trump Lincoln Project, called the story “shocking” and “a disgrace for the US Marine Corps”, adding: “The credibility of the Brookings Institution is on the line … Washington DC corruption has reached epic and unprecedented levels.”
Schmidt also linked Allen’s alleged behaviour to a congressional investigation of a business deal involving another senior figure in the Trump administration, Jared Kushner, Donald Trump’s son-in-law who as a White House adviser was closely involved in Middle East policy.
“Jared Kushner walked out of the White House where he had access to the nation’s greatest secrets and signed a corrupt $2bn deal with the Saudis,” Schmidt wrote. “It should be covered as an espionage story. John Allen and Kushner are the same person. Allen’s entitlement was his service.”
Court filings reported by the AP and the Times detailed Allen’s efforts to help Qatar influence US policy in 2017, when Saudi Arabia, the UAE and other countries announced a blockade of Qatar over alleged ties to terror groups and other issues. Donald Trump, then president, appeared to side against Qatar.
Court papers say Allen played an important role in shifting the US response. Authorities say he lobbied the then national security adviser, HR McMaster, then a serving army general, to have the administration adopt a more friendly tone.
In an email to McMaster, Allen said the Qataris wanted the White House or state department to call on all sides to “act with restraint”. Federal officials say the then secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, did just that two days later, calling on Gulf countries to “ease the blockade against Qatar” and asking “that there be no further escalation by the parties in the region”.
According to the court papers, Allen did not tell McMaster he was being paid for his work.
“There is substantial evidence that these Fara violations were willful,” an FBI agent, Babak Adib, wrote in a search warrant application, referring to the Foreign Agents Registration Act. Apparently filed in error, the warrant was removed from the docket on Tuesday.
Adib said Allen misrepresented his role in the lobbying campaign and failed to disclose “that he was simultaneously pursuing multimillion-dollar business deals with the government of Qatar”. The FBI said Allen gave a “false version of events” about his work for Qatar in a 2020 interview and failed to produce relevant emails in response to a grand jury subpoena.
A spokesperson for Allen, Beau Phillips, said: “John Allen voluntarily cooperated with the government’s investigation into this matter. John Allen’s efforts with regard to Qatar in 2017 were to protect the interests of the United States and the military personnel stationed in Qatar. John Allen received no fee for his efforts.”
Allen used his Brookings email account for some Qatar-related communications, court papers say. Qatar has long been one of Brookings’ biggest financial backers, though it says it has stopped taking Qatari funding.
Brookings and the Qatar embassy did not immediately comment.
Federal authorities say Olson and Allen traveled to Qatar to meet the emir and other officials. Allen provided advice on how to influence US policy and said the Qataris should “use the full spectrum” of information operations, including “black and white” operations, the affidavit says.
“Black” operations are typically covert and sometimes illegal. Qatar has been accused of hack-and-leak operations of critics and rivals, including targeting a UAE ambassador. It has denied wrongdoing.
Before they went to Doha, Allen wanted to “have a chat” with Olson and Zuberi about compensation, the affidavit says, adding that Allen suggested he be paid a $20,000 “speaker’s fee” and then “work out a fuller arrangement of a longer-term relationship”. Zuberi paid Allen’s first-class airfare, the affidavit said, but there was no indication the fee was paid. Some associates have accused Zuberi of not honoring financial commitments.
Allen had other financial incentives for helping Qatar, the FBI said.
“At the same time he was lobbying US government officials on behalf of Qatar, Allen pursued at least one multimillion-dollar business deal with the Qatari government on behalf of a company on whose board of directors he served,” the affidavit said.
After their trip to Qatar, Allen and Olson lobbied members of Congress, particularly supporters of a House resolution linking Qatar to terror financing, the FBI said. Among them was Ted Lieu, a California Democrat. He told officials he did not recall exactly what Allen said but thought he was there “to support the Qatari officials and their position”.
