Japanese national Satoko Kishimoto won ward of 500,000 people after shining in online political debates
A Japanese woman who until recently was a long-time resident of Belgium has been elected as mayor of a district in Tokyo after coming to prominence through online political debates during the Covid pandemic.
Satoko Kishimoto, 47, who has lived in the Belgian city of Leuven with her husband and children for a decade, is due to take over in July as mayor of Suginami city, a ward of 500,000 people, more than 5,800 miles away from her family’s home in the eastern Belgian city.
Kishimoto, a project coordinator for the Transnational Institute – a not-for-profit international organisation based in Amsterdam – moved to Japan in April to campaign in person.
Kishimoto’s husband, Olivier Hoedeman, said the election result had come as a “huge surprise” and the family was not yet committed to moving as their youngest son is still in secondary school. Kishimoto is planning to stay in Japan and the rest of the family may join her at a later date, under one option being explored.
He told Flemish radio: “During the Covid-19 crisis, when everything happened online, Satoko participated a lot in online public debates in Japan from Leuven.
“Satoko is very interested in politics and through her work for the Transnational Institute in Amsterdam, she knows a lot about it too. She became very popular with the progressive movement in Japan and was asked to run for mayor in Suginami.
“Satoko lived the first 25 years of her life in Japan. After that, she moved to the Netherlands and then to Leuven, where we have lived together for more than 10 years and now have two children.
“The election result came as a huge surprise. Satoko defeated the conservative mayor in office. Apparently, her political message appealed to many citizens. Satoko wants less privatisation and more citizen participation.”
Kishimoto, who has edited a book on the alternatives to water privatisation, won by just 200 votes after managing to surmount her opponents’ criticisms over her extended Belgian residency.
This article was amended on 27 June 2022. An earlier version mistakenly reported that Satoko Kishimoto won her Suginami city mayoral campaign while living in Belgium.
