
Sign In


            The U.S. needs healing that requires mature leadership capable of thinking
Manage Newsletters
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Kavanaugh’s Democratic assassins
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Jim Crow
OPINION:
Former President Donald Trump’s embrace of American exceptionalism has brought forth upon this nation a patriotic rebirth of our founding principles that he will only diminish should he persist in his evident determination to run for reelection in 2024.
Today we are engaged in a great and perhaps ultimate spiritual battle challenging the future of the Judeo-Christian principles so dear to our Founders. As John Adams warned, “Our Constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other.”  
Perhaps Mr. Trump’s most enduring contribution will be that he radicalized a university-indoctrinated Neo-Marxist minority into public view. These radical extremists have launched a carefully crafted, well-financed and highly successful Maoist cultural revolution of political correctness. Do we want to surrender our freedoms to take a godless leap into a dark, schizophrenic nightmare in which a concept as fundamental to human existence as gender is ruled indeterminate by a post-modernist Democratic Party-inspired mob?  
A Trump presidential candidacy in 2024 will only bring forth once again the howling demons that tarnished the 2020 presidential election with their “Never Trump” resistance movement.  
Truthfully, all the Democratic Party can offer America in 2024 is a continuation of the diminished future and erosion of our constitutionally protected liberties that America has experienced under the leadership of President Biden in the White House. In the spirit of Ester 4:14, former Vice President Mike Pence has a tested record of public service that strongly suggests he “was born for such a time as this.” The devotion of Mr. Pence and his family to God and the United States has a decadeslong history of bona fides that leave no room for doubt. As a political actor, Mr. Pence is motivated by love, not hate — by a spirit of reconciliation much needed right now to extinguish the flames of Armageddon threatening to burn out of control here and in every corner of the globe.
The United States in 2024 badly needs a time of healing that requires mature leadership capable of thinking above the chaotic fray of the day-to-day turmoil of politics. The genius of the American system is that historically potentially divisive political conflicts tend to get resolved when the extremes move to the center of the political spectrum. The nearly impossible necessity of confronting today’s radical left in constructive dialogue demands a president capable of seeing past the hate-America chaos that threatens to cast the Republic in a second, massively destructive civil war.
After much prayerful reflection, a conviction has come upon my heart to support Mike Pence in his 2024 presidential bid. We are at yet another crossroads of American history, testing whether today what Abraham Lincoln, the first Republican president, described in 1862 as “the last best hope” will survive this second decade of the 21st century. Today, I am endorsing Mr. Pence for president in the spirit of Jeremiah 3:15: “Then I will give you shepherds after mine own heart, who will guide you with knowledge and understanding.”
My continuing support of Mr. Trump should also not be in doubt. In 2018 and 2019, the corrupt Mueller investigation threatened to imprison me for my active involvement in supporting Mr. Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign. To avoid another time when the “fire kindled in God’s anger” burns upon us (Jeremiah 15:14), I would respectfully suggest Mr. Trump consider how Teddy Roosevelt and Winston Churchill managed their political careers in their senior years.  
Motivated by his incessant ambition, Roosevelt’s decision to run as president in 1912 on a third-party ticket arguably put the Hegel-inspired Woodrow Wilson in the White House, the first Democrat to win a presidential election since the election of Grover Cleveland in 1892.  In July 1945, after losing the general election to the Labour Party, Winston Churchill enhanced his reputation as a statesman, highlighted by his famous “Iron Curtain” speech at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri, on March 5, 1946.
The MAGA movement has not yet forgiven Mr. Pence for certifying the 2020 election in favor of Mr. Biden. But the actual failure was Mr. Trump’s inability to drain the swamp as promised. Even the Supreme Court, with three Trump-nominated judges, failed to intervene in the 2020 federal election controversy. Before the joint meeting of Congress on Jan. 6, 2021, legal counsel had advised Mr. Pence that holding up the certification of the presidential election would violate federal law.
The constitutional remedy to prevent voter fraud in a presidential election resides in voter-driven efforts in the states. Voters must be sure state authorities implement constitutional voting rules and procedures to prevent voter fraud and, if necessary, to catch and criminally punish voter fraud that might occur in future presidential elections. Given his experience in state and federal government positions, Mr. Pence is uniquely qualified to champion as president the grassroots voter integrity movement needed to assure the nation’s future retains the destiny of freedom our Founders intended.
Given these considerations, I enthusiastically endorse Mr. Pence as the Republican Party’s presidential candidate in 2024.
• Jerome R. Corsi, a political commentator, is the author of “Silent No More” (Post Hill Press, 2019).
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC. 
                        
                          Click
                            here for reprint permission.
 Click to Read More and View Comments
                    
 Click to Hide 
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters
