Awaiting Gov. Hochul’s action are two crucial decisions with major implications for our state and our planet. One is a bill that would put a two-year pause on granting new and renewed permits for proof-of-work cryptomining in fossil-fuel power plants, and require a thorough environmental impact study. The other is an application made to the Department of Environmental Conservation for a Clean Air Act permit for the Greenidge Power Plant, an operation that has transformed itself into a massive Bitcoin mining facility. Fortunately for our state, the decisions are easy ones. The bill must be signed into law, and the air permits must be denied.
Cryptomining is a new, but growing issue in the United States. We’re talking about thousands of computers each solving a complex mathematical puzzle to produce or “mine” coins. After China banned this practice because of the strain it put on the country’s energy grid, speculators have flocked to New York to take advantage of the lack of environmental regulation. New York is currently home to 10% of the nation’s cryptomining.
Not all cryptocurrencies rely on this kind of energy intensive “proof of work” process, and many would be completely unaffected by the bill. But the crypto industry has whipped up completely misplaced fears, making large campaign donations to Hochul and urging her to veto the bill. Now, with the gubernatorial primary on June 28 and the decision deadline for Greenidge’s permits on June 30, things are hitting a fever pitch and New Yorkers across the state are urging her to put the planet first. They’re right.
It cannot be disputed that power plants present myriad environmental harms. For their cooling, they require millions of gallons of water drawn from our rivers every day, killing countless fish and other river dwellers in the process. That water is then discharged superheated, killing more at the outfall.
Further, even if these plants comply with a Clean Air Act permit, the emissions contain pollutants, most notably greenhouse gases. The consequences of burning fossil fuels for power become especially abhorrent given the existing and growing availability of clean and renewable energy options for supporting our present and future needs. No longer approving and advancing new or expanded fossil fuel plants is easy enough.
Smokestacks from the Greenidge Generation power plant tower above nearby homes, Friday, Oct. 15, 2021, in Dresden, N.Y.  (Julie Jacobson                    /AP)
When it comes to the Greenidge application, denial is even easier, because any arguable social utility of the plant is essentially nil. The usual decisionmaking process of balancing the known environmental impacts against New Yorkers’ undeniable need for electricity is unnecessary, because the Greenidge plant primarily generates electricity just so a handful of individuals can profit from mining cryptocurrency. Also, the plant is highly automated, and the facility only employs 48 people.
Compare that to the 60,000-job, $3 billion agritourism economy under threat because of the plant’s environmental harm. Curbing cryptomining is the real pro-business decision. Local Republicans and Democrats on the Seneca County Board of Supervisors, located across the lake from Greenidge, are united on this front, recently writing a letter to the governor, saying, “We are holding up our end of the deal to protect our environment and honor the state’s climate goals. We ask that you hold up the state’s end of the deal.”
Second, the Greenidge decision has effectively already been made. The Department of Environmental Conservation recently considered arguments for balancing environmental impacts versus the need for the Danskammer power plant permit application. There, the department found that the climate harms resulting from additional sources of greenhouse gases were too great under the Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act to justify granting the permit. Making this comparison even more clear is the fact that, unlike Greenidge, Danskammer was intended to generate electricity for New York residents, not a handful of crypto miners.
Third, a final powerful consideration for Hochul and the DEC is that in November, 70% of New York voters, with majorities across the whole political spectrum, voted to amend our Constitution to enshrine a right to clean air, clean water and a healthful environment. As the Yellowstone floods, choking New Mexico wildfires and deaths of 11 New Yorkers less than a year ago in basement apartments flooded by the remnants of Hurricane Ida attest, unchecked climate change will eviscerate these rights. We are faced with hard decisions about how best to conserve energy, cut emissions and deploy renewables, and we will have to work hard to maintain the political will to enforce and even strengthen the CLCPA and other measures.
Gov. Hochul is blessed with what may be the easiest decisions of her time in office. She must sign the moratorium and deny the Greenidge application. This is low-hanging fruit.
Ommen is a professor at Elisabeth Haub School of Law at Pace University and van Rossum is the founder of The Green Amendments For The Generations Movement, and leader of the Delaware Riverkeeper Network.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
