The Republican race for governor looks up for grabs in the late hours, with limited recent public opinion polls showing Rep. Lee Zeldin holding a narrow lead over Andrew Giuliani ahead of Primary Day on Tuesday.
Zeldin, a Long Island lawyer who has the support of the state Republican Party, topped Giuliani, son of former Mayor Rudy Giuliani, by 7 percentage points in an online survey conducted by John Zogby Strategies last week.
An online poll conducted by SurveyUSA in mid-June showed an even tighter race: Giuliani trailed by just 2 percentage points in that survey.
Rep. Lee Zeldin, R-N.Y. (left) Andrew Giuliani (right) (AP)
Rob Astorino, the party’s 2014 nominee for governor, and Harry Wilson, a relatively moderate businessman, trailed further behind in both polls.
In the survey from Zogby Strategies, Astorino trailed by 19 percentage points, while Wilson was 21 points behind. In the SurveyUSA poll, Wilson had a lead on Astorino but still trailed Zeldin by 12 points.
The contest cuts a clear contrast with the Democratic race for governor. In that race, Gov. Hochul has held dramatic polling leads over two long-shot challengers, Rep. Tom Suozzi and Public Advocate Jumaane Williams.
From left to right, businessman Harry Wilson, former Westchester County Executive Rob Astorino and Rep. Lee Zeldin face off during New York's Republican gubernatorial debate on Monday, June 20, 2022, in New York.  (Brittainy Newman/AP)
Zeldin and Giuliani have rushed to the right during the primary, running as anti-abortion, pro-Trump Republicans who are quick to rip pandemic health measures.
Giuliani, who has said he has not been vaccinated against COVID, was forced to attend a pair of debates remotely due to his inoculation status.
He is campaigning on a shoestring budget: He reported less than $400,000 in campaign funds last week, according to state Board of Elections records.
[ New York Voting Guide: What voters should know for June 28 primary ]
But Giuliani has often managed to avoid the mudslinging that has marred debates in the race, and he may be benefitting from the familiarity of his last name, even if it could hurt him in a general election.
Zeldin, meanwhile, has the advantage of significant institutional support, and has been viewed as the front-runner throughout the race.
Wilson, the only pro-abortion rights candidate in the race, has stood out in the field for his opposition to former President Donald Trump. And Astorino, a former Westchester County executive, has pitched himself as having broad appeal.
The winner of the race is expected to serve as the underdog in the general election for governor; Democrats outnumber Republicans in the state by more than two to one.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
