It’s not alright, alright, alright.
In the nearly two weeks since the massacre at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas, a semi-surprising voice has risen to call for something, anything to be done to curb gun violence, specifically that which targets children — Oscar-winner Matthew McConaughey.
In a new op-ed in the Austin American-Statesman, McConaughey, who was born in Uvalde, calls for gun responsibility laws — which are, crucial to his point, not gun control laws — as a way to not infringe on the Second Amendment while making life in America a little safer.
NEW YORK, NEW YORK - JANUARY 11: Matthew McConaughey speaks onstage during the Special NY Screening of "The Gentlemen" at the Alamo Drafthouse on January 11, 2020 in New York City.  (Slaven Vlasic/Getty Images for STXfilms)
“Depraved acts of violence, with guns as the weapon of choice, are ripping apart families, tearing at people’s faith, and shredding the fabric of our society. We have an epidemic of indiscriminate mass shootings, of parents burying their children, of inaction, and buck-passing. Saving the unnecessary loss of lives is not a partisan issue,” McConaughey wrote.
He lists off a number of factors contributing to gun violence, but says now is not the time to litigate which causes should take precedence.
“We need to focus on corrections and countermeasures that can also and immediately reduce the gun violence tragedies that have become too common in our country,” the “Dallas Buyers Club” actor wrote.
Members of the Pharr, Texas, police department visit a memorial at Robb Elementary School to honor the victims killed in last week's school shooting, Thursday, June 2, 2022, in Uvalde, Texas.  (Eric Gay / AP)
The actor then lays out what he thinks is a plan to “restore responsible gun ownership” and save lives.
McConaughey’s first plan of action is fixing the national background check system, and requiring a background check for every gun purchase.
He then proposes a minimum age of 21 to buy an assault rife. New York just passed a law that would do just this and Sen. Jon Manchin has said he approves of such a law.
“The killer in my hometown of Uvalde purchased two AR-15s for his eighteenth birthday, just days before he killed 19 students and two teachers. He obeyed the law. Had the law been different, perhaps I wouldn’t be writing this today.”
In this aerial image taken with a drone, police and media gather around Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas, on Saturday, May 28, 2022.  (Allen G. Breed/AP)
He rounds off his platform with a national “red flag” law and a mandatory waiting period law, both of which would reduce both homicides and suicides.
“A waiting period to purchase an assault rifle is an acceptable sacrifice for responsible gun owners when it can prevent a mass shooting crime of passion or suicide,” McConaughey wrote.
McConaughey points out that these are government-only solutions and that private businesses and organizations would have to enact policies focused on safety.
“It’s time for real leaders to step up and do what’s right, so we can each and all just keep livin’.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
