A Staten Island judge struck down a city law Monday that would give some noncitizen New Yorkers the right to vote in local elections, ruling that the expansion of electoral participation would violate the state constitution.
The so-called Local Law 11, which was adopted in January, would let green card holders and some immigrants on work and relief visas vote for mayor, City Council and other municipal-level positions.
In a bid to stave off legal challenges, the Council crafted the legislation in such a way that it did not give noncitizens the right to vote in presidential, congressional and state-level elections — but Richmond County Supreme Court Justice Ralph Porzio ruled that the measure doesn’t pass constitutional muster regardless.
Activists participate in a rally on the steps of City Hall ahead of a City Council vote to allow lawful permanent residents to cast votes in elections to pick the mayor, City Council members and other municipal officeholders in lower Manhattan, New York on Thursday, Dec. 9, 2021. (Mary Altaffer/AP)
Porzio stated that the city can’t give any noncitizen the right to vote due to a portion of the state constitution that holds that only “citizens” are eligible.
“The New York State Constitution expressly states that citizens meeting the age and residency requirements are entitled to register and vote in elections,” Porzio wrote.
He added, “Though voting is a right so many citizens take for granted, the City of New York cannot ‘obviate’ the restrictions imposed by the Constitution.”
The decision came in response to a lawsuit brought by Staten Island Borough President Vito Fossella and other local Republicans, who celebrated the outcome Monday.
“Today’s decision validates those of us who can read the plain English words of our state constitution and state statutes: Non-citizen voting in New York is illegal and shame on those who thought they could skirt the law for political gain,” said Staten Island Councilmember Joe Borelli, the Council’s GOP minority leader.
Residents vote during the New York City mayoral primary election at the Brooklyn Museum polling station on June 22, 2021 in New York City.  (ANGELA WEISS/AFP via Getty Images)
Within minutes of Porzio’s ruling, supporters of Local Law 11 affirmed they plan to appeal to the state’s top court.
Murad Awawdeh, executive director of the New York Immigration Coalition, which will be involved in the planned appeal, said Porzio’s decision was “no surprise to us.”
“The Republican opponents to the law specifically placed their lawsuit in a court they knew would be favorable to them,” Awawdeh said. “We remain firm in our certitude that municipal voting is legal and plan to support the appeal of this judge’s decision. We refuse to allow today’s verdict to further the disenfranchisement of Black and brown communities in New York City.”
It’s unclear if the Council can take any additional legislative action to push back on Porzio’s ruling. Nonetheless, Council Speaker Adrienne Adams (D-Queens) said: “We are reviewing the ruling and exploring options for moving forward.”
Residents arrive to vote during the New York City mayoral primary election at the Brooklyn Museum polling station on June 22, 2021 in New York City. (ANGELA WEISS/AFP via Getty Images)
Roughly 800,000 noncitizen New Yorkers would become eligible to vote if the legislation is upheld on appeal.
Supporters of noncitizen voting have argued that those hundreds of thousands of residents deserve the right to vote in local elections since they pay taxes and hold legal immigration status.
“We know that our immigrant neighbors deserve a voice in our democracy,” said Brooklyn Councilmember Shahana Hanif, who chairs the Council’s Immigration Committee. “They are just as much a part of our city as each and every one of us and their exclusion from voting is yet another form of racist gerrymandering. This decision is a setback to our vision of a free and open society, but it is not the end. We will continue to fight for all New Yorkers.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
