Rep. Adam Kinzinger (R-Ill.), a prominent critic of former President Trump, is revealing ugly threats to his family over his participation in the Jan. 6 committee.
With the panel’s hearings presenting credible evidence and testimony against Trump and his role in the attack on the Capitol, Kinzinger said his own party is failing the test of history to stand up for the truth.
“The Darkness is spreading courtesy of cowardly leaders fearful of truth,” Kinzinger tweeted. “Is (this) what you want @GOP?”
Here is the letter.  Addressed to my wife, sent to my home, threatening the life of my family.  The Darkness is spreading courtesy of cowardly leaders fearful of truth.  Is the what you want @GOP?  Pastors?  https://t.co/YimZJcFp4W pic.twitter.com/BBgZ6Teur3
Kinzinger shared a hand-scrawled note sent from within his own district that denounced himself as a “pimp” who “will be executed.”
The hate message also said his wife, Sofia, and their 5-month-old baby boy child would face the same fate.
“You and Christian will be joining Adam in hell too!” the deranged constituent wrote, using the c-word to insult Kinzinger’s wife.
Rep. Adam Kinzinger (R-Ill.) (MANDEL NGAN/AFP via Getty Images)
Once a mainstream suburban conservative, Kinzinger has a prime target for Trump’s loyal army of MAGA supporters because he is participating in the Democratic-led committee investigating Jan. 6.
He was one of 10 GOP lawmakers to vote in favor of Trump’s impeachment for inciting the attack on the Capitol and has decided not to seek reelection in the coming midterm elections.
[ Kinzinger: GOP plagued by Trump 'cancer' of lies ]
The lawmaker warned that Trump’s hold on the Republican Party and the failure of the GOP to reject him has led to an epidemic of hatred and violent threats against anyone who objects.
“There’s violence in the future, I’m going to tell you,” Kinzinger said Sunday on ABC’s This Week with George Stephanopoulos. “And until we get a grip on telling people the truth, we can’t expect any differently.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
