Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Sun 5 Jun 2022, 3:32 PM Last updated: Sun 5 Jun 2022, 3:36 PM Bollywood star Katrina Kaif is down with Covid-19 for the second time. The news comes after actors Kartik Aaryan and Aditya Roy Kapur also tested positive for the virus. According to reports, this is also the reason why Katrina could not join her husband Vicky Kaushal in Abu Dhabi for the IIFA Awards 2022. This is the second time the Ek Tha Tiger actress has contracted Covid-19. On the personal front, the Bollywood couple have been the talk of the town ever since their wedding last December in Rajasthan, India. On Saturday night, Vicky happily addressed all the questions related to his post-marriage life with Katrina while marking his “solo” appearance on IIFA 2022 green carpet in Abu Dhabi. “Life bhaut achi chal rhi hai... sukoon bhari ( Living the best life that is filled with peace). Katrina is very good. I am missing her presence today a lot. Hopefully, next year we make it to IIFA together,” Vicky said. On the workfront, Katrina is a part of Merry Christmas with Vijay Sethupathi and Tiger 3 with Salman Khan. Entertainment The Bollywood superstar is celebrating 30 years in the film industry  Entertainment2 days ago Entertainment Bale served as the Dark Knight in three films Entertainment2 days ago Entertainment Britney had cut ties with her family after the end of a nearly 14-year-long period of conservatorship Entertainment2 days ago Entertainment The jury had announced its verdict on June 1, largely siding with Depp after a sensational trial Entertainment2 days ago Entertainment The comedy drama starring Kiara Advani, Anil Kapoor and Neetu Kapoor is out now in the UAE Entertainment2 days ago Entertainment The comic actor was in Dubai earlier this month for a performance Entertainment3 days ago Entertainment The Argentinian film is a psychological thriller that puts the Biblical “an eye for an eye” under the lens Entertainment3 days ago Entertainment The graduates will showcase 12 intriguing couture collections Entertainment3 days ago 