Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 9:53 AM Last updated: Mon 6 Jun 2022, 9:56 AM Alec John Such, the bassist and a founding member of the iconic rock band Bon Jovi, has died. He was 70. The group on Sunday announced the death of Such, the New Jersey band’s bassist from 1983 to 1994. No details on when or how Such died were immediately available. A publicist for singer-songwriter Jon Bon Jovi didn’t immediately respond to messages. “He was an original,” Bon Jovi wrote in a post on Twitter. “As a founding member of Bon Jovi, Alec was integral to the formation of the band.” Bon Jovi credited Such for bringing the band together, noting that he was a childhood friend of drummer Tico Torres and brought guitarist and songwriter Richie Sambora to see the band perform. Such had played with Sambora in a band called Message. The Yonkers, New York-born Such was a veteran figure in the thriving New Jersey music scene that helped spawn Bon Jovi. As manager of the Hunka Bunka Ballroom in Sayreville, New Jersey, Such booked Jon Bon Jovi & The Wild Ones before joining the singer-songwriter’s band. He played with Bon Jovi through the group’s heyday in the 1980s. Such departed the band in 1994, when he was replaced by bassist Hugh McDonald. He later rejoined the band for its induction into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame in 2018. “When Jon Bon Jovi called me up and asked me to be in his band many years ago, I soon realized how serious he was and he had a vision that he wanted to bring us to,” said Such at the Hall of Fame induction. “And I am only too happy to have been a part of that vision.” Music Musician named Andy Stone says he co-wrote and recorded a festive song of the same name Music3 weeks ago Music The 54-year-old musician's last rites will be performed on Thursday Music3 weeks ago Music The late singer performed in the country on several occasions.  Music3 weeks ago Music A look back at the melodious life and times of the artist who was an integral part of the life of many 90s kids.  Music3 weeks ago Music A post-mortem will be conducted in Kolkata on Wednesday Music3 weeks ago Music PM Modi, Bollywood and music fraternity shocked by artiste's demise at 53 Music3 weeks ago Music The popular artiste passed away at 53 on Tuesday Music3 weeks ago Music She also spoke about her vision and journey as an independent artist in Dubai. Music4 weeks ago 