Monday, Jun 27, 2022 | Zul Qaadah 27, 1443 Published: Sat 28 May 2022, 8:50 AM The Rhode Island farmhouse that inspired the 2013 horror movie "The Conjuring" occurred has been sold to a Boston developer who plans to keep it open to the public. The 18th century home in Burrillville sold for $1.525 million on Thursday, far higher than the $1.2 million asking price. "This purchase is personal for me," buyer Jacqueline Nunez, owner of WonderGroup LLC, told The Boston Globe. "It's not a real estate development. It's around my own beliefs." Nunez and the couple who sold the home, Cory and Jennifer Heinzen, jointly announced the sale on Facebook. Nunez plans to continue the paranormal business the Heinzens started. Guests will be able to continue the nightly paranormal investigations, day tours will resume, and there will be live streamed events. The Heinzens, who bought the home in 2019, will remain involved. ALSO READ: The movie wasn't filmed at the home but was based on the experiences of a family that lived there in the 1970s. Nunez said she was not afraid of the house. "I don't believe the energy here is malevolent. Things will happen here that will startle me, but not harm me," she said. "I look forward to experiencing things." Offbeat No priest was present to solemnise Kshama Bindu's wedding Offbeat2 weeks ago Offbeat The courtroom will need to be closed for fumigation after the incident Offbeat2 weeks ago Offbeat The cash was stuffed in envelopes inside a couch cushion Offbeat2 weeks ago Offbeat The slang word mixes 'ojisan', which means 'old men' in Japanese, and 'kyun”, meaning 'heart-throb' Offbeat3 weeks ago Offbeat Hundreds of bottles of the illegal substance were seized in the biggest-ever haul Offbeat3 weeks ago Offbeat Jyoti Amge has a form of dwarfism called achondroplasia and will never grow beyond a certain height Offbeat1 month ago Offbeat Donald even has his portrait hung on the wall of his local McDonald’s Offbeat1 month ago Offbeat The 24-year-old told police he had gambled the money away at online casinos  Offbeat1 month ago 