
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 11:10 PMGujarat Titans stormed into the final of the Indian Premier League (IPL) in their debut season after David Miller’s blistering half-century secured a seven-wicket victory against Rajasthan Royals in Tuesday’s qualifier in Kolkata.
Needing 16 off the final over from Prasidh Krishna, Miller smashed three sixes in a row to book their place in Sunday’s final on their home ground in Ahmedabad.
South African Miller’s unbeaten 68 off 38 balls earned him the man-of-the-match award.
Inaugural champions Rajasthan can still make the final by beating the winners of Wednesday’s eliminator between Lucknow Super Giants and Royal Challengers Bangalore.
Rajasthan posted a strong 188-6 after being put into bat at Eden Gardens.
Jos Buttler, the tournament’s leading scorer, had gone five innings without a fifty and the Englishman bounced back with a breezy 89.
Buttler initially scored at a run-a-ball rate while skipper Sanju Samson smashed 47 off 26 balls at the other end.
Buttler was on 43 when Gujarat captain Hardik Pandya slipped at long off trying to take a regulation catch.
Buttler milked 46 off the subsequent 17 balls he faced and was eventually run out in the final delivery of the innings.
Gujarat lost opener Wriddhiman Saha in the first over but Shubman Gill and Matthew Wade scored 35 each to keep their chase on track.
Gill and Wade fell in quick succession but Pandya, who made an unbeaten 40, and Miller saw Gujarat home with a century stand for the unbroken fourth wicket.
“We wanted us to finish the game, that was the conversation in the middle,” Pandya said after the win.
“When we started the tournament, I obviously wanted to win the tournament, it’s a dream.
”Rajasthan captain Samson said batting got easy in the second innings.
“We’ll come back stronger,” Samson said.
“I think we’ve been playing some really good cricket throughout the tournament.
.
.
 we’ll try to come back and play some good cricket.
”CricketDelhi beat Punjab by 17 runs, thanks to Marsh's 63 off 48 balls and Thakur's 4-36 Cricket1 week agoCricketThe ICC-sanctioned T20 tournament brought together a wealth of talent from both Test-playing teams as well as associate members of the world cricket’s governing bodyCricket1 week agoCricketWhile Umran’s return to wicket-taking form has given SRH some hope, the road to redemption for SRH is paved with umpteen hurdlesCricket1 week agoCricketWith a place in the playoffs so near, players will obviously be under a lot of pressure, writes Ayaz Memon Cricket1 week agoCricketFirst at the scene, Townson started doing CPR on Symonds but didn't get much responseCricket1 week agoCricketIPL newcomers Gujarat Titans earlier confirmed their spot in Qualifier 1 with a seven-wicket win over Chennai Super KingsCricket1 week agoCricket'Gone too soon.
 Heartfelt condolences to the family and friends'Cricket1 week agoCricketQueensland Police says an investigation into the crash has been openedCricket1 week ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Wed 25 May 2022, 12:13 AMVirat Kohli’s belated return to form has been a shot in the arm for Royal Challengers Bangalore going into the playoffs.
Bangalore, the perennial underachievers who are chasing their first title, hardly looked the part for most of the league phase.
 For eight weeks of the league phase, they had a rickety, uncertain ride until, suddenly, things started falling in place last week.
The big issue confronting RCB was Kohli’s miserable form.
 Probably the only reason he wasn’t benched was that he was turning out to be a lucky mascot for the team!Then, against table-toppers Gujarat Titans, Kohli magically seemed to rediscover his best touch, scoring a match-winning 73.
 RCB’s fate still hinged on how Delhi fared against Mumbai, but the Capitals blew away a splendid opportunity after Rishabh Pant’s boo-boos on the field, allowing Bangalore to sneak in.
While RCB’s entry into the last was fortuitous, they could now be a tough obstacle for Lucknow Super Giants to overcome at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata.
And it’s Kohli who becomes a central figure in tonight’s Eliminator.
The match will likely be decided by how the openers of both teams fare in the Powerplay.
 KL Rahul and Quinton de Kock have been magnificent all through.
 RCB had a bumpy ride essentially because Kohli was a non-performing asset.
 The match against Titans showed how dramatically the equation could change if he fires.
Kohli and Faf du Plessis put on 115 for the first wicket which stunned the Titans, and then Glenn Maxwell came out to deliver the finishing touches with a blistering 18-ball 40.
RCB barely needed the services of Dinesh Karthik who had bailed them out several times earlier.
RCB need the top order to click as the batting otherwise does not have the heft that Lucknow has.
 In bowling too, LSG have more depth and variety.
LSG’s problem could stem from a slump of sorts in self-belief.
 In their last few games, the victories came squeakily, the defeats were by big margins.
 Though they secured a place in the last 4 after a nail-biting win over the Kolkata Knight Riders, LSG couldn’t finish in the top 2.
Now, it’s a do-or-die situation for both LSG and RCB in the Eliminator tonight.
Strengths:RCBAbility of Josh Hazlewood (at the start) and Harshal Patel (slog) overs to put batsmen under pressure, take wickets, control runs.
 Leg-spinner Wanindu Hasaranga’s ability to pick up wickets in the middle overs and turn the match around.
 Explosive finisher in Dinesh Karthik with the best strike rate in the tournament.
 Glenn Maxwell shining with ball and bat.
LSGDevastating opening pair in KL Rahul-Quinton de Kock, the best among all teams seen this season.
 Deep batting line-up with all-rounders Krunal Pandya, Marcus Stoinis and Jason Holder in the ranks.
 Skilful young fast bowlers Avesh Khan (right-arm) and Mohsin Khan (left-arm) who have helped the team overcome tight situations.
WeaknessesRCBDespite Kohli coming good, the batting’s still iffy and heavily dependent on Faf and Karthik.
 Team RCB also lack a quality spinner to support Hasaranga.
 Siraj’s failures saw him benched, reducing an experienced hand in the pace department which could hurt.
Pace optionsLSGAll-rounders Holder and Stoinis haven’t been able to pull their weight, with bat or ball, in the past few games.
 Lead spinner Ravi Bishnoi has been below par.
Key Contests: Hazlewood v Rahul-de Kock, Bishnoi v MaxwellX Factor: Virat KohliCricketDelhi beat Punjab by 17 runs, thanks to Marsh's 63 off 48 balls and Thakur's 4-36 Cricket1 week agoCricketThe ICC-sanctioned T20 tournament brought together a wealth of talent from both Test-playing teams as well as associate members of the world cricket’s governing bodyCricket1 week agoCricketWhile Umran’s return to wicket-taking form has given SRH some hope, the road to redemption for SRH is paved with umpteen hurdlesCricket1 week agoCricketWith a place in the playoffs so near, players will obviously be under a lot of pressure, writes Ayaz Memon Cricket1 week agoCricketFirst at the scene, Townson started doing CPR on Symonds but didn't get much responseCricket1 week agoCricketIPL newcomers Gujarat Titans earlier confirmed their spot in Qualifier 1 with a seven-wicket win over Chennai Super KingsCricket1 week agoCricket'Gone too soon.
 Heartfelt condolences to the family and friends'Cricket1 week agoCricketQueensland Police says an investigation into the crash has been openedCricket1 week ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 12:30 AMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 12:31 AMWhat characterises the four teams that made it to the Indian Premier League playoffs this year is their bowling strength.
 All four had better bowling units than the other six franchises, who focused more on batsmen in their player retention and auction.
Take for instance the IPL’s most successful franchise, Mumbai Indians, who finished last this season.
 Three of the four players they retained before the auction were batsmen, and their two most expensive buys at the auction were also batsmen.
 It left their bowling over-dependent on Jasprit Bumrah, who was easier to negotiate with lack of pressure at the other end.
Table-toppers Gujarat Titans were the opposite.
 Their two overseas fast bowlers, Lockie Ferguson and Alzarri Joseph, both cross 150 kmph and form a formidable combination with India’s premier seamer, Mohammed Shami, and Afghan leg-spin wizard Rashid Khan.
 It was their batting lineup that looked iffy at the outset, but a second wind for 37-year-old wicketkeeper-batsman Wriddhiman Saha, return to form of skipper Hardik Pandya, and late order heroics by Rahul Tewatia and Rashid papered over the cracks.
They will be running into a team with an equally good bowling attack, if not better, in the first qualifier of the playoffs at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata on Tuesday.
Left-arm Kiwi swing bowler Trent Boult, the much-improved tall Karnataka speedster Prasidh Krishna, and clever Caribbean pacer Obed McCoy of Rajasthan Royals can match GT in the pace department.
RR leg-spinner Yuzvendra Chahal, who has rediscovered his mojo to become this season’s highest wicket-taker, and experienced off-spinner Ravichandran Ashwin, who is as economical as ever, are a great counterpoint to Rashid and impressive young Tamil Nadu left-arm spinner Sai Kishore of GT.
Ashwin keeps challenging those who write him off from white ball cricket, and has staked a claim to the all-rounder’s slot in the Indian team ahead of the T20 World Cup with a batting average of 30.
50 at a strike rate of 146.
40 in IPL 2022.
His BASRA (batting average strike rate aggregate) would be the envy of most of India’s top order batsmen, including former skipper Virat Kohli and current skipper Rohit Sharma.
The inventive Ashwin is a dangerous floater in the RR batting lineup which is studded with the hitting abilities of Jos Buttler, Shimron Hetmyer, Sanju Samson and Yashasvi Jaiswal.
 On paper it looks better than the GT batting where the only two genuine specialists are Shubman Gill and David Miller, whose assured No.
5 batting position has revived his IPL career after failures for eight years.
Thus, GT batsmen have been performing way above expectations, whereas RR skipper Samson keeps flattering to deceive and the season’s top-scorer Buttler has gone off the boil in recent games.
This makes for a mouth-watering clash at the Eden Gardens where torrential thunderstorms over the weekend added a new twist to the upcoming playoffs.
 If the green-tinged wickets in Mumbai and Pune restored the balance between bat and ball in the league phase, a damp sticky wicket may do the same in Kolkata which has traditionally been a venue where both strokemakers and spinners have revelled.
Clash of the bowlersThe loser of the GT-RR encounter will get another crack at making it to the final by playing the winner of Wednesday’s eliminator between third-placed Lucknow Super Giants and Royal Challengers Bangalore.
Two tall young speedsters from India’s hinterland spearhead LSG’s bowling - right-armer Avesh Khan and left-armer Mohsin Khan.
 Avesh Khan groomed by Delhi Capitals for three years before he bloomed in the 2021 IPL, becoming the second highest wicket-taker.
 The speedster from Indore, who clocks above 145 kmph, has maintained his wicket-taking with 17 strikes so far for LSG, who acquired him for Rs 100 million.
But the find of the season is Mohsin Khan who was benched after an indifferent first game.
 He returned to the playing eleven when a niggle kept Avesh out.
 An economical spell against MI kept him in the side.
 Then he took three wickets against Punjab Kings and produced a player-of-the-match show with 4 wickets for 16 runs against DC.
Mohsin was little-known before this IPL, warming the benches for three years at MI.
 Now he’s an India prospect.
 He can bowl at 150 kmph, and mix it up with well-disguised and accurate slower balls.
 Blessed with a cool head on his shoulders, the speedster from Sambhal in Uttar Pradesh gained from training with Shami during lockdown in Amroha.
Dushmantha Chameera from Sri Lanka, who can also reach the searing speed of 150 kmph, rounds out the LSG pace unit.
 Their googly man, Ravi Bishnoi, has belied expectations so far, however, and left-arm spinner Krunal Pandya plays more for his all-round skills.
That’s where LSG’s opponents RCB may have an edge with their leg-spinner Wanindu Hasaranga being the second highest wicket-taker this season behind Chahal.
 The young Sri Lankan with a strong wristy action, who created a sensation in the T20 World Cup last year with a hat trick against South Africa, may enjoy his outing at the Eden Gardens.
 He will be supported by the clever part-time off-spin of Aussie batsman Glenn Maxwell.
Aussie pacer Josh Hazlewood, who helped Chennai Super Kings win the title last year, and variation artist Harshal Patel give RCB a fighting chance, despite the loss of form of India pacer Mohammed Siraj.
RCB’s batting has been on and off.
 Faf du Plessis may have scored 443 runs this season, but the South African hasn’t managed to hit the form that saw him score 633 runs last season for CSK.
What augurs well for RCB is Virat Kohli’s return to form.
 The former captain did have his share of luck when he hit his second half-century of the season (73 in 54 balls) in RCB’s last match, but he seemed to have rediscovered his touch during the fluent knock.
If Kohli and Du Plessis can give RCB a good start, they have dangerous hitters in Maxwell and a rejuvenated Dinesh Karthik down the order.
The LSG batting depends a lot on openers KL Rahul and Quinton de Kock who had a record unbeaten partnership of 210 in their last league game against Kolkata Knight Riders.
 That they won by only two runs was because of Rahul’s conservative strike rate of 133 (about 8 an over) on a belter of a wicket where De Kock scored at a rate of 12 an over.
 Rahul has been guilty of choking as the captain of Punjab Kings in previous seasons, and LSG’s fate may rest on how freely he plays in the playoffs.
If you believe in destiny, you would put your money on RCB, who will be on a high after sneaking into the playoffs, thanks to DC making a hash of their last game against MI after getting into a clear winning position.
DC skipper Rishabh Pant dropping a skied sitter and then failing to review a caught behind off Tim David who went on to smash 34 in 11 balls shows that it often comes down to who can hold their nerve at the crunch.
In Du Plessis, RCB have a skipper with a cool head who has observed MS Dhoni at close quarters while playing for CSK earlier.
 And former skipper Kohli has the motivation and ability to turn his form around when it matters the most.
 This franchise with a huge following would thrill fans no end by winning a maiden title.
But then, it would be an equally stirring event if RR were to lift the trophy a second time as a tribute to their first captain, Shane Warne, who won the inaugural IPL in 2008.
 And if one of the two new franchises, GT or LSG, emerge as the ultimate winner, it would only reaffirm the IPL’s finest characteristic, a level playing field.
Sumit Chakraberty is a writer based in Bengaluru.
 Write to him at chakraberty@gmail.
comCricketDelhi beat Punjab by 17 runs, thanks to Marsh's 63 off 48 balls and Thakur's 4-36 Cricket1 week agoCricketThe ICC-sanctioned T20 tournament brought together a wealth of talent from both Test-playing teams as well as associate members of the world cricket’s governing bodyCricket1 week agoCricketWhile Umran’s return to wicket-taking form has given SRH some hope, the road to redemption for SRH is paved with umpteen hurdlesCricket1 week agoCricketWith a place in the playoffs so near, players will obviously be under a lot of pressure, writes Ayaz Memon Cricket1 week agoCricketFirst at the scene, Townson started doing CPR on Symonds but didn't get much responseCricket1 week agoCricketIPL newcomers Gujarat Titans earlier confirmed their spot in Qualifier 1 with a seven-wicket win over Chennai Super KingsCricket1 week agoCricket'Gone too soon.
 Heartfelt condolences to the family and friends'Cricket1 week agoCricketQueensland Police says an investigation into the crash has been openedCricket1 week ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 12:19 AMBionic T20 action is expected in the first playoff as the two most exciting teams this year square off tonight.
 Both Gujarat Titans and Rajasthan Royals have played dazzling cricket.
 Aggression, experimentation and improvisation — in tactics, batting and bowling — have defined their performances, setting them apart from the eight other teams.
Gujarat Titans have been remarkable in their inaugural season.
 Lucknow Super Giants, the second new franchise in the IPL, have had a wonderful run too, qualifying for the playoffs despite running into hurdles towards the end of the league stage.
 But Titans have been the more impressive team.
Losing only four matches and finishing on top in the points table is vindication of how everything has fallen into place for a side that wasn’t considered too hot when the tournament began.
The collection of talent looked good, particularly the acquisition of champion leg-spinner Rashid Khan, which was truly an inspired move.
 But how many other established match-winners besides him, Hardik Pandya and Matthew Wade did they have? Some other teams boasted more such talent.
Also, Hardik being made captain had even early well-wishers turn sceptical.
 Pandya’s experience in a leadership role was virtually zero.
 Moreover, the last 12-18 months had been harrowing for the all-rounder who spent most of this time nursing injury or in rehab.
 His comeback in the T20 World Cup had been controversial and ended in him losing his place in the Indian team.
In the eight weeks since the tournament began, Pandya has overcome all the odds to put his team in a commanding position.
Under his captaincy, Titans began well, got better and recovered swiftly from a blip or two, to finish table-toppers.
It has been a commanding performance by the new team.
 While players obviously deserve plaudits for their effort, credit must also be given to the team management for astute selection in the mega-auction.
 And the captain and coaches for swiftly building up a culture that enabled players to perform at their best.
In most of the 10 matches Titans won, they did it in style.
 A few wins, in fact, were dragged from the jaws of defeat, thanks to the incredible self-belief of players like Rahul Tewatia, David Miller and Rashid Khan.
 It was not just exhilarating batting that helped the Titans reach where they are now, but also the bowling.
 Rashid was brilliant once again and Mohammed Shami was exceptional too, getting wickets unfailingly in the PowerPlays.
Lockie Ferguson was frequently testing the speed gun to challenge Umran Malik, while young fast bowler Yash Dayal showed fine promise, constantly learning from the senior pros, getting better with each match.
What stood out in the Titans campaign was that the team wasn’t entirely dependent on the big stars.
 For instance, when Wade got injured, Wriddhiman Saha stepped in as a dashing opener and made enough runs to compensate even for Shubman Gill’s modest scores.
Rajasthan Royals were not too far behind Gujarat in the league phase.
 From the first match to the last, RR looked like a well-balanced, well-rounded team – perhaps the best of the 10 teams in the fray.
 They have not just taken a place in the playoffs but marched ahead of Lucknow Super Giants to finish second on points and give themselves two opportunities to reach the final.
Since the start of the IPL in 2008, RR have been an enigmatic team.
 Under the charismatic captaincy of the late Shane Warne, a bunch of rookies and modestly known players pulled off a stunning upset to win the title against all odds.
However, in the 14 seasons since, RR have flattered to deceive, playing attractive cricket at all times, but never quite looking a champion side despite paying big money to hire marquee names at various times.
While RR players have always believed in flair and an adventurous approach, they also frequently lapsed into self-indulgence.
 This led to inconsistent results and often early exits from the tournament, belying the rich potential of the team.
This is where Rajasthan have been different this season.
 The approach on the ground is still defined by intrepidity and panache of old, but it’s laced now with greater responsibility and accountability.
 The ambition this time, it seems, is not just to entertain, but also to win matches, and also the tournament.
Like the Titans and the Super Giants, Rajasthan too reaped the benefits of strategic selection in the mega auction.
 Those retained from the previous season were Jos Buttler, Sanju Samson and Yashasvi Jaiswal.
To this exciting batting, trio were added players of proven calibre like Ravi Ashwin, Yuzvendra Chahal, Trent Boult, Shimron Hetmyer, Prasidh Krishna which gave the team not just a truly international flavour, but experience to complement youth, variety and depth in both batting and bowling.
 Rajasthan have reaped rich rewards as all these players have been in top form.
It’s a clash of equals and promises to be a humdinger at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata on Tuesday.
Ayaz Memon is an Indian sports writer and commentatorCricketDelhi beat Punjab by 17 runs, thanks to Marsh's 63 off 48 balls and Thakur's 4-36 Cricket1 week agoCricketThe ICC-sanctioned T20 tournament brought together a wealth of talent from both Test-playing teams as well as associate members of the world cricket’s governing bodyCricket1 week agoCricketWhile Umran’s return to wicket-taking form has given SRH some hope, the road to redemption for SRH is paved with umpteen hurdlesCricket1 week agoCricketWith a place in the playoffs so near, players will obviously be under a lot of pressure, writes Ayaz Memon Cricket1 week agoCricketFirst at the scene, Townson started doing CPR on Symonds but didn't get much responseCricket1 week agoCricketIPL newcomers Gujarat Titans earlier confirmed their spot in Qualifier 1 with a seven-wicket win over Chennai Super KingsCricket1 week agoCricket'Gone too soon.
 Heartfelt condolences to the family and friends'Cricket1 week agoCricketQueensland Police says an investigation into the crash has been openedCricket1 week ago.
