
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Partner Content By KT Engage

Published: Fri 13 May 2022, 12:44 PMIf becoming a millionaire is a pipe dream for you, as it is for most people, you can buy some self-help books such as The Millionaire Next Door, Think and Grow Rich or Rich Dad Poor Dad to get the best tips from the world's best personal finance advisors.
 You can also listen to Tony Robbins, Dave Ramsey or Robert Kiyosaki's motivational speeches or attend financial workshops to improve your money management skills.
 But if you prefer shortcuts, you can choose Mahzooz.
Mahzooz, which means 'lucky' in Arabic, is the UAE's leading weekly live raffle  and draw , and the GCC's first true dream maker, that has been creating millionaires and transforming thousands of lives through its sizable weekly wins and its solid community outreach program.
With over AED 190 million in prize money given away to over 160,000 winners so far, Mahzooz has already created 22 millionaires and has made dreams come true for those who participate in its weekly draw.
For only AED 35, you can buy a water bottle on www.
mahzooz.
ae to qualify for a line in the weekly Grand Draw, where you stand a chance to win AED 10 million.
 You automatically enter the Raffle Draw where 3 guaranteed winners take home AED 100,000 each, every single week.
 That's twice the chances for your dreams to become real.
To be the Grand Prize winner, you need to match your five chosen numbers with the 5 winning numbers that the host will draw live on air.
 If you end up matching 4 numbers, you, as well as others who have chosen the same numbers, could win AED 1 million divided among the winners.
 If you strike 3 out of 5 winning numbers, you will get AED 350.
Up until its 76th draw, Mahzooz has seen the participation of 177 nationalities representing 122 countries, all dreaming the Mahzooz dream and hoping to make their dreams a reality.
 Those realities have ranged from building houses, setting up businesses and supporting families to doing charity in the community where the winners live.
 You also can become the next Mahzooz millionaire this weekend and make your own new reality.
So, this coming Saturday 14 May, at 9.
00 pm, after your get your entries ready, simply gather family and friends and watch the live draw on www.
mahzooz.
ae or @MyMahzooz on Facebook and YouTube to find our if you are one of the lucky winners.
 The show is hosted by Lebanese TV personality, Wissam Braidy, Indian model and entrepreneur, Ashwarya Ajit, Emirati presenter, Ali Al Khajeh, and Emirati TikTok sensation, Mozah Al Ameri.
*Terms and conditions apply.
 They can be found here: https://www.
mahzooz.
ae/en/legal/terms-and-conditions.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 10 May 2022, 5:26 PMDr Usha Kiran is a Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist (OBGY) at the Prime Hospital, Dubai since 2016, specilaises in Level 3/4 advanced Minimal Access Surgery , High risk pregnancies & Cosmetic Gynaecology.
She is the first & currently the only Gynaecologist performing SCARLESS surgery(VNOTES) in the UAE.
She has a keen interest in Women's health issues which span both the reproductive and menopausal age groups.
 She graduated from Mysore University in 1989 and obtained MD, OBGY from Mumbai University in 1995 and was a gold medalist in the FCPS by Mumbai University.
 She completed postgraduate training in the Welsh Deanery, UK, and was awarded MRCOG in 1999, CCT in 2006 and FRCOG in 2011.
She worked as a full-time Consultant & Unit Head at the Aneurin Bevan NHS Trust, UK from 2006 to 2012.
 She was a Joint Lead Clinician/Preceptor for Minimal Access Surgery, Maternal Medicine and Emergency Gynaecology and Chair of the Guideline Committee & Head of Research & Development at Aneurin Bevan NHS Trust, UK.
She has held a post of Unit Head and Associate Professor at Grant Medical College, Mumbai, from 2013 to 2016.
 .
 She has presented and published more than 100 presentations and articles in International conferences and Peer-reviewed journals and was an Honorary tutor at Cardiff and Mumbai University.
She also has her own YouTube channel & Blog providing patient education & information on various women's health and other issues.
 She is actively uses social media like Facebook and Instagram to educate and inspire.
Apart from her professional and academic achievements, she is passionate about trekking and has not only trekked to Everest Base Camp but has climbed Kilimanjaro, the tallest freestanding mountain in the world, not just once but twice in the last year.
She is actively involved in conducting surgical camps and doctors' training in remote places with basic facilities, free of cost, to help the needy and train junior doctors.
 Her goal is to organise more such camps to provide free surgical service and training to as many places in the world to serve the needy patients.
Speaking about her journey, Dr Kiran said: "As you are aware, I am a Laparoscopic surgeon.
 Recently there is a new technique of doing Hysterectomy (removal of the uterus) without any scars by using the laparoscope through the vagina (VNOTES Surgery) - a SCARLESS surgery.
 It is being done in the Europe, US, and very few places in India as well.
 Currently, I am the only one who is trained and certified and offering this surgery in the UAE and have performed 25 successful surgeries till now.
Anamika Mohan Saha :After meeting Dr Kiran for the first time, I felt very comfortable and confident that I am in good hands.
 She proved it true when she conducted the VNOTES (SCARLESS) Hysterectomy on me.
 I recovered from the surgery very fast and with minimal pain even though I was back to my regular home duties within a few days after the surgery.
 She also clarified all my pre and post-operative clarifications and followed up till my complete recovery.
 I am indeed indebted to her and would recommend her without any doubt.
Aileen Pelagio:I'm so glad and grateful that I found Dr Kiran, who is an expert in her profession with a caring hands and heart for her patients.
 I had Myoma that caused bleeding that lasted eight months and became worse because I was afraid of going through surgery.
 Only then did I decide to search for an expert to ease my issue and found out about Dr Kiran through a recommendation through Dr.
 Amor Romero.
 I loved how Dr Kiran took the time to explain my conditions and the treatment options until I was convinced.
 Finally, my husband and I came up with the decision to remove my uterus and cervix.
 I went through surgery, an unbelievable major SCARLESS (VNOTES) surgery.
 Honestly, I had a quick recovery, I didn't feel much pain, and I didn't even use the pain reliever that they gave me.
 With proper care, I was able to do my usual routine at home with precautions of avoiding bending and lifting, and on the 15th day, I started going back to work.
 I'm very impressed with the overall experience and would highly recommend her to anyone.
Sanab Gul:Dr Usha Karin did the VNOTES (SCARLESS) surgery for my wife and her recovery was quick and with no complications.
 Here I want to mention that we are satisfied with Dr.
 Usha.
 She is having good knowledge and experience.
 We are very thankful to her and entire staff of prime medical hospital.
.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Partner Content By KT Engage

Published: Wed 30 Mar 2022, 11:39 AMLast updated: Fri 1 Apr 2022, 12:32 PMGéant brand has opened its largest hypermarket in the highly affluent Dubai Hills Mall, adding to its rapidly increasing presence in the region.
 Known for its quality produce and wide range of product choices, the emphasis at Géant Dubai Hills Mall is on ease, convenience, and comfort in making every purchase, be it a single item or the monthly shopping list.
 The idea is to generate that 'come back again' loyalty in the clientele, that Géant has been very successful in its journey so far.
Urban Foods CEO Mark Anthony Lack elaborated on how Géant adds a new dimension to shopping by saying: "We promise a positive and dedicated in-store experience and are constantly fine tuning the on-floor priorities to make it even better.
 Our staff at Géant Dubai Hills will not sit behind counters, but are interactive and on hand to suggest and advise according to the customer's needs.
  For this 12th Géant opening and keeping in mind the location and the discerning clientele that resides in the vicinity, we have designed the premises and sourced the products to reflect their lifestyle and needs.
"In a first for the city, Géant Dubai Hills will feature a unique technology that embeds digital screens in some of the refrigerator and freezer doors to create a new network of ‘smart’ displays that will be used to depict the food and drink inside in their best light and also to act as an in-store billboard that can share information and special offers to shoppers.
For added convenience, the shop floor is divided into comprehensive sections, unlike what you'll see conventionally in local hypermarkets.
 The laundry department, for example, not only has machines, but you also get the detergent to go with the wash.
 The baby and child section are so comprehensive that there is literally nothing you cannot get for your little darling, from diaper genies to diapers and from baby food to baby bath products"For us it is vital that customers think of us as a one stop shop, replete with new options and experiences, yet offering a select but also eclectic range of quality goods.
 From our themed departments to a dedicated candy section, clothing and electronics, kitchen gadgets and organic food items, each one has something unusual to offer.
"Amongst its many attractive features, Géant scores points with its insistence on the freshest produce and choicest meats, an in-house bakery, an unrivalled organic, gluten free and vegan foods section, a French-inspired cheese section and one of the city's largest collections of established global foods.
Another first for the UAE, the hypermarket in Dubai Hills will also include the Maison Marguerite, Géant’s in-house café concept, where shoppers can unwind with some coffee and conversation before or after they shop.
"We will also be offering home delivery via our delivery platforms and Géant's highly reliable 'Your store to Your door' service.
 With our competitive pricing and well-trained and knowledgeable staff, we can confidently say our aim is singular, once you come through our doors, you never have to go anywhere else," concluded Lack.
To provide further impetus to its robust expansion plans, the company is also poised to launch Monoprix, a new concept store very soon, while expanding its equally well known Géant Express and Franprix portfolios.
Check out offers with up to 60% off this Ramadan across all Géant Hypermarkets in Dubai here.
.
