
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Fri 6 May 2022, 9:28 PMWhen the pandemic struck in early 2020, Susan Furness, an alternative strategist and self-confessed digital nomad, was staying at Studio One hotel in Dubai.
 It was meant to be a short stay, just to get a project over the line.
 But the arrangement soon turned into a long one as Covid dug in its heels.
Anyone in her place would have perhaps flinched at the thought of staying in a hotel while the world was locked up but for Susan it was a blessing in disguise.
 Since 2017, she had anyway traded a ‘traditional’ or ‘classic’ home living to embrace a “vocational commitment to business and life”, by giving up her villa in Al Nakheel.
 But the long-term reality of Covid further changed her definition of home.
 “I was fast to embrace the #WFA (work from anywhere) rule and ‘nomad’id’ my way to Ras Al Khaimah where the big ocean, skies, sunset and mountains beckoned,” she laughs.
Anchored in RAK, she then negotiated for an extended stay in Studio One which has been functioning as her home in Dubai for over two years now.
 Currently, Susan enjoys the best of all words — the natural beauty of the northern emirate and the modern contemporary living of Dubai with all its amenities, great restaurants, hangout joints and the option of using the premises for both a rendezvous with friends or a serious work meeting.
 “I feel safe, secure and cared for.
 I am so supported by the high-tech infrastructure that I am able produce some of my best work without ever leaving home,” she says, adding that in her “AC life” (After Corona), she is unlikely to take on home responsibilities ever again.
Frankly, I identify with and envy Susan.
 Home, for me, means ‘routine’ — a space to be messy, host friends, cook, clean and be yourself.
 But a hotel, on the other hand, defines a welcome break from that routine.
 An orderly and disciplined (also expensive) space to be pampered with room service and a spa, and all mundane chores of everyday living, including dreadful laundry, taken care of.
ALSO READ:Now, imagine the break becoming your everyday reality! That’s what the hotel apartment life is all about.
 A hospitality trend that was always in demand, the long-term stay has become considerably more popular over the last couple of years.
Hotel life has certainly lured me in since moving to Dubai a few months ago.
 The sheer comfort of having your cleaning, maintenance, bills, furniture and living space managed is preventing me from going house-hunting, negotiating with agents, drawing up budget sheets and shopping for furniture.
 ‘Should I be a hotel guest forever?’, bypassing the tediousness of chasing water, electricity, chiller and gas connections, is my ‘to shift or not to shift’ Hamletian dilemma these days!Sure, the joy of giving a personal touch to your space is unmatched but, according to Susan, even a so-called sterile hotel room can be personalised.
 “I truly am a nomad which essentially means ‘surrender of things’.
 But I remain individual in my style.
 So, I always personalise my environment even if I am somewhere for 24 hours, be it by rearranging the angle of the furniture or placing a few of my favourite books around,” she says.
Claudio Cisana, a high-ranking exec with a luxury Italian brand, echoes these thoughts.
 Cisana, who stayed at the Sofitel Dubai Downtown for a few months, raves about the comfort of having all his needs met and attended to.
 “I felt at home though I was abroad.
 With a kitchen, private laundry machine, sofa and other small details, I was made to feel comfortable even though I was far from my family,” he says.
 I ask Cisana what his definition of home is.
 “A place that offers privacy, time and space to set life at one’s own pace, where one can chill in luxurious surroundings,” is his reply.
 Sounds like what a lavish hotel would have on its plate!According to experts, the pandemic has led to a rise in long-term stays.
 Initially it was because of enhanced hygiene and sanitation requirements which hotels are trusted for.
 But the uncertainty in the job market too played its part.
 With processionals on the edge about their careers, they were not really keen to get into yearly rental contracts which made the hotel apartment more practical.
 Finally, the overall drop in hospitality rates too motivated guests to choose hotels over villas and apartments.
Ruby Pande, director of rooms at Sofitel Dubai Downtown — that has its fair share of long-stay guests — calls them “true ambassadors of the hotel”.
 “They promote the business by influencing their friends and family to stay at the same property,” she says.
From a purely business standpoint, Ruby adds that long-term stays have the potential to act as a cushion by providing base occupancy.
 “The base occupancy of around 10-12 per cent saves the hotel from a sudden downtrend due to a disruption caused by political or economic instability, a pandemic or similar issues.
 Also, once a certain occupancy is achieved, hotels can increase rates for a better yield,” she explains.
Srbana Gavrilovic, head of Hotel Operations at Studio One, concurs as she lists out the benefits of long stays: it helps avoid gap in reservations, lowers housekeeping costs (since guests do not expect frequent housekeeping), and leads to greater use of hotel facilities such as meeting rooms, transport and meals.
 “Long-stay business offers much more resilience in uncertain times.
 Though the average daily rates or ADR is lower than for short stays, this can be compensated by higher long-term occupancy, more efficient operations and new opportunities for upselling and cross-selling guests,” says Srbana.
Luke Tremmel, hotel manager, Media One — that has special arrangements and offers for long-stay guests — terms it a risk-free and viable option.
 The numbers tell the story.
 “Long  stays at our hotel exceeded 30 per cent of the business mix during the pandemic, accounting for nearly 2,000 room nights on a monthly  basis,” says Luke.
While the primary users, as Ruby observes, are people who are in the process of relocating to a city and would like to stay in a hotel till they choose their own home, a large part of long-term guests are also professionals on short-term contracts who do not want to get into the hassle of signing tenancy agreements and bother about utilities, maintenance or furnishings.
 Then there were businessmen who wished to stay in a hotel for a congenial ambiance to work.
Tehsin Shaikh, director at an import-export firm, who spends at least two months every quarter in a serviced apartment, is a case in point.
 With the tough job of establishing overseas business and taking care of finances, investments and revenue, for Tehsin it’s all about managing energy rather than managing time or comfort.
 “I feel we are in perfect rhythm and harmony if we find a routine outside of our homes.
 When our basic needs are met, we can be more productive.
 Hence when I travel, I choose the most feasible option — a hotel apartment.
 It’s so much better than investing in a place of one’s own.
” Moreover, the global disruption and resultant unpredictability also makes him think twice about a home.
 “With all the uncertainty surrounding us, it’s not wise for me as of now to think of having a permanent place in a cosmopolitan city.
 The ‘floating population’ is the new normal,” he shrugs.
For this ‘floating population’, the emotional connection that one forms with a home, the personal touch given to a space and the comfort of friends and neighbours can be sacrificed at the altar of stress-free, no-strings-attached living.
 The comfort certainly does not come cheap and, as Tehsin points out, money may buy convenience but guests have to be prepared to shell out a tidy sum for every service which can “blow away your budget”.
 But for those who can afford it, the investment is worth every dirham.
Mzahem Al-Saloum, a senior analyst and programmes manager working with Sovereignty Contractors, and a veteran of long-stay arrangements, having spent a considerable amount of time in plush properties like Bab Al Qasr, The Address Boulevard and Sofitel Dubai Downtown, has an interesting definition of ‘home’.
 “As a Syrian who has stayed in seven countries and more than 10 cities around the world, home is where I feel safe, secure and comfortable.
 A place where I feel I am able to take care of my own situation and business and achieve my dreams.
 The geographical location does not matter,” he says.
An extremely private person who doesn’t socialise much, he also doesn’t miss noisy, chaotic neighbourhoods.
 “As long as I feel mentally safe, sleep comfortably, don’t have to think of silly stuff and don’t have the pressure of neighbours, it is home for me,” he says, maintaining that he prefers making his own community than having one foisted on him.
 “A hotel stay helps me build my own group of people.
 When I have my own community, I choose who will come into my house or who I hang out with.
 I don’t want to be forced to have a community or have neighbours behind me.
”Material comforts and the joy of not having unwanted neighbours aside, Mzahem has another reason to opt for long-term hotel stays — a plush hotel as your address gives you a special identity among business peers.
 “The prestige associated with big brands is definitely a factor,” he  admits.
 “But I also had a family vibe with the properties I stayed at, which was great and helped during lockdown.
”The connection for long-term hotel guests comes in the form of a bond with the hotel staff who become a second family.
 “I still remember guests who took out time to drop me a condolence message when my father passed away or sent me a farewell message when I was moving on to Dubai,” says Ruby.
 “However there is a fine line between professional and personal dealings.
 As hotel professionals, we work for an organisation and we need to have the organisational interest and well-being as our top priority.
 Any fraternisation is not ethical neither is soliciting any favour from a long-stay guest,” she says.
And that perhaps spotlights the other side of the debate: that, for all the luxury and personalised attention a hotel offers, it cannot substitute the feeling of home.
Personally, I love the idea of coming back from a hard day’s work to a spic and span room with crisp, fresh linen and soft lights as opposed to the glorious mess I would be welcomed by otherwise when the housekeeper failed to turn up (which was often).
 Yet, the mess, the chaos and the fun of putting up a painting or embellishing your walls is what home is all about.
There is also the eternal question: can a long-term hotel stay ever offer the full freedom to do what you want, play your kind of music, host friends, laugh out loud and develop an emotional bond?Claudio doesn’t feel it’s a big deal.
 “During my stay in the hotel, I definitely did prefer to have fun out of the room, also as a matter of respect for neighbours.
 I did what I would expect other guests would do — not play loud music in the room.
 And come on, it’s Dubai! You can go clubbing where and when you want!”Tehsin disagrees.
 “It is advantageous to stay in hotels but there is the other side too.
 The loneliness that hits you after hectic schedules, the impossibility of having a work-life balance and the days when you miss your family.
”So, what do you do when you have to make your hotel a home and develop permanent connections in what will remain a temporary space? Can you be ‘hotel proud’ the way you would be ‘house proud’? Susan offers some simple tips: communicate, make eye contact and truly listen to one another.
 “I mean, if we are the environment, it’s only sterile if we are, right? And tangible functionality used with good energy manifests creativity, right? If it is not used or appreciated then any environment — even a bountiful garden or a jamming nightclub — can be alienating,” she says, offering four simple solutions to make a home out of a hotel room:1.
 To bring light and lightness, at least five times a day stop to breathe in good energy and breath out anxiety.
2.
 Always look up and connect just before you pass someone — from about five steps away, or that moment the elevator doors open.
3.
 If you see the same person three times without speaking, on the fourth occasion say ‘Hi’.
4.
 If you see the person(s) hanging around waiting for something and by chance you are too, whip up a conversation.
Simple, easy-to-follow tips indeed.
 Human connections and room service…what’s not to like?lekhamenon77@gmail.
comLekha is a journalist, editor and communications  professional based  in Dubai Long ReadsA crippling pandemic, lack of food security and climate change might push an already embattled middle class into a deeper abyss.
  Can the situation still be salvaged?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt is 20 years since the iconic Bend It Like Beckham was released.
 It reflected change and continuity in an increasingly multicultural Britain, going on to inspire generations of Asian women footballers, and challenge stereotypes, while continuing to move audiences across the globeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsFor long, classics have been reimagined and reinterpreted.
 At times, stories are taken forward or given a twist.
 At times, embedded characters are extrapolated and given a new life.
 Why do writers feel the need to fall back on books that were written in a different era — and that upheld different value systems?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsEbb tide in the pandemic has led to a second surge in the power of social media stars, all of whom benefit from a hyper-connected world.
 Top names in this cyber-verse share their insights on sustained successLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsCovid took the global economy on a roller coaster.
 Even as the world struggled in its aftermath, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent price indices into a tizzy.
 Here’s a primer on what exactly is going on — and what the short-term future of purchasing power looks likeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIndian journalist and author Veena Venugopal’s The Mother-in-Law: The Other Woman in Your  Marriage explores the ‘spectre’ of “the husband’s mother” through 12 compelling case studies and anecdotal storytelling.
 Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt’s perhaps the toughest, most complex ‘social’ relationship one handles: trying to  make peace with your spouse’s mother.
 It has spawned jokes and television soap operas.
.
.
 and real-life horror stories have been swapped down the ages.
 But then, there are those who’ve found love, affection and friendship— not discordLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsC-suites in corporate America are increasingly being occupied by Indians and people of Indian origin.
 Is there a secret formula — with ingredients sourced from the homeland — that equips them to rise to the top of the game in an opportunistic yet opportunities-driven market?Long Reads1 month ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Fri 20 May 2022, 9:47 PMLast updated: Mon 23 May 2022, 6:38 PMA few years ago, Jatin and Sherry Gupta, a young millennial couple, he a banker in his early 30s, she a PR consultant  (and founder of Excel Comms) in her late 20s, moved to Dubai from Doha.
 It was a transfer they had actively sought because they both felt Dubai would be a “good place” to be in — not least because it is “a two-and-a-half-hour flight away from home [in north India]”.
 In a year’s time, both had fallen in love with the city, and decided this was where they want to be in the foreseeable future: at least for the next 5 to 10 years.
That year was also the time when they lived in a rented accommodation in the bustling community of Jumeirah Lakes Towers (JLT), and, over the course of socialising on weekends, discovered that six of Jatin’s classmates from his college in India, all in their early 30s, scattered in various freehold parts of Dubai, had purchased properties of their own in the city.
“It made perfect sense,” says Jatin, sitting next to one of the many green lakes in JLT — on an evening when the weather still permits al fresco seating — and sipping a cup of tea from one of the innumerable eateries dotting the expanse of glass-façaded residential (and a few commercial) towers.
 “Instead of paying money on rentals, you’re better off owning a place… for sure, property prices will go up and down, but — worst-case scenario — even if you assume that the value of what you bought remains the same at the end of 5 or 10 years, you would still have saved on rent.
”Sometime before Covid gripped the world, Jatin and Sherry bought a 2-bedroom apartment in JLT.
 One of Jatin’s friends — from his alma mater — who owned a place in the same JLT cluster was instrumental in showing them the ropes.
It needed “courage” to put up a substantial sum of money, the couple points out; the down payment itself almost wiped out their entire savings.
 “Our parents back in India kept asking us to do — and redo — the math so we didn’t end up cash-crunched and in debt,” Sherry remembers.
 “But finally, when we sealed the deal, they were very proud of us… It was a big moment, pretty emotional.
” Helped greatly by the fact that home was, literally, where their heart was.
 In Dubai.
It’s important to note the bedrock of this trend.
 Earlier, it used to be said the Dubai dream lasts only as long as you have a job — or a profit-making business.
 The day the rug is pulled from below your feet, you have to wake up and smell the coffee.
But not anymore.
With the UAE loosening up visa and residency regulations, you don’t need to pack your bags and get ready to exit the country in case you lose your job — or your business folds up.
 In fact, you can even enter the country and live here as a digital nomad, while being employed elsewhere.
While Jatin and Sherry fetched up in Dubai as ‘newcomers’, there are catchments of young people who were raised here, and whose families were wary of investing in real estate because of the lack of a sense of brick-and-mortar-like permanence.
 The new gen-ers are now buying their own homes, instead of living in rented quarters like their parents did, points out Aleli D Alo, a property advisor in Dubai.
 “If you live in a rented place for, say, 10 years, then it’s basically money lost,” she says, echoing Jatin’s sentiments.
 “Instead, if you had bought the property, you could have paid it [your mortgage] off in a decade… and even sold your place at a higher price… and then maybe bought some place bigger.
”Overall, there’s been a surge in the number of younger, first-time buyers, who are “motivated to buy because the market is going up”.
 Many younger folks, she adds, “who have earned good money on, say, [investing in] cryptocurrency often want to diversify their funds to a more tangible/stable asset — a first home”.
Aleli also avers “many millennials are becoming digital nomads and moving here because they believe Dubai is very stable… a very safe market.
”Anis Sahyoun, a Lebanese entrepreneur, born and raised in Dubai (and partly in Saudi Arabia), is a firm believer in immovable assets.
 “No stocks and bonds for me, give me real estate,” he says.
 And as someone who’s been in the entrepreneurial/startup ecosystem and who’s observed it closely, Anis feels there’s no turning back the “huge influx of businesses here” which is leading to a further spike in the number of home purchases.
 “There are conflicts and uncertainties around the world [including his home country, Lebanon], but the UAE is a safe, tax-free haven.
” People, especially younger people, will continue to pour in.
 And invest in properties here rather than in their home countries.
Having said that, his reasons for buying property here is also emotional.
 “This is home, this is a city with a vision, my family and I are here to stay… at least for the foreseeable future.
” He’s comfortable in the security the outlook offers.
When Anis’s brother-in-law (who’s French) and his family wanted to move out of France, they zeroed in on Dubai, and have now picked up properties here.
 “My brother-in-law saw exactly what I did.
” Maximum city.
 Not just architecturally.
In March 2020, the Central Bank of the UAE issued a decree enabling banks to increase the loan-to-value (LTV) for first-time buyers by 5 per cent — for both expats and UAE nationals.
 Which means, expats can now borrow up to 80 per cent of purchase prices from banks here.
According to Lewis Allsopp, CEO of Allsopp & Allsopp, one of Dubai’s most premier property services agencies, this increase in LTV encouraged many first-time buyers “to take the plunge”.
 “From then on, the legislations and visas that have been introduced by the UAE government have been extremely helpful for expats looking to set up a life in the city and have definitely made an impact on the property market.
”In his interactions and his company’s dealings with first-time buyers, he notices something: they are confident about their intent to buy.
 “A lot of them have done their due diligence and have been living in Dubai for some time before making the decision to buy… once they are at the stage of viewing properties, their mind has been made about buying their first property here.
”It’s a confidence bolstered by a careful curation of policies and mandates that have made home-buying a compelling option.
 Other than banks offering competitive rates to prospective buyers, in cases where one buys a place and then suddenly decides to leave, “they can always rent out the place very easily — or convert your place into a holiday home — and earn money from it”, says Aleli.
There’s another magic ingredient thrown into the mix: how almost everything can be done online, intuitively.
 “You don’t even have to be present in person in order to purchase.
”The kind of property management you get here, Aleli continues, “is something you will not find anywhere else in the world… everything can be managed on your smartphone.
 There’s an excess of service providers here in Dubai, who can be accessed even if you are not around in person.
”These are all concerns that have been laid to rest for younger buyers who are looking for a hassle-free experience, with technology being used as a great enabler.
 Anis seconds the observation: “They’ve just made it so easy.
”Rizwan Sajan, founder and chairman of the Danube Group, may not be a millennial, but the building blocks of Danube Properties have been put in place riding on a strategy to tap into the young, first-time buyer segment.
“Our propositions were formulated keeping in mind the younger target group — those in their early- to mid-30s, buying their first home, who wouldn’t need to be intimidated by the prospect of very expensive properties — for which you need to have wealth passed on to you by your family — and yet would not need to compromise on aspirations like a ‘luxurious’ lifestyle,” says Rizwan.
 The Danube residences, for instance, are usually furnished, and they are furnished keeping in mind younger, millennial sensibilities.
He adds that at the Danube offices, on any given day, there’s a steady stream of first-time buyers — who usually step outafter signing on the dotted line.
It’s reflective of the same mindset that Lewis Allsopp spoke about: confidence in the market — and an intent to purchase.
Rizwan also tells us how Danube zoomed in on the tagline of ‘stop renting, start owning’ while conceptualising the value propositions of their offerings.
 There are pure plays such as the 10 per cent down payment scheme and 1 per cent payment per month from thereon among others.
After how the government handled Covid and Dubai Expo, investors are flowing in, market confidence is at an all-time high, and loads of young people — salaried professionals, startup entrepreneurs, digital nomads — from around the world want to move to Dubai.
 “They will be investing in properties,” Rizwan affirms.
 “No two ways about it.
”The future, he is super sanguine, “is super bright”.
It all has to come down to the first-time buyer and what they feel will be most beneficial in the coming years, says Lewis Allsopp: “If you feel that Dubai is home and moving back to your home country is not on your radar, then it’s time to stop paying rent and subsequently paying someone else’s mortgage — and start paying into your own.
”Even if one were to point out that all this sounds notional, the flip side can only be that the market remains volatile.
 During the pandemic, there was a blip in the property market when prices in Dubai suddenly nosedived.
 Jatin — he’s the sort who goes to Dubizzle every other day to check on the likely valuation of his property — was most miffed when he saw he could have bought his apartment for an obscene percentage lesser if only he had waited.
But that’s when Sherry gave him the ‘realty check’.
 “Why are you putting a monetary value to the place we call home?”And the penny suddenly dropped.
Long ReadsA crippling pandemic, lack of food security and climate change might push an already embattled middle class into a deeper abyss.
  Can the situation still be salvaged?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt is 20 years since the iconic Bend It Like Beckham was released.
 It reflected change and continuity in an increasingly multicultural Britain, going on to inspire generations of Asian women footballers, and challenge stereotypes, while continuing to move audiences across the globeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsFor long, classics have been reimagined and reinterpreted.
 At times, stories are taken forward or given a twist.
 At times, embedded characters are extrapolated and given a new life.
 Why do writers feel the need to fall back on books that were written in a different era — and that upheld different value systems?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsEbb tide in the pandemic has led to a second surge in the power of social media stars, all of whom benefit from a hyper-connected world.
 Top names in this cyber-verse share their insights on sustained successLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsCovid took the global economy on a roller coaster.
 Even as the world struggled in its aftermath, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent price indices into a tizzy.
 Here’s a primer on what exactly is going on — and what the short-term future of purchasing power looks likeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIndian journalist and author Veena Venugopal’s The Mother-in-Law: The Other Woman in Your  Marriage explores the ‘spectre’ of “the husband’s mother” through 12 compelling case studies and anecdotal storytelling.
 Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt’s perhaps the toughest, most complex ‘social’ relationship one handles: trying to  make peace with your spouse’s mother.
 It has spawned jokes and television soap operas.
.
.
 and real-life horror stories have been swapped down the ages.
 But then, there are those who’ve found love, affection and friendship— not discordLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsC-suites in corporate America are increasingly being occupied by Indians and people of Indian origin.
 Is there a secret formula — with ingredients sourced from the homeland — that equips them to rise to the top of the game in an opportunistic yet opportunities-driven market?Long Reads1 month ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Sat 30 Apr 2022, 11:15 PMWill Smith is history.
 Hold your thoughts: I am not talking about the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences “cancelling” him for 10 years.
 It seems the whole world was reminded of what toxic male masculinity really means when the Oscar-winning actor (he retains his Oscar) slapped stand-up comedian Chris Rock at the Oscars ceremony in front of a live TV audience just because Rock cracked a joke about his wife Jada Pinkett Smith.
 When I say history, I mean he and his antics have been largely forgotten as more juicy morsels of celebrity shenanigans have figuratively buried his slap in the graveyard of news cycles.
 The flavour of the season at the moment is the court battle between another Hollywood star — Johnny Depp of Pirates of the Caribbean fame — and his former partner Amber Heard.
New revelations tumbling out indicate that Depp could have been the victim rather than Amber with her ‘slap dash’ tactics and behaviour.
 Once upon a time, Amber was hailed as the classic female victim of abuse.
 But now, the tables have been turned.
Coming back to the Oscars, Smith will probably invade us through social media platforms and tabloids if Jada launches a choreographed kick at Patrisse Cullors.
Now you would be justified in asking where Cullors comes in from.
 Even more fundamental: who is she? Well, since that Will Smith slap rekindled my long-lost interest in the Oscars, I have been wondering — if not fantasising — about toxic female masculinity.
 I mean, why can’t females display toxic masculinity? Let’s discuss one oft commented upon trait of toxic males and relate it to Cullors.
 Toxic males have a greedy tendency to grab (not just the kind of grab the ultimate toxic male Donald Trump talked about) what is not theirs and then cry victimhood when found out.
 History is replete with toxic males indulging in land, property, women, attention and power grabs.
 Patrisse Cullors joined the gang.
 She is the co-founder of Black Lives Matter, the powerful movement against racial discrimination in the United States.
 BLM collected tens of millions of dollars from starry-eyed woke millennials of America to advance the “cause”.
In the movie Wall Street, Gordon Gekko — played by Michael Douglas — was the quintessential toxic male who revelled in greed (we will come back to the star later).
 Cullors may or may not have revelled in greed.
 But like toxic males, she did resort to victimhood.
 It was revealed recently that BLM “grabbed” the donations and used them to buy a $5.
8 million mansion in Los Angeles.
 It seems to be a clear violation of laws that govern the use of charitable donations in the land of the free.
 Cullors promptly doubled down and played victim.
 She said that financial disclosure norms are “triggering” and “unsafe”.
 According to media reports, she addressed BLM supporters after the details of the $ 5.
8 million mansion were revealed: “This is deeply unsafe.
 This is literally being weaponised against us, against the people we work with…people’s morale in an organisation is so important.
 But if the organisation and the people in it are being attacked and scrutinised at everything that they do, that leads to deep burnout.
” Wouldn’t it have been better if Cullors had invoked Michael Douglas and given a middle finger to her critics? But then, we live in an age when getting “triggered” is the go-to mantra for woke folks when polite males commit the crime of opening doors for women or utter blasphemous words like Ladies First.
This trait is rampant even in my country India; though the reasons and excuses offered are more exotic.
 Recently, an influential and admired lady, Chitra Ramkrishna, was arrested by law enforcement authorities for, let’s put it simply, grabbing and stealing money.
 She is no ordinary person.
 Ramkrishna was the head honcho of the National Stock Exchange that handles transactions worth tens of billions of dollars every day.
 It seems she was leaking information to a preferred group of financial brokers who made a killing and shared the spoils with her.
 Ramkrishna used spirituality to defend her actions.
 According to her, a spiritual guru residing in the Himalayas used to proffer unsolicited advice to her.
I don’t really know if that Himalayan spiritual guru was a male or a female.
 When she was arrested, I suggested to the editor of a portal for which I sometimes I write that we should write a piece on why women should celebrate her arrest.
 He politely asked me if I was crazy.
 My response was: crazy maybe, but her arrest truly means there is complete equality between males and females.
 Financial services is one sector where women in India have done exceptionally well, breaking all glass ceilings.
 Why can’t they indulge in the toxic male masculine pastime of greed and grab? The editor refused to respond to my WhatsApp messages for almost two weeks.
Bullying comes naturally to toxic males.
 But they also become cry babies when bullied back.
 The author was reminded of this trait as he followed the comically toxic shenanigans of journalist Taylor Lorenz who is one of the high priestesses of woke bullying and activism masquerading as journalism in America.
 Lorenz “cares” for the marginalised.
 And why not? She has done her schooling in oh-so-proper finishing schools in Switzerland and graduated from the exclusive Hobart and William Smith Colleges.
 During her stint as a technology reporter for The New York Times, she acquired a fearsome reputation for “exposing” right-wing interlopers on social media platforms.
 With 500,000 followers on TikTok and 300,000 followers on Twitter, Lorenz acquired a larger than life image.
 But when she kept targeting and even bullying right wingers, there was a pushback with another toxic male Tucker Carlson of Fox News slamming her for supposed hypocrisy.
 The New York Times publicly defended her.
 Eventually, Lorenz quit the paper this year claiming she was kind of stifled and joined The Washington Post.
Meanwhile, in an interview to sympathetic hosts in the “woke” channel MSNBC, Lorenz shed copious tears and complained she was stalked, harassed and abused on social media platforms to the point she contemplated suicide.
 She piously declaimed that stalking someone was abhorrent behaviour.
 Good for her.
 At Washington Post, Lorenz literally stalked a Twitter handle called @libsoftiktok which makes fun of woke activism and attitudes with hilarious memes and videos.
 Lorenz actually barged into the houses of family members of the account.
 She then “doxxed” (revealed the actual identity of an anonymous handle) the owner of the Twitter handle in a story for Washington Post and called it an important public interest story.
 It turned out that the person was Chaya Raichik, a regular homemaker who holds no public office.
When Pulitzer Prize-winning journalists started slamming Lorenz for toxic bullying, she promptly reverted to being a cry baby.
 This author thinks Lorenz is on a personal quest to even out centuries of toxic bullying by males.
 More power to her? So what if her victims happen to be ordinary women?You don’t really need to gather a mob to display toxic female masculinity.
 One more fabled tale about allegedly toxic alpha males is their keenness as well as ability to dominate and appear dominant.
 Both history and folklore are replete with examples of alpha males dominating political discourse as well as the fortunes of war and peace.
 But even here, contemporary history reveals that this trait of toxic male masculinity has been displayed with more finesse, style and chutzpah by alpha women.
 There is an apocryphal story about 1990 that has been kind of confirmed by many journalists who were “insiders” in that tumultuous year when Saddam Hussein decided to invade Kuwait and claim it as the 19th province of Iraq.
, while then US President George Bush (whose son George Bush Jr followed an entirely different path) was pondering over what to do about this act of territorial violation.
 The wavering Bush was virtually steamrolled and railroaded by an incandescent Margaret Thatcher, the British Prime Minister.
Many years before that, Thatcher had already “taught a lesson” to Argentina during the Falklands war.
 It is said that hardly any male member of the Cabinet dared raise his voice once the “Iron Lady” Thatcher made up her mind.
 Of course, she was deposed in a modern-day version of a palace coup for displaying classic signs of toxic (fe)male masculinity: dictatorial attitude, unwillingness to listen to others and dismissive of dissent.
But the Iron Lady of Britain had probably learnt a lesson or two from Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister of India for about 14 years.
 She was anointed PM by a powerful ruling cabal of the ruling Congress party because they thought she could be “controlled and manipulated”.
 Some chauvinists even called her “goongi gudiya”, roughly translated as a dumb doll.
 But Indira Gandhi displayed a streak closely associated with toxic female masculinity: ruthless and relentless dictatorship.
 She not only declared an internal emergency, but turned her Cabinet colleagues into quavering masses of jelly with her raised eyebrows and tongue lashing.
 Both Thatcher and Gandhi are not much loved in the feminist crowd because they apparently didn’t do enough for women.
 What’s wrong with this feminist crowd? Didn’t they outdo and outclass alleged males in toxic (fe)male masculinity? You can’t have two separate standards for males and females, can you?Perhaps the most controversial and talked about traits about toxic males is their inability to resist the temptation of abusing power.
 In contemporary times, apparently toxic females do with the same even more brazenly.
 Just a year or so ago, the Corona virus had ravaged the US, like many other parts of the word.
 Lockdowns had become the norm and virtually all business establishments had shut down temporarily.
 Both men and women couldn’t visit a barber shop or a salon even for a haircut.
 But such rules apply only for ordinary folks.
 The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi was in her hometown in San Francisco and decided she wanted to get her hair washed and blow dried.
 A salon was specially opened only for her and a “beautician” did the honours.
 When the story broke in the media with the add-on fact that Pelosi was not even wearing a mask, she claimed ignorance about mask rules in her own home town.
 Her office issued a bland statement that said: “This business offered for the Speaker to come in on Monday and told her they were allowed by the city to have one customer at a time in the business.
 The Speaker complied with the rules as presented to her by this establishment.
”Abuse of power is not just about washing and blow drying your hair when millions of women in America had to chop their own hair at home.
 It’s also about sexual harassment of those below you in the hierarchy of power.
 Hundreds of such cases involving predatory females have surfaced in the media.
 But this is not the right platform or place to get into prurient and salacious details.
 A more compelling way probably is to illustrate this through a Hollywood blockbuster.
That is where Hollywood star Michael Douglas comes back into the narrative.
 Best-selling author Michael Crichton, who revelled in being politically incorrect, wrote a book called Disclosure where a male employee of a technology company is sexually exploited by his lady boss who used to be his girlfriend many years ago.
In the 1994 movie, which created a kind of sensation, Michael Douglas is the junior employee while Demi Moore is his boss who wants to rekindle their old romance with an evening of dalliance.
 When Douglas uses his “superhuman” self control to stop at the edge, Moore becomes vindictive — like hundreds of thousands of male bosses have been in real life.
 My vote goes to Demi Moore.
 But Douglas does make a point when he says: sexual abuse is not about gender; it is about abuse of power.
I am hoping more and more women assume such positions of unaccountable power in other domains when the scores start getting more even.
 That brings me to my final point.
 Thank heavens we have almost stopped using the word ‘virago’.
 According to Merriam Websters Dictionary, the synonyms of virago are: dragon lady, battle ax, fury, harpy, harridan, shrew, vixen and termagant.
 If the word was still in regular use, BLM co-founder Cullors could be in the same room with Donald Trump.
 Actually, I find that to be a tantalisingly delicious and toxicidea!Long ReadsA crippling pandemic, lack of food security and climate change might push an already embattled middle class into a deeper abyss.
  Can the situation still be salvaged?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt is 20 years since the iconic Bend It Like Beckham was released.
 It reflected change and continuity in an increasingly multicultural Britain, going on to inspire generations of Asian women footballers, and challenge stereotypes, while continuing to move audiences across the globeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsFor long, classics have been reimagined and reinterpreted.
 At times, stories are taken forward or given a twist.
 At times, embedded characters are extrapolated and given a new life.
 Why do writers feel the need to fall back on books that were written in a different era — and that upheld different value systems?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsEbb tide in the pandemic has led to a second surge in the power of social media stars, all of whom benefit from a hyper-connected world.
 Top names in this cyber-verse share their insights on sustained successLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsCovid took the global economy on a roller coaster.
 Even as the world struggled in its aftermath, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent price indices into a tizzy.
 Here’s a primer on what exactly is going on — and what the short-term future of purchasing power looks likeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIndian journalist and author Veena Venugopal’s The Mother-in-Law: The Other Woman in Your  Marriage explores the ‘spectre’ of “the husband’s mother” through 12 compelling case studies and anecdotal storytelling.
 Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt’s perhaps the toughest, most complex ‘social’ relationship one handles: trying to  make peace with your spouse’s mother.
 It has spawned jokes and television soap operas.
.
.
 and real-life horror stories have been swapped down the ages.
 But then, there are those who’ve found love, affection and friendship— not discordLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsC-suites in corporate America are increasingly being occupied by Indians and people of Indian origin.
 Is there a secret formula — with ingredients sourced from the homeland — that equips them to rise to the top of the game in an opportunistic yet opportunities-driven market?Long Reads1 month ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Sat 7 May 2022, 10:17 PMLast updated: Sat 7 May 2022, 10:46 PMEvery spring break, I get into this routine where I collect old clothes, old shoes, and gadgets that I am no longer using and send them off to a place which salvages what it can — and then the recycled stuff gets donated.
 It makes me happy that I am contributing my two-bit to the larger good.
With the pandemic and various stress points of life creeping in more often than one would want, a friend suggested I repeat the routine mentally.
 Initially, I was a bit sceptical, but, nevertheless, gave it a shot.
 I processed feelings, emotions, regrets and expectations.
 Many of them, I realised, had lived longer in my head than needed and deserved a quiet burial.
 Some emotions were harder to pack away but, with time, it’s a routine I have created.
Thoughts — bitter ones sometimes — that would buzz in my head needed to be chopped off and sent away packing.
 Expectations were toned down and I reminded myself of what Louisa May Alcott once wrote: “Into each life some rain must fall, some days must be dark and sad and dreary.
”But I was also curious how others dealt with these mental dragons.
 Mj Maria Uy Lami-in, a Filipina expat, has been living in the UAE for 15 years now; she works as a socio-civic HR consultant, among other jobs.
 When asked about how she usually de-stresses, she says, “Stress is usually any outside factor that we let in to affect and get to us — that is if we let it in, and to what degree.
 I might not have theconventional answer most would want to hear but I keep busy outside of what’s ‘affecting’ me.
 I keep my mind and body active with something more pressing, preferably not my current issues.
”Some will say it’s avoidance, but, for her, it’s a temporary rerouting and regrouping of her mental and physical energies until she gets the strength and mental capacity to face and deal with her actual stressor.
 “It might not be very practical as per some professionals, but it works for me.
 A good blow dry helps.
Look good, feel good still stands true.
 It’s not being fake.
 It’s a step towards self-care.
 You already feel horrible inside, why wallow in it on the outside?”An upside of current times is that we are discussing mental health issues more often — and more candidly — these days.
 Mj Maria points out that the issue of mental health and ‘being’ in that place has always been present.
 “What has changed is the shift of what is now openly acceptable in our social mindset.
 It is now more accepted and acceptable, we are even expected to talk about mental health and one’s own mental wellbeing, much like all the other currently ‘socially relevant issues’ of the last decade or so.
”On how to keep regrets and expectations in check, she points out, “Hope for the best, expect the worst.
 I know that sounds fatalistic but with recent global events, we’ve come to a point wherein our priorities and mindsets have shifted.
 And mine certainly has.
 I have come to that age and maturity where I am more appreciative and immensely grateful everyday of what I have been given in life and survived and manifesting graces.
Yes, it’s great to expect and dream of great things but we also need to have that practical and realistic balance of life realities so we don’t get dismayed and disappointed over false expectations.
”When asked that one size never fits all so how is an individual expected to deal with these pressures on their own, Mj Maria says, “There is no right or wrong answer I guess, even though some would push more for what they believe in.
 Depending on who is vocal, more visible and gets it out there.
 There was a time in my life I was easily rattled; on career, relationships, finances and people’s opinions.
 I felt so alone and very scared.
 But I kept it all inside because of generational social expectations and pressure.
 I guess I might be of one of the last generation wherein we were conditioned to keep ‘our mess, our perceived weaknesses in’.
 To keep a brave and strong face for everyone else except ourselves because that is how it was done.
 I was even afraid to ask for help or open up.
 We were conditioned to be that way.
”Leonardo DiCaprio, one of the biggest success stories to have come out of Hollywood, while speaking to Rolling Stone, said that his anxiety comes from the small things, the “really stupid stuff, things that shouldn’t make you anxious whatsoever.
 It’s crazy how your mind will become this database to make you worry about things that are so arbitrary.
 I have a well-organized life, and I’ve put a lot of thought into the things that I do, and then, you know, my stomach will be.
.
.
 I’ll just be sitting there, totally anxious about something ridiculous.
 You have to stop yourself during the day and say, ‘It’s just not worth it’.
”In London, Priya Chandan has developed her own way of dealing with dark thoughts and seeking a bright, safe place in the sun.
 Born and brought up in Mumbai, India, today she calls London — where she has now lived for 16 years with her husband, three kids and their pet dog — her homeAfter Priya had her third child, she decided to take up something that would allow her to find a purpose in her life.
 “I came across a foundation course in counselling and here I am, four years later, doing my Level 4 diploma in integrative counselling.
” She calls herself a self-love and self-care advocate, and truly believes in taking care of herself first because “you can’t pour from an empty cup”.
 “My first priority in life is my family and if I struggle and burn myself out, I will not be able to give my family the love and the affection that I so very much would love to shower them with.
”Mental health has recently become the hot topic perhaps because of the realisation now that mental health is not just about mental wellbeing but it also includes physical wellbeing, emotional well-being, social wellbeing — basically, your overall wellbeing.
 “Ever since the pandemic struck, with lockdowns and isolations, losing our loved ones to the virus and so much more, everyone was forced to slow down the pace of their lives, to reflect and take that reality check which was long overdue,” she feels.
“People were forced to re-evaluate their pre-pandemic life,” Priya adds.
 “Somewhere, I believe it eventually dawned on people that it was actually a burnout from the hustle and bustle of life.
 It gave us a fresh perspective of how we can ‘live’ the gift of life rather than just existing.
 In my opinion, it has given people a fresh lease to build a life of conscious choices.
 Choices that add value to this new life and for this very reason, it’s important that one nurtures and replenishes their own cup of self-care.
”In order to walk the talk, Priya has built her own customised, go-to self-care tool kit whenever she feels overwhelmed.
 “I am aware one size never fits all.
 Everyone has their own way of dealing with things but you can make your own kit with anything that you truly enjoy doing when you are feeling stressed or burnt out.
”So, what’s in her self-care tool kit? “Long walks that help me regulate my emotions.
 Nature is therapeutic, it is soul healing.
 Sometimes driving helps me too.
 Music and podcasts distract me from over-thinking.
 Speaking to family and friends helps me calm my mind.
 Journaling is one of the best tools of my survival kit: pouring out my thoughts and feelings on a note pad has been a game changer.
 You do not need to save these if you are worried someone might read them: you can write your thoughts on paper, and then shred it or even burn it.
 Anything that’s bothering you — let it out of your system, on to the paper and let it go.
 Crying is one of the best self-soothing mechanisms that helps uplift my mood.
 Crying is not a sign that you are too sensitive or weak.
 Crying releases toxins and stress hormones which help restore our emotional balance and soothe the soul.
”Priya also suggests keeping one hour of the day — or even just 20 minutes — to spend time with just yourself, sit with your feelings and reacquaint yourself with the new you.
Ahmed Mohammed Younis, a quality engineer in the UAE, has his own unique way of coping with stress.
 “Stress can cause severe mental pressure in many ways.
 When it comes to me, I try my best to address and overcome this by identifying what stressed me out exactly and find answers as to why this is affecting me.
 This helps me in finding positive actions of what to do next to de-stress.
 Moreover, I do things that help me: getting busy with my friends and talking about positive things that can motivate me, going to the gym and working out… also, [looking for] food online plays a big role in overcoming stress for me!” Ahmed says.
Stress cannot be avoided completely, so we must try and find coping mechanisms, and zero in on proper solutions on how to deal with them in a healthy and productive way.
 “We need to be easier on ourselves too.
 Fortunately, now there are many professionals who can help us seek positive life changes with tools suited to us.
 Sometimes we are our own worst critic.
 We have to learn to be kinder to ourselves and accept challenges in life as a learning process,” is how he sums up his life lessons.
Stress is here to stay, and as we manage our careers and relationships — with their attendant good, bad and ugly sides — our main survival tool has to be accepting that stress and demons do live in our mind spaces.
 But it’s more important to talk about them and, at times, seek a helping hand so we can declutter our minds and hearts of negativity.
Long ReadsA crippling pandemic, lack of food security and climate change might push an already embattled middle class into a deeper abyss.
  Can the situation still be salvaged?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt is 20 years since the iconic Bend It Like Beckham was released.
 It reflected change and continuity in an increasingly multicultural Britain, going on to inspire generations of Asian women footballers, and challenge stereotypes, while continuing to move audiences across the globeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsFor long, classics have been reimagined and reinterpreted.
 At times, stories are taken forward or given a twist.
 At times, embedded characters are extrapolated and given a new life.
 Why do writers feel the need to fall back on books that were written in a different era — and that upheld different value systems?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsEbb tide in the pandemic has led to a second surge in the power of social media stars, all of whom benefit from a hyper-connected world.
 Top names in this cyber-verse share their insights on sustained successLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsCovid took the global economy on a roller coaster.
 Even as the world struggled in its aftermath, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent price indices into a tizzy.
 Here’s a primer on what exactly is going on — and what the short-term future of purchasing power looks likeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIndian journalist and author Veena Venugopal’s The Mother-in-Law: The Other Woman in Your  Marriage explores the ‘spectre’ of “the husband’s mother” through 12 compelling case studies and anecdotal storytelling.
 Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt’s perhaps the toughest, most complex ‘social’ relationship one handles: trying to  make peace with your spouse’s mother.
 It has spawned jokes and television soap operas.
.
.
 and real-life horror stories have been swapped down the ages.
 But then, there are those who’ve found love, affection and friendship— not discordLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsC-suites in corporate America are increasingly being occupied by Indians and people of Indian origin.
 Is there a secret formula — with ingredients sourced from the homeland — that equips them to rise to the top of the game in an opportunistic yet opportunities-driven market?Long Reads1 month ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Thu 19 May 2022, 11:36 PMLast updated: Fri 20 May 2022, 9:49 PMTechnology died today.
 Long live beauty.
 That would have been an apt epitaph for a digital companion that lived in our midst for 20 years and passed away on May 10.
 In many ways, it was the chronicle of a death foretold.
 Technology was shifting, streaming was killing, and younger bro iPhone was becoming a brainier all-purpose pocket rocket.
Take a pause.
The first iPod could well have been Harry Potter’s wand.
 The brand and its manifestations — Mini, Nano, Shuffle, Touch — not only transformed Apple from a niche computer maker to a gadget overlord, they created the modern wearables business.
 When it was launched with Steve Jobsian fanfare in 2001, the iPod created a new religion.
 It became the iconic pendant of tech-couture, the wow-intersection between fashion and technology.
 The iPod was more than the iPod.
 It was the ultimate personification of its creator.
 It was Apple’s most influential evangelist.
In the years that followed the birth of the iPod, it was hip to flaunt the icon.
 Levi Strauss put built-in headphones, docking cradle and joystick in its iPod jeans.
 Luxury shifted gears when BMW integrated the iPod into its music ecosystem.
 Genre-defining iPod ads hit the senses, with splashing colours and dancing silhouettes.
The product and its earbuds were conspicuously white.
 Cool became the mantra of the geek universe.
 The marketing campaign echoed the original 1984 Mackintosh ad produced by Ridley Scott, which heralded the dawn of a new order.
 Although sense and simplicity dominated the ad campaigns, the message was clear: design is the new normal.
Apple founder Steve Jobs’ seminal 2001 presentation, launching the iPod, tells us what made the MP3 player amazingly great.
 Sheer passion.
 “We love music…and it’s always good to do something you love…More importantly, music’s part of everyone’s life — everyone.
 Music’s been around forever.
 It will always be around.
 This is not a speculative market.
 And because it’s a part of every one’s life, it’s a very large target market all around the world.
 It knows no boundaries.
 But interestingly enough, in this whole new digital music revolution, there’s no market leader.
” iPod’s purpose was cast in stone by Jobs on that day.
And while he highlighted its long battery life, download speed, functionality, price and interface, he provided the ultimate headline for the iPod: “Thousand songs in your pocket.
” For the buyer, it was clearly a thousand reasons to buy.
 Jobs’ baby was the showpiece of the iTunes ecosystem and the north star of the Apple brand universe.
 Its design, purpose and ambition influenced Apple’s next big product: the iPhone.
 It influenced intuitive design more than any other product in Apple’s stable.
 It amplified wow.
To understand the iPod is to understand the mind of Jobs.
 His biographer Walter Isaacson says Job’s passion for simplicity in design was triggered when he was practising Buddhism.
 “I have always found Buddhism, Zen Buddhism in particular, to be aesthetically sublime.
 The most sublime thing I’ve ever seen are the gardens around Kyoto…The way we’re running the company, the product design, the advertising, it all comes down to this: Let’s make it simple.
 Really simple.
”Has the iPod passed the Zen test? It’s not just a tech achievement or a musical crescendo.
 It’s an aesthetic triumph.
 The iPod is often compared to another great product that disrupted an industry: Sony’s Walkman.
 The man behind the company, Akio Morita, also believed in design, user experience and product innovation.
 But it’s his ability to outguess the market (he did not fully believe in market research) that gave gadgetry a new life and a bold new generation of tech entrepreneurs.
Writing in the Harvard Business Review, Johny K.
 Johansson and Ikujiro Nonaka point at Sony’s intuitive approach.
 “When Sony researched the market for a lightweight portable cassette player, results showed that consumers wouldn’t buy a tape recorder that didn’t record.
 Company chairman Akio Morita decided to introduce the Walkman anyway, and the rest is history.
”Design-obsessed Jobs was no different: He told Businessweek in 1998: “It’s really hard to design products by focus groups.
 A lot of times, people don’t know what they want until you show it to them.
” Jobs, who was clearly influenced by Sony’s ability to innovate, design and market, took Apple into the next generation with a new ethic: minimalism.
 The designer became the non-designer.
 Zen became cool.
The death of the iPod deserves a celebration.
 Even in a disruptive world, the product has lived a fuller life.
 It has had a multiplier effect on innovation.
 It still does.
 The iPod hasn’t passed.
 It has only departed in a Zen-like manner.
vinay@khaleejtimes.
comLong ReadsA crippling pandemic, lack of food security and climate change might push an already embattled middle class into a deeper abyss.
  Can the situation still be salvaged?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt is 20 years since the iconic Bend It Like Beckham was released.
 It reflected change and continuity in an increasingly multicultural Britain, going on to inspire generations of Asian women footballers, and challenge stereotypes, while continuing to move audiences across the globeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsFor long, classics have been reimagined and reinterpreted.
 At times, stories are taken forward or given a twist.
 At times, embedded characters are extrapolated and given a new life.
 Why do writers feel the need to fall back on books that were written in a different era — and that upheld different value systems?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsEbb tide in the pandemic has led to a second surge in the power of social media stars, all of whom benefit from a hyper-connected world.
 Top names in this cyber-verse share their insights on sustained successLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsCovid took the global economy on a roller coaster.
 Even as the world struggled in its aftermath, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent price indices into a tizzy.
 Here’s a primer on what exactly is going on — and what the short-term future of purchasing power looks likeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIndian journalist and author Veena Venugopal’s The Mother-in-Law: The Other Woman in Your  Marriage explores the ‘spectre’ of “the husband’s mother” through 12 compelling case studies and anecdotal storytelling.
 Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt’s perhaps the toughest, most complex ‘social’ relationship one handles: trying to  make peace with your spouse’s mother.
 It has spawned jokes and television soap operas.
.
.
 and real-life horror stories have been swapped down the ages.
 But then, there are those who’ve found love, affection and friendship— not discordLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsC-suites in corporate America are increasingly being occupied by Indians and people of Indian origin.
 Is there a secret formula — with ingredients sourced from the homeland — that equips them to rise to the top of the game in an opportunistic yet opportunities-driven market?Long Reads1 month ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Sat 21 May 2022, 8:58 PMIt was a freezing night in January 1995, when I first encountered a London black cab, long before the era of global positioning system (GPS), or digital maps on mobiles.
 My flight to Heathrow had landed late.
 I had reached the King’s Cross station to catch the last train to Cambridge but missed it by a few minutes.
 Close to midnight, shivering and being new to London, the only option was to make my way to a friend’s place in Hampstead to crash for the night.
 I had large paper maps of Britain and London, tucked closely into a folder.
 I took out the London map from deep inside the luggage and carried it to the only taxi standing outside the station, the driver busy reading the day’s evening tabloid.
In my anxious state, I unfolded the map to show him my destination, but he shot back in a friendly growl: “Just tell me where you want to go, mite”.
 I told him the road, but there were two roads with the same name in London.
 Which one, he asked, and after more mumbling in my confused state, I mentioned Hampstead.
 “Ah, fine, jump right in”, he said, and within 20 minutes I was at my friend’s door, pleasantly surprised at the driver’s way around town without even a cursory look at my map; he didn’t have one, I later learnt why.
Since then, I have used the black cab numerous times, always marvelling at the roomy space inside, its distinctive design and the driver’s knowledge of the capital’s complex roads.
 The cab — it was voted the most iconic piece of London’s transport design in 2015 — is also available across Britain and in countries such as Singapore, China, Romania, South Africa, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Egypt.
 The image of the black cab is as quintessentially British as the Houses of Parliament, the Union flag, red phone boxes or the Big Ben; for most tourists and visitors, it is the first thing they come across upon their arrival.
But it is only in London that the cab drivers need to pass a rigorous test called “Knowledge of London” before they could obtain a licence to drive.
The test is almost like completing an undergraduate degree over three to four years, costing nearly £10,000 (Dh45, 425).
 Driver-students must learn and memorise thousands of roads along 320 routes (known as runs) and thousands more points of interest within around six-mile (9.
6-kilometre) radius of Charing Cross.
 The points include landmarks such as clubs, hospitals, hotels, theatres, embassies, stations, and historic buildings.
 The pass rates after written and practical tests are usually less than 50 per cent, but those that manage to pass know that Londoners appreciate their achievement.
The story goes that the test was introduced in 1865 after the Great Exhibition of 1851 at the Crystal Palace in Hyde Park.
 Hundreds of thousands of people from across Britain and the British Empire visited the event, but many complained to the authorities just how bad their journeys to the venue had been, because cabmen (mainly horse-driven taxis then) did not know the route.
 What was called for was a system that could test the cabmen’s knowledge of the principal streets, squares, and public buildings.
 Transport for London (TfL), the public body responsible for the capital’s transport, said the test is still very much an integral part of becoming a London taxi driver, with nearly 1,000 students currently working towards it.
Helen Chapman, TfL’s director of Licencing, Regulation and Charging, said: “London’s black cabs are woven into the historical fabric of the capital.
 The iconic Knowledge (test) has for more than 150 years produced some of the most skilled taxi drivers in the world.
 You name your destination, and they will instantly know how to get you there.
 Taxis continue to stay modern and relevant with a 100 per cent accessible fleet and more than a third of all vehicles are now zero emission capable and rising.
 It is pleasing to see the number of licenced taxis increasing after a fall in the pandemic and from what we are hearing from the industry, the trade is thriving again.
”TfL’s managers are considering updating the tough test considering new technology, but there are no plans to make it easier.
 There have been calls to scrap it, because some believe it is an entry barrier to new drivers in an age when satellite navigation (satnav) and digital maps on mobiles make navigation easy.
 There are cab drivers who passed the test years ago, but retain close knowledge of London, something that has sparked recent interest among medical researchers.
A team at University College London (UCL) has been studying cab drivers’ brains to explore whether they could uncover clues to help understand Alzheimer’s disease.
 The focus is on a specific part of the brain — the hippocampus — that is involved in memory.
Lead researcher Hugo Spiers of UCL’s Psychology & Language Sciences hoped the results would help develop diagnostics for the early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s: “We know from previous research that the hippocampi of London taxi drivers’ brains are larger than average, and that this is also an area that shrinks in people with Alzheimer’s disease.
 We hope that taxi drivers could help us learn more about how the hippocampus helps us to navigate, which could provide new insights into how this part of the brain is involved in the early stages of Alzheimer’s.
”London’s taxi service evolved from horse-driven carriages (hackney) to motorised vehicles as technology advanced, with the first electric vehicle introduced in 1897.
 The black cab has been manufactured by various companies since the early 20th century, including Renault, Fiat, Austin, Peugeot, Ford, Volkswagen, and Mercedes-Benz.
 Coventry in the Midlands was for long the production base of Austin FX3: the first model of what came to be known as the classic London black cab.
 Carbodies, the company that produced the vehicles, went through some mergers, until it ceased production in 2017.
 The FX3 was the model for generations of cabs, which retained the black colour for a reason: until 1948, taxis were produced in various colours, but the FX3 was produced in black as standard, with buyers having to pay extra for special colours; operators who bought many vehicles for their fleet, the extra cost was a bit much, and preferred to stay with the standard black colour.
 Today the cabs come in various colours, some display advertising.
The black cab was once the only taxi service in London, but now operates in competition with rider-apps such as Uber and Ola, besides needing changes demanded by environment concerns and restrictions imposed by ultra-low pollution zones in the capital.
 Black cabs older than 15 years are not allowed to operate, while others need to transition to electronic and green technology, imposing new costs, but also benefiting from a multi-million-pound package from the mayor of London.
 Drivers and owners of black cabs staged demonstrations after Uber began operations in 2012, but after protracted rows over drivers’ rights and licensing, it was granted a new licence in March for two and a half years.
 The black cabs have also scaled up their operations, now available as ever to customers to hail on streets, in taxi ranks at London airports, train and bus stations, but also through the Gett app, allowing cashless payments.
In April, the London Electric Vehicle Co.
 (LEVC), a wholly owned subsidiary of China’s Geely Automobile Holdings Ltd.
, announced the 5,000th sale of its TX model since the vehicles debuted in 2018.
 The TX comprises a third of London’s licenced black cabs; nearly 50 electric-powered cabs join the fleet each week.
 Its features include an easy-to-use, integral fold-down ramp with extension that is designed with a shallow angle for ease of access and departure; a wheelchair retention system that holds wheelchairs firm and secure during transit; a swivel seat to assist people with reduced mobility; and an adjustable centre rear seat belt harness to suit younger and smaller passengers.
The scale of London’s taxi services has expanded with growing demand.
 Latest TfL figures show that there are 19,342 black cab drivers, while private taxi drivers number 99,044.
 The number of licenced black cabs is 14,802, while private taxis number 81,908, and there are 1,684 private hire operators.
 The number of black cabs has dwindled from the high of 21,876 in 2013-14, but their numbers have increased since the pandemic low of 13,409 in March 2021.
 The pandemic hit the taxi sector particularly hard, with drivers reporting zero business as they drove across deserted streets of central London and otherwise busy areas during lockdowns.
 Many sold their vehicles to take up other jobs, and some returned to their home countries.
In the initial stages of the pandemic, victims included several taxi drivers.
 Many black cabs rented by drivers were turned in and parked in fields — called ‘taxi graveyards’ or ‘fields of broken dreams’ by Steve McNamara, general secretary of the Licenced Taxi Drivers Association.
 He said: “Many of the older vehicles that have been taken off the road, may sadly never come back.
 But as restrictions ease and passenger demand picks up, we should start to see confidence returning to the trade, and people who have temporarily hung up their badges to find other work or because they can’t earn enough to cover the running costs, getting their cabs back on the road”.
Concerned by the various challenges before the London icon, prominent broadcaster Piers Morgan is among those keen to save it, particularly opposing demands to scrap the Knowledge test.
 He said in a recent segment on Sky News: “The humble London black cab: a purring, sleek, glossy emblem of Britain, always there when you need it, safe, secure, simple.
 As iconic to the capital city as red buses and bowler hats; it’s in a different league…The black cabs show up, you tell the cabbie where you want to go, he or she will take you on the fastest route possible.
 They don’t need a fancy map or app to do it.
 The reason they can do so efficiently is because of the Knowledge (test) … It requires personal knowledge of 25,000 roads and 20,000 landmarks.
 They don’t need satellites because they’ve got the Knowledge.
 They are not just national treasures, they are global treasures, without any doubt the finest and best qualified cab drivers on the entire planet.
 But now the busybodies and an influential think-tank say the Knowledge (test) should be scrapped…This is nonsense, shameful nonsense, it must be thwarted.
 Black cab drivers should be deemed official, endangered species and protected accordingly.
 The campaign to save the black cabs starts here.
”Driver-students take the Knowledge test at various stages of life.
 For instance, some like Dahir Salah Abdullahi qualify even before reaching the legal driving age of 21 (he passed it at the age of 20).
Nikki, 34, continued to work for the emergency services while she studied for the test.
She said, “It has taken me four and a half years to get through the test.
 I wanted to do it before starting a family because it means I’ll already have the tools to work as a taxi driver after I have children.
 It’s all about work/life balance.
 I love the test.
 I’m a bit geeky and I didn’t realise how much I love London until I started doing the test and getting to know the city better.
 I have learnt so much.
 I say to all my friends, ‘why don’t you do it?’ But people fear the test; they say, ‘I’ll never be able to remember all that’.
 But, if you take it bit by bit, everything comes together.
 Anyone can do it.
 It’s all about commitment.
”But cut to May 2022 and the picture looks encouraging.
 The TfL has no plans to scrap the test, while business has boomed with the end of pandemic restrictions: tens of thousands of tourists flock to the capital, commuters return to office, and airports, hotels and train stations are beginning to return to pre-pandemic levels.
 “We’re seeing a real renaissance,” said McNamara, while Uber and other operators also report a spike in demand.
 The ‘taxi graveyards’ are vanishing, as drivers return to work and report much larger daily collections — “best-ever”, as a driver puts it (after passing the Knowledge test, a cab driver can make around £40,000 [Dh181,350] a year).
  Some apps have raised prices and cheaper fares are hard to find, so more commuters have turned to the reassuring reliability and standard pricing of black cabs.
 Some operators who rent out taxis say there is now a shortage of taxis and drivers — at least for now, the London icon appears safe.
Long ReadsA crippling pandemic, lack of food security and climate change might push an already embattled middle class into a deeper abyss.
  Can the situation still be salvaged?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt is 20 years since the iconic Bend It Like Beckham was released.
 It reflected change and continuity in an increasingly multicultural Britain, going on to inspire generations of Asian women footballers, and challenge stereotypes, while continuing to move audiences across the globeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsFor long, classics have been reimagined and reinterpreted.
 At times, stories are taken forward or given a twist.
 At times, embedded characters are extrapolated and given a new life.
 Why do writers feel the need to fall back on books that were written in a different era — and that upheld different value systems?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsEbb tide in the pandemic has led to a second surge in the power of social media stars, all of whom benefit from a hyper-connected world.
 Top names in this cyber-verse share their insights on sustained successLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsCovid took the global economy on a roller coaster.
 Even as the world struggled in its aftermath, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent price indices into a tizzy.
 Here’s a primer on what exactly is going on — and what the short-term future of purchasing power looks likeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIndian journalist and author Veena Venugopal’s The Mother-in-Law: The Other Woman in Your  Marriage explores the ‘spectre’ of “the husband’s mother” through 12 compelling case studies and anecdotal storytelling.
 Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt’s perhaps the toughest, most complex ‘social’ relationship one handles: trying to  make peace with your spouse’s mother.
 It has spawned jokes and television soap operas.
.
.
 and real-life horror stories have been swapped down the ages.
 But then, there are those who’ve found love, affection and friendship— not discordLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsC-suites in corporate America are increasingly being occupied by Indians and people of Indian origin.
 Is there a secret formula — with ingredients sourced from the homeland — that equips them to rise to the top of the game in an opportunistic yet opportunities-driven market?Long Reads1 month ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Wed 11 May 2022, 4:49 PMLast updated: Thu 12 May 2022, 11:37 PMGet ready for some serious belly laughs as Dubai Comedy Festival returns tomorrow with another sell-out season of rip-roaring performances.
For the next 11 days - from May 12-22 - top venues across Dubai, including the Coca Cola Arena, will be taken over by the veritable who’s who of comedy.
From homegrown comics to international heavyweights like Josh Widdecombe, Gad, Elmaleh, Jo Koy, Russel Peters and Virda - they will all be performing to packed houses at various locations in the city.
Most of these stars are no strangers to Dubai.
Indo-Canadian comedian Russell Peters was in Dubai for his ‘Act Your Age World Tour’ two months ago, while Vir Das, bringing his latest globetrotting ‘The Wanted Tour’, has entertained audiences on numerous occasions.
This celebration of all things funny comes close on the heels of Expo 2020 Dubai and the Dubai Shopping Festival (DSF), which also saw some of the biggest names in the world of comedy, including British funnyman Jack Dee and Amit Tandon from India, leaving audiences in splits.
The city’s independent comedy scene is also thriving with new talent and new places to enjoy it.
 Comics are increasingly taking to music venues, neighbourhood bars and restaurants to host weekly, often, daily stand-up gigs.
Curiously, just a few years ago, Dubai’s comedy landscape looked more like a desert than the flourishing garden it is today.
 Apart from The Laughter Factory, there wasn’t anything remotely close to a comedy here.
 The Laugher Factory, which recently completed 25 years of keeping fans in the region deliriously happy, came into being in 1997 when the Dubai’s entertainment scene consisted mainly of musical duos sporting mullets and murdering ‘Hotel California’ in scruffy bars, according to the popular comedy club.
Gail Clough was a DJ and Duncan Jones was a drummer (in a scruffy bar).
 They both wanted to watch some live comedy.
 Hence, The Laughter Factory was born.
The Laughter Factory’s original home was at the Hyatt Regency in Deira.
  It was a unique time in comedy history as comedy voices were just starting to explode on the UK circuit.
“The idea that a comic has an authentic voice, rather than just telling jokes is one of the major reasons that The Laughter Factory has thrived for 25 years,” according to the club’s co-founder Gail Clough.
"Being based in Dubai has meant that we are not part of a big comedy scene unlike the UK, Canada and US.
 This has been in some ways beneficial.
 We don’t get caught up with the latest comedy fads.
 We focus totally on our audiences and what makes them laugh.
”Award-winning American artist Mina Liccione, widely regarded as Dubai’s first lady of comedy, said the local comedy scene barely existed when she came to Dubai in 2007 to perform at a summer festival.
“Like myself, comedians were being flown in to perform,” recalls the Broadway veteran who took a “leap of faith” and returned to Dubai to create a platform for local talent.
 However, it took months before she could find a venue where she could host comedy workshops.
“Those days, they were happy with the safe route of karaoke and cover bands; they were scared of stand-up,” said Liccione.
 Here's a clip from one of her previous shows:“I was told it will be too dirty and we’ll get in trouble, so we hit back and said we’ll keep it clean and open for teens and adults from both the expat and local community to which they said, 'Then it won't be funny!'"On April Fool's Day in 2008, Liccione and renowned Emirati comedian Ali Al Sayed founded Dubomedy, a premiere comedy and urban arts school to produce stellar festivals and events throughout the year and use comedy as a tool to bring people of diverse cultural, monetary and religious backgrounds together for one big laugh.
Now married, Ali Al Sayed and Mina Liccione are known as the twin pillars of the local comedy scene.
“The first few years were a challenge but once the foundation was strong we just kept moving forward - creating, coaching, performing, producing, spreading laughter! What an adventure it has been,” said Liccione who will be performing at the fest as part of the Late Shows at Comedy Bizarre on May 13, 14 and 18.
Indian expat Nitesh Chaturvedi, who made a foray into comedy five years ago, said the comedy scene in Dubai has flourished in three main areas – increase in the number of shows, emergence of new faces and audience awareness.
"The love and support we have got from our audiences are immense and absolutely undeniable.
 Without that we would not have been able to sustain so many shows or get the platforms for the existing and upcoming comedians in town,” said Chaturvedi, who runs his own comedy club called NitChatComedy and has been an opening act or produced shows for indian comics like Atul Khatri, Harsh Gujral, Sorabh Pant, Punit Pania and Manish Tyagi among many others.
Arzoo Malhotra, another female comedian, reckons the growth of Dubai’s comedy scene has been extraordinary over the past decade.
“When I moved to Dubai and started doing comedy here five years ago, there were fewer comics, fewer venues, and fewer audience members who knew the scene existed.
 Now, there’s more than one gig every night and the number of active comics is easily 3-4 times larger than it was previously,” says the feisty Indian-American.
 “We’ve gone from having one or two shows a week five years ago to more than one a night.
 That would not happen if there wasn’t buy in from venues, and from audiences as well.
 I would credit a lot of that to the advent of streaming services and the increased exposure to comedians on social media platforms.
Arzoo said she’s happy with the diversity in the comedy scene in terms of content and ethnicity of comedians, but upcoming female comedian Shaima Muaz is far from content.
“I think we still have a long way to go,” said the young Indian expat who performs a weekly gig at Mercure Barsha Heights hotel.
“Venues are excited about comedy as a concept, but they are yet to understand its full potential.
 I think we are still on a learning curve,” said Muaz.
However, she feels there are far more opportunities today for young comedians like herself.
 “I am still learning and growing.
”Chaturvedi said he’s noticed a welcome change in the outlook of hotels towards comedy gigs in recent years.
 “Now they look at comedy shows as the main attraction, rather than a filler.
”He said this is a great time for anyone breaking into the comedy scene in Dubai.
 “There are a lot of great things just waiting to happen.
 So go out there, perform as much as you can, be a part of the community and, most importantly, have fun.
”Long ReadsA crippling pandemic, lack of food security and climate change might push an already embattled middle class into a deeper abyss.
  Can the situation still be salvaged?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt is 20 years since the iconic Bend It Like Beckham was released.
 It reflected change and continuity in an increasingly multicultural Britain, going on to inspire generations of Asian women footballers, and challenge stereotypes, while continuing to move audiences across the globeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsFor long, classics have been reimagined and reinterpreted.
 At times, stories are taken forward or given a twist.
 At times, embedded characters are extrapolated and given a new life.
 Why do writers feel the need to fall back on books that were written in a different era — and that upheld different value systems?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsEbb tide in the pandemic has led to a second surge in the power of social media stars, all of whom benefit from a hyper-connected world.
 Top names in this cyber-verse share their insights on sustained successLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsCovid took the global economy on a roller coaster.
 Even as the world struggled in its aftermath, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent price indices into a tizzy.
 Here’s a primer on what exactly is going on — and what the short-term future of purchasing power looks likeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIndian journalist and author Veena Venugopal’s The Mother-in-Law: The Other Woman in Your  Marriage explores the ‘spectre’ of “the husband’s mother” through 12 compelling case studies and anecdotal storytelling.
 Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt’s perhaps the toughest, most complex ‘social’ relationship one handles: trying to  make peace with your spouse’s mother.
 It has spawned jokes and television soap operas.
.
.
 and real-life horror stories have been swapped down the ages.
 But then, there are those who’ve found love, affection and friendship— not discordLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsC-suites in corporate America are increasingly being occupied by Indians and people of Indian origin.
 Is there a secret formula — with ingredients sourced from the homeland — that equips them to rise to the top of the game in an opportunistic yet opportunities-driven market?Long Reads1 month ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Thu 5 May 2022, 9:34 PMOne day you have all the power and perks of a job considered ‘heaven-born’; the next day, all that is gone.
 Retirement day at the age of 60 comes as a shock to many officers of the elite Indian Administrative Service (IAS), one of the many legacies of the British raj in south Asia.
 It continues to be held in high social esteem, and to make it as an IAS officer — through a rigorous selection process — is to be sorted for life.
 Besides the power that comes with the job, officers are entitled to generous perks, including accommodation (many in plush bungalows built during the colonial era), a retinue of servants, aides, vehicles, and allowances.
 Your wish is everyone’s command.
From those commanding heights, the world suddenly changes on retirement day; all that just drops away.
 Many cannot reconcile to the new situation, become depressed and wither away; but some like AK Mandlekar prepare for it… and make a new start.
A retired IAS officer of the Madhya Pradesh cadre, Mandlekar is among a large number of professionals across the globe who have successfully reinvented themselves after retiring: such as a CEO taking to organic farming, an IT professional taking up falconry, a pilot excelling at baking, a solicitor picking up the paintbrush and finally graduating with a fine arts degree at the age of 92, a soldier finding his station in life as a priest, a banker taking up cooking and winning MasterChef, an architect becoming a trapeze artist at 65, a pharmacist moving to writing novels, or a nursing academic creating her own clothing brand at 71.
The stories are so many that the milestone of retirement no longer seems the beginning of the end, but the start of another, more joyful phase in life.
 There are those who discover they are good at running marathons or a foreign language late in life, and revel in the experience while they can, while others who reach financial security may be driven by the urge to give back to society and volunteer in charity organisations.
Earlier, the opportunities to reinvent were not as easily available as they are now, and many are taking them with both hands, some driven by the words of Confucius that “we have two lives and the second begins when you realise you only have one”.
 It may just be the time to retire outdated ideas about retirement; after all, we are not here for a long time, we are here to try and have a good time.
Says Mandlekar, who held several top bureaucratic positions: “You should be prepared to change, be prepared for the shock that comes with retirement, but many of my colleagues cannot deal with the shock to the ego built over decades of salutes and subordinate officers obeying every command or request.
 I was preparing for life after 60 much before that age.
 In my family, there is no history of anyone in business, but I began only with the passion to travel.
 I started from scratch, learnt the basics of the travel industry, and opened a travel agency in Bhopal.
 It has now become the city’s leading travel agency for international and domestic travel and holiday packages.
 We recently opened a resort nearby, which has also become a success.
 If one is prepared to change, retirement is not a shock, it can be very fulfilling and great fun.
”Working past normal retirement age is one of the fastest growing trends in the United States, Europe and elsewhere.
 Many don’t want to slow down, others can’t afford to; they all want meaningful work that fuels their passion, suits their personality, and fills their pockets.
 Call it ‘daring second acts’, or life’s ‘second innings’, the idea of a new role after retirement is akin to ‘rewiring’ your worldview.
 Coined by American executive search consultants Jeri Sadlar and Rick Miners in their book, Don’t Retire, Rewire!, the term has been widely used to refer to the new fulfilling roles found by professionals who either plan to retire early or at around 60.
Rewiring, according to them, is a process over five steps that covers “seeing the opportunity: retiring is a going from, and rewiring is a going to; identifying your ‘drivers’; linking the drivers to your activities; creating your rewired vision; and developing your action plan”.
Sadlar and Miners write: “In our research, we interviewed many people, both retirees and pre-retirees, who were dissatisfied with the concept of traditional retirement with its focus on leisure.
 We met others who were not only satisfied but had created a new kind of retirement for themselves…Our research showed that most people hate the word retirement, so we decided to rename this highly satisfying alternative to traditional retirement, rewirement, and the alternative to retiring, rewiring.
 To rewire is to reroute personal energy you spent on full-time work into deeply satisfying, personally customised work activities (full-time, part-time, flex-time, phased, sabbatical, seasonal, paid, personal and/or volunteer) that can transform your next act into the most fulfilling time of your life.
 The satisfied people who chose the alternative to traditional retirement are rewirees”.
The new start after 60 need not be only for work, even if it is very satisfying.
 Some rewire themselves by learning a new sport or skill, like 78-year-old astrophysicist Richard Epstein in New Mexico, who learnt to skate in his 70s, even though he has stage four prostate cancer.
 A video of Epstein performing an ice-skating routine that took him months to learn went viral after his daughter Rebekah Bastian posted it on Twitter, watched by nearly 3 million people.
It is never too late to learn something new, he says, but is baffled by the response.
 Bastian says: “I just kept watching it [the video] over and over again.
 I just kept watching it and showing it to friends and my husband.
 I was tearing up in a happy way because it’s so beautiful on so many levels.
 What I shared is the fact that it’s never too late to try new things or to start something new.
 That sense of hope of, we can always learn new things, there’s always new starts.
 We could all use a little bit of optimism right now.
”Clinical psychologist Gary Bradt uses the analogy of rewiring a house to explain the new idea: “Imagine you are remodeling a house.
 The electrical system, the home’s source of power and light, needs to be rewired.
 To do so, you remove outdated systems and replace them with modern means of flowing energy throughout the home.
 As a bonus, the new system could take advantage of all the technical gains in energy distribution that have been made since the home was originally built.
 Rewiring your life when your working career ends is similar.
 It means taking your passions and energy and finding new mediums and pathways to bring power and light to your life.
 Your years of experience and maturity will inform new ways to infuse life with meaning and purpose.
”Medical research says there are many mental and physical benefits of rewiring and being active beyond normal retirement age, particularly in its ability to ward off Alzheimer’s and other ailments.
 A key benefit is what experts call cognitive fitness: a state of optimised ability to reason, remember, learn, plan, and adapt that is enhanced by certain attitudes, lifestyle choices and exercises.
According to Roderick Gilkey and Clint Kilts, brain-imaging studies indicate that acquired expertise in areas as diverse as playing a cello, juggling, speaking a foreign language and driving a taxicab expands and makes more communicative the neural systems in parts of the brain responsible for motor control and spatial navigation.
 They write in Harvard Business Review: “These advances in neuroscience suggest that there is no reason why your brain at 60 can’t be as it was at 25…Cognitive fitness will allow you to be more open to new ideas and alternative perspectives…Perhaps more important, you can delay senescence for years and even enjoy a second career.
” Senescence is described as the process by which cells irreversibly stop dividing and enter a state of permanent growth arrest without undergoing cell death.
Taking up the challenge of learning something new is key.
 Many don’t wait to reach the normal retirement age of 60 to make the change and switch horses; they are already better placed to face the advancing years and all that comes with the inevitable phase in life.
 Sushil Sharma was a general manager of a major French international banking group, when an invitation to speak at an event of chartered accountants encouraged him to change course.
 Peppered with humour and anecdotes, the session went rather well and set him on the path of public speaking on issues related to banking.
He later set up a company to offer education, development and capacity building initiatives in banking, finance, and capital markets.
 To give back to the community, the company with  several centres across India now also provides free training to rural youth on banking backend operations before placing them with international banks.
Sharma says: “The excitement and intellectual stimulation of studying and presenting  cutting edge topics in banking and finance is vastly more rewarding than a regular corporate life.
 The philosophical goal of my firm is to document all the practices in banking, finance, and capital markets for posterity in content of different kinds.
 Today, top names in banking and finance come to us for their learning,  development and capacity-building initiatives.
 Changing tracks in careers is tough.
 Working  life is linear.
 After several years in one field,  a career change requires learning a new paradigm and doing something differently to make up for your late start in a different field.
 It  has been a great run so far.
 Meeting the challenge of change is the greatest way to stay young and sharp.
”Another recent, related idea is becoming a  ‘time millionaire’, coined by author-editor Nilanjana S Roy in a 2016 column in Financial Times.
 Time millionaires — they need not be around 60, in fact many who have taken to the idea are much younger — measure their worth not in terms of financial capital, but according to the seconds, minutes and hours they claw back from employment for leisure and recreation.
 Roy says: “Wealth can bring comfort and security in its wake.
 But I wish we were taught to place as high a value on our time as we do on our bank accounts — because how you spend your hours and your days is how you spend your life.
”The idea appeals to many, but some realise that their identity is closely tied to their work identity, which feeds self-esteem and makes them feel relevant in some ways.
 Giving up that world completely, which also means no money reaching the bank account every month, is not easy, particularly in societies in which being in work is a matter of group esteem, where working overtime is considered a good thing,  or where having much leisure time is not exactly celebrated.
Becoming a time millionaire is one of the ideas mulled seriously during the Covid-19 pandemic, when ruminating over life and its purpose became something of a global activity.
 For many, the period completely changed their relationship with money.
 There are several reports of the ‘Great Resignation’: people not returning to the jobs they held before the pandemic.
 Besides, official figures in the United States and Britain suggest that the pandemic may have added to the numbers of new ‘time millionaires’, with more unemployed people not actively looking for a job or many requesting to continue working from home, so that they can use the time previously spent on community on leisure, family, or activities of interest.
So, if you were in a position to be a time  millionaire or rewire yourself, how would that play out?Long ReadsA crippling pandemic, lack of food security and climate change might push an already embattled middle class into a deeper abyss.
  Can the situation still be salvaged?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt is 20 years since the iconic Bend It Like Beckham was released.
 It reflected change and continuity in an increasingly multicultural Britain, going on to inspire generations of Asian women footballers, and challenge stereotypes, while continuing to move audiences across the globeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsFor long, classics have been reimagined and reinterpreted.
 At times, stories are taken forward or given a twist.
 At times, embedded characters are extrapolated and given a new life.
 Why do writers feel the need to fall back on books that were written in a different era — and that upheld different value systems?Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsEbb tide in the pandemic has led to a second surge in the power of social media stars, all of whom benefit from a hyper-connected world.
 Top names in this cyber-verse share their insights on sustained successLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsCovid took the global economy on a roller coaster.
 Even as the world struggled in its aftermath, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has sent price indices into a tizzy.
 Here’s a primer on what exactly is going on — and what the short-term future of purchasing power looks likeLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIndian journalist and author Veena Venugopal’s The Mother-in-Law: The Other Woman in Your  Marriage explores the ‘spectre’ of “the husband’s mother” through 12 compelling case studies and anecdotal storytelling.
 Long Reads1 month agoLong ReadsIt’s perhaps the toughest, most complex ‘social’ relationship one handles: trying to  make peace with your spouse’s mother.
 It has spawned jokes and television soap operas.
.
.
 and real-life horror stories have been swapped down the ages.
 But then, there are those who’ve found love, affection and friendship— not discordLong Reads1 month agoLong ReadsC-suites in corporate America are increasingly being occupied by Indians and people of Indian origin.
 Is there a secret formula — with ingredients sourced from the homeland — that equips them to rise to the top of the game in an opportunistic yet opportunities-driven market?Long Reads1 month ago.
