
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Mon 23 May 2022, 10:59 PMLast updated: Mon 23 May 2022, 11:00 PMAt the start of the year, I expressed concerns about the outlook for financial markets, owing to all the considerable uncertainties that I could identify, and to the many other potential risks that were not yet clear.
 This was after Russia had begun to mass troops on Ukraine’s border, but before it had invaded.
 Now Russia has been almost totally removed from the international economy and markets, and energy and food prices have spiked.
At the same time, Western central banks have undertaken a major shift in their policy stances, having finally dropped the idea that today’s inflation is a merely temporary phenomenon that would subside on its own.
 They are now deliberately tightening global financial conditions (by both unwinding their balance sheets and increasing interest rates), and this is adding to cyclical pressures on household incomes, and thus on the wider economy.
As if that weren’t enough, China’s economy – the world’s second-largest and ten times bigger than Russia’s – has been held back by the government’s zero-COVID strategy.
 And this comes on top of existing efforts to dampen excessive housing prices, reduce credit growth, and rein in business sectors (starting with major tech conglomerates) that are seen to be interfering with the government’s new “fairer growth” objective.
Given these developments, it looks as though a global recession could be upon us.
 If so, it will have been remarkably sudden, coming so soon after the lockdown-induced mini-recessions of 2020 and 2021.
 How bad will this downturn be, and are there policies that could avert it, or at least minimize its scale and severity?In China, policymakers are worried that a more relaxed stance on COVID-19 could drive up infections and overwhelm the country’s urban hospitals.
 Since we have already seen the same sequence play out elsewhere – particularly in the United Kingdom, which was forced to impose sudden, harsh lockdowns in 2020-21 – China can hardly be criticized for being generally cautious.
 But the evidence suggests that Omicron (the dominant global variant) is so transmissible that even lockdowns are unlikely to stop it completely.
 Moreover, it appears to be less virulent than previous variants, which makes a draconian response harder to justify.
China’s blunt zero-Covid strategy comes on top of an already weak economy, so it has added to underlying cyclical weaknesses.
 The most recent trade data (for April) show that Chinese imports remain exceptionally low – just one of many signals pointing to a weak economy.
The problems facing China have implications extending beyond the economy and markets.
 China’s single-party leadership has long legitimized its rule by delivering ever-rising living standards for the country’s 1.
4 billion people.
 But this implicit pact cannot easily be sustained under conditions of persistent economic weakness.
Having watched China for more than 30 years, I would say that one of its government’s biggest strengths has been its exceptionally good risk management.
 In the past, it has dealt with major potential problems decisively and in a timely manner.
 Not so today.
 If it doesn’t change course soon, there will be much more pain in store for its economy and for the rest of the world.
 On the other hand, if the government can abandon “zero-COVID” and some of its other more draconian economic crackdowns, growth could well rebound quickly.
As for the rest of the world, two major factors beyond China will determine how things play out: major central-bank policies and Vladimir Putin.
 The Russian president’s intentions remain as difficult to predict today as they were three months ago.
 Finland and Sweden’s sudden support for joining NATO shows that Putin has miscalculated abysmally.
In any case, the blow to real incomes – and thus to consumer spending – from higher energy and food prices has been so large that central banks ought to think twice about their newfound hawkishness.
 After all, if the way to bring inflation under control is to weaken the economy, surging energy and food prices, together with tightening financial conditions, might have already done central banks’ job for them.
To be sure, if longer-term inflation expectations are rising and no longer anchored, that would change the calculation considerably.
 In the United States, where the Federal Reserve’s policy changes have far-reaching global effects, the latest Consumer Price Index shows core inflation still above 6 per cent, with service-sector price inflation accelerating.
 As such, the Fed might see little reason to abandon the tightening path that it has so loudly hinted at.
But the Fed would do well to consider the reduction in real (inflation-adjusted) disposable incomes in the US.
 Though the decline hasn’t been as severe as in Europe, it has been significant, and the strong tightening of financial conditions may have already sown the seeds for an economic downturn soon.
So, are we heading into a global recession? Much will depend on the Fed, the Chinese leadership, and the Kremlin.
Jim O’Neill, a former chairman of Goldman Sachs Asset Management and a former UK treasury minister, is a member of the Pan-European Commission on Health and Sustainable Development.
 — Project SyndicateOpinionThis new era has been launched based on solid foundations developed through years of hard work, experience and dedication to reach a day where the UAE celebrates exporting the last oil barrelOpinion1 week agoOpinionWhile support for the Conservatives in the Indian community increased, it saw a decline in support from the Pakistani and Bangladeshi communities in the recent electionsOpinion1 week agoOpinionTesla chief's comment on Japan's population is an irresponsible rush of going down the rabbit holeOpinion1 week agoOpinionAlthough India’s poorest half holds a small percentage of the country’s total wealth, its members are still better off than their peers in most countriesOpinion1 week agoOpinionFor the longest time in America (and indeed in much of the world) women were underrepresented in most of the professional workforceOpinion1 week agoOpinionNo matter what the new government does it will open itself to vicious attacksOpinion2 weeks agoOpinionThe Gulf nations now seek to operate on a global scale as a united bloc, and the future looks promising for the regionOpinion2 weeks agoOpinionBefore speaking, just THINK, ask yourself five questions: Is what I’m saying true, is it helpful, is it Inspiring, is it necessary, and is it kind?Opinion2 weeks ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:37 PMTrust has been in the air throughout conversations at Davos.
 From its relationship to purpose and environmental, social, and governance (ESG) outcomes to the deepening connections amongst changemakers on the sidelines.
  It is clear that this binding life force, both simultaneously light and heavy, will sustain us through unbearable crises, enhance resilience, and enable us to continue to build a sustainable future for all beings.
Specifically, Edelman Trust Barometer 2022 was released and shows that UAE residents’ trust in government, health authorities, media, and UAE businesses is improving.
Positive economic outcomes have had a huge role to play.
 However, at the same rate, in the past five months, trust has decreased among the general population in China and the Middle East countries.
Meanwhile, trust has increased in Western democracies, partly due to their collective response in Ukraine.
 This underscores the need for deliberate efforts to understand stakeholder or citizen sentiment in a real-time way.
 It also makes the case to channel national resources towards key collective cross-section on some key societal challenges.
Consistency, competence, integrity, and humility have all been linked to trust.
 The UAE is a vibrant regional hub.
 Despite this, the ease of doing business has room to improve.
 The more we can use platforms and processes to drive trust amongst the business community, the more we stand to gain in strengthening ecosystems - including in the UAE.
 Shared values, social impact and sustainability are ways to open doors to aligned visions that build connection and trust - starting with urgent challenges.
Another key lever will be enlightened leadership.
 Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak has confirmed that the theme of Emirati Women’s Day 2022, held in August, will be “Inspiring Reality.
.
 Sustainable Future” - inspiring and catalyzing various initiatives.
 She’s just one example of a shining light.
Specifically, food security in the UAE is an urgent topic where there’s a call for businesses to do and invest more, and UAE Food Tech Valley can be that conduit.
  Aid is not a sustainable response to hunger; localisation is necessary.
  And resilient agri-food chains are a part of the ecosystem that should be further developed.
 Given the global scope of the challenge, the area also represents a profitable long-term opportunity, attracting greater global capital to the UAE  - if the model is sound and scales well.
Global ecosystem-level social innovation starts with ways to pilot / test, share data, and learn to attract greater resources.
 It’ll be interesting to see over the next couple of days what concrete actions emerge to build trust by committing resources to the foundational global technological capacity that’s absolutely necessary.
 Accelerating big tech’s response across global markets is the key to a sustainable and equitable future.
At the same rate, to leapfrog on trust, the UAE must be able to position itself as front and centre  - or, as a hub for social innovation with global, disruptive impact.
Samira Khan has worked in tech for impact spaces at both Salesforce and MicrosoftOpinionThis new era has been launched based on solid foundations developed through years of hard work, experience and dedication to reach a day where the UAE celebrates exporting the last oil barrelOpinion1 week agoOpinionWhile support for the Conservatives in the Indian community increased, it saw a decline in support from the Pakistani and Bangladeshi communities in the recent electionsOpinion1 week agoOpinionTesla chief's comment on Japan's population is an irresponsible rush of going down the rabbit holeOpinion1 week agoOpinionAlthough India’s poorest half holds a small percentage of the country’s total wealth, its members are still better off than their peers in most countriesOpinion1 week agoOpinionFor the longest time in America (and indeed in much of the world) women were underrepresented in most of the professional workforceOpinion1 week agoOpinionNo matter what the new government does it will open itself to vicious attacksOpinion2 weeks agoOpinionThe Gulf nations now seek to operate on a global scale as a united bloc, and the future looks promising for the regionOpinion2 weeks agoOpinionBefore speaking, just THINK, ask yourself five questions: Is what I’m saying true, is it helpful, is it Inspiring, is it necessary, and is it kind?Opinion2 weeks ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:28 PMGlobal food prices are soaring.
 The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization’s Food Price Index – which covers a basket of basic food commodities (cereals, meat, dairy, vegetable oils, and sugar) – reached an all-time high of 159.
7 in March, up from 141.
1 the previous month.
 While it declined slightly in April, to 158.
5, ongoing developments – not least Russia’s war in Ukraine – are set to keep driving prices to new highs, with devastating implications for global hunger.
The Covid-19 pandemic exposed the fragility and dysfunctionality of the world’s food systems, with movement restrictions and supply-chain disruptions driving up prices, damaging rural livelihoods, and exacerbating food insecurity, especially for the poor.
 Now, the war in Ukraine is compounding these challenges, because both sides are major exporters of food, fuel, and fertilizer.
Moreover, climate change poses an even larger threat to global food security.
 Already, extreme weather like heatwaves, floods, and prolonged droughts has triggered shocks to agricultural production and food availability.
 As temperatures rise, these shocks will become increasingly frequent and powerful.
 If global warming crosses the 1.
5° Celsius threshold (relative to Earth’s pre-industrial temperature), they are likely to become catastrophic.
As the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report shows, avoiding the threshold will require immediate and drastic action.
 But mitigation is only part of the challenge.
 Large-scale investments in adaptation will also be needed to protect vulnerable communities from the warming that is already locked in.
Even under the most optimistic mitigation scenario, global warming is expected to hit the 1.
5°C threshold in a decade, before receding.
 This will result in shifts in climatic zones, rising sea levels, and disruptions to the water cycle that increase the frequency and intensity of extreme weather.
 Beyond raising economic and health risks, the resulting disruptions to food and water supplies are likely to drive social and political upheaval, fueling a vicious cycle of poverty, hunger, instability, and even conflict, accompanied by sharp rise in migration.
A more resilient, sustainable, and equitable food system must be a pillar of any climate mitigation or adaptation agenda.
 But the barriers to building such a system should not be underestimated, especially for countries and regions where soil is poor, land has little agricultural value, other natural resources, such as water, are limited or degraded, and socioeconomic conditions are difficult.
Given the low productivity of their agricultural land, such marginal environments are unable to support the sustainable production of sufficient food to meet local people’s nutritional needs.
 In fact, while marginal environments are home to less than 25% of the global population – an estimated 1.
7 billion people – they account for 70% of the world’s poor and most of its malnourished.
Poverty and hunger can lead farmers to overuse fragile environmental resources in order to ensure their short-term survival, even at the cost of long-term depletion of their lands and impoverishment of their households and communities.
 Those living in remote areas with minimal infrastructure, few alternative economic opportunities, and limited market access are particularly likely to make such choices.
Given this, countries with significant marginal lands rely on food imports – in some cases for more than 80% of their needs.
 But pandemic- and war-related disruptions, together with the price increases they have fueled, have shown just how vulnerable such countries are.
 According to the FAO’s State of Food and Agriculture 2021 report, an additional 161 million people were affected by hunger in 2020, compared with 2019.
 And the World Food Program is now cautioning that the combination of conflict, Covid, the climate crisis, and rising costs has pushed 44 million people in 38 countries to the edge of famine.
With countries struggling to secure enough food to meet their populations’ nutritional needs, many are now re-evaluating their food dependencies and seeking to expand local production.
 But unless sustainability is taken into account, efforts to increase short-term resilience by shortening supply chains could undermine medium- and long-term resilience by further depleting agricultural resources like soil and water.
Sustainability isn’t cheap.
 Efficient production amid biophysical and climate constraints requires investment in costly technologies.
 But poor governance tructures, limited growth prospects, and high debts pose major challenges for many countries.
 The pandemic has placed a massive strain on public budgets, and debt crises loom for many governments, as loans are taken out to address the pandemic come due.
Poor and vulnerable countries cannot be expected to address the myriad interconnected challenges they face, from pollution and biodiversity loss to hunger and poverty, without help.
 To bolster long-term food and nutritional security, we must look beyond country-level solutions to regional and international ones that consider the needs of communities living in marginal environments.
 Otherwise, there will be no escaping destabilising cycles of hunger, migration, and violence.
  — Project SyndicateSeta Tutundjian, Founder and CEO of Thriving Solutions, is a member of the High-Level Expert Group to assess the need for the International Platform for Food Systems Science and a co-leader of the global Food is Never Waste initiative.
OpinionThis new era has been launched based on solid foundations developed through years of hard work, experience and dedication to reach a day where the UAE celebrates exporting the last oil barrelOpinion1 week agoOpinionWhile support for the Conservatives in the Indian community increased, it saw a decline in support from the Pakistani and Bangladeshi communities in the recent electionsOpinion1 week agoOpinionTesla chief's comment on Japan's population is an irresponsible rush of going down the rabbit holeOpinion1 week agoOpinionAlthough India’s poorest half holds a small percentage of the country’s total wealth, its members are still better off than their peers in most countriesOpinion1 week agoOpinionFor the longest time in America (and indeed in much of the world) women were underrepresented in most of the professional workforceOpinion1 week agoOpinionNo matter what the new government does it will open itself to vicious attacksOpinion2 weeks agoOpinionThe Gulf nations now seek to operate on a global scale as a united bloc, and the future looks promising for the regionOpinion2 weeks agoOpinionBefore speaking, just THINK, ask yourself five questions: Is what I’m saying true, is it helpful, is it Inspiring, is it necessary, and is it kind?Opinion2 weeks ago.
