
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 3:28 PMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 3:40 PMActor Alia Bhatt on Tuesday announced that Darlings, her debut film as a producer, will premiere on streaming platform Netflix.
The 29-year-old actor is starring in and producing the film through her banner Eternal Sunshine Productions, in collaboration with Shah Rukh Khan’s Red Chillies Entertainment.
Bhatt shared the news of the film’s Netflix debut on her social media handles.
 “Hey, darlings.
 I want to tell you something big but the network is not good here.
 Hello.
.
hello? #Darlings #DarlingsOnNetflix” the actor wrote alongside a promotional video, also featuring co-stars Shefali Shah, Vijay Verma and Roshan Mathew.
A post shared by Alia Bhatt 🤍☀️ (@aliaabhatt)Darlings, a dark comedy, marks the directorial debut of writer Jasmeet K Reen.
 The Mumbai-set film is mounted against the backdrop of a conservative lower middle-class neighbourhood.
 It explores the lives of a mother-daughter duo trying to find their place in the city, seeking courage and love in exceptional circumstances while fighting against all odds.
Bhatt and Netflix are yet to announce the official release date of the film.
In a statement, the actor said Darlings holds a “special place in my heart”.
“It’s my first film as a producer and that too with Red Chillies.
 We are very proud and happy how the film has shaped up and we hope it will entertain and engage audiences world over,” she said.
Darlings features music by Vishal Bhardwaj and lyrics from veteran writer Gulzar.
OTTThey recreate the rise and fall of the co-founder of shared workspace startup WeWork in new seriesOTT2 months agoOTTThe acting powerhouses talk up their new film while also commenting on the evolution of roles for women, thanks in part to OTT.
 OTT2 months agoOTTThe Bollywood actor hopes cinema will be back in full swing while praising the OTT format for telling good stories.
 OTT2 months agoOTTThe actress also spoke about the magic of cinema, her love for indie films and more in a chat with City Times.
 OTT2 months agoOTTNew platform led by Karnesh Ssharma, Bollywood actress/producer Anushka Sharma's brotherOTT2 months agoOTTThe actor reveals why he loves experimenting on screen and gives a shout out to fans for appreciating his efforts.
 OTT2 months agoOTTThe actor talks to us about the brutal love story of a runaway couple being hunted by a ruthless mercenary, streaming now on ZEE5 Global.
 OTT2 months agoOTTThe film is inspired by Western Noir genres and also stars Harsh Varrdhan Kapoor.
OTT3 months ago.
