
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Mon 9 May 2022, 11:22 AMIf you are in the market looking to buy a new smartwatch this year, then there are some key features to keep in mind.
 The design and material used are important factors as they epitomise style and decide wearing comfort.
 Battery life and charging speeds are crucial because what use is a smartwatch without power? Moreover, the health and fitness tracking features are imperative and important as they give you timely updates about your health and physical condition.
Huawei recently unveiled the HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro that comes in two variants: Titanium Edition and Ceramic Edition delivering a lavish, upgraded, and more convenient user experience.
 On top of its attractive and fashionable looks, the smartwatch also comes with an up to 14-day battery life with wireless fast charging, professional health management, new workout modes, in addition to other convenient life assistant features.
One of its biggest perks is that it is compatible with Huawei devices as well as other devices running on Android and iOS systems, and that is definitely an advantage if you are using devices from other brands.
 The HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro is the elegance on your wrist, an everlasting masterpiece, in many ways! It will be up for grabs in (Name of Country) on (Date) starting at a price of (Price).
 Here is why it is our favourite watch for this season!The HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro comes in 46mm and 43mm sizes.
 The HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro Titanium Edition is equipped with a titanium metal case, sapphire glass lens and ceramic back case.
 Its premium ID design is clean and elegant appearance is prevalent across a variety of styles each embodying a blend of technology and art, while the Ceramic Edition is soft and elegant.
 Every detail has been processed with ingenious craftsmanship and fine polishing techniques, making it full of quality and lightweight, yet dazzling.
 Thus, it brings a soft natural gloss with excellent quality, highlighting its feminine and elegant features.
 Its high-end design is complemented by a Moon Phase function that brings to users unique watch faces from which they can observe the different phases of the moon as it changes.
 While this complication is often found in high-end traditional watches, it definitely adds to the elegance of the HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro and gives it a special luxury touch.
The HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro Titanium Edition is equipped with a 1.
43-inch AMOLIED high-definition colour display, while the Ceramic version comes with a 1.
32-inch AMOLED HD coloured display.
 Both displays adopt 466 x 466 high-definition resolution, for a more delicate display quality performance.
HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro Ceramic Edition features a new and exclusively designed flower dial with dynamic effects; the five different dial effects show various shapes of flower as time goes.
 The dynamic flower dial that changes with time embodies design ingenuity with artistry.
 The vivid blossoming of flowers not only symbolises the passage of time in a fascinating way but also adds a fun twist in its presentation.
The HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro inherits the ultra-long battery life of the HUAWEI WATCH GT Series.
 The enhanced battery architecture provides the HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro Titanium Edition with 14 days battery life and 7 days battery life in intense usage scenarios while the HUAWE WATCH GT 3 Pro Ceramic Edition comes with 7 days battery life in typical scenarios and 4 days battery life in heavy usage scenarios.
 The smartwatch supports the fast and convenient wireless fast charging.
 It only takes 10 minutes to charge for a full-day use (in typical scenarios).
In terms of health, HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro series supports Electrocardiogram (ECG) data collection, which can accurately provide single-lead ECG measurements, real-time analysis, sinus rhythm and atrial fibrillation detection, and premature atrial and ventricular beat reminders for users and supports arterial stiffness detection, allowing users to actively prevent the risk of vascular diseases.
 It also offers all-round health management in heart rate monitoring, blood oxygen, sleep, respiratory health, and pressure, which helps keep tracking the changes in your body.
 With the HUAWEI Health App on the phone, you can synchronise real-time exercise and health monitoring data to pay close attention to the health of you and your family.
HUAWEI TruSeenTM 5.
0+ does not only further improve the accuracy of heart rate monitoring, but also improves the accuracy of SpO2 monitoring: It increases the data processing capacity by four times, reducing the signal loss rate, and improves the accuracy of heart rate monitoring.
 Especially in workout scenarios, the accuracy of dynamic heart rate monitoring is greatly improved.
 At the same time, the output rate and speed of SpO2 monitoring have also been improved.
The HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro Series offers an upgraded workout monitoring feature, providing over 100 workout modes, aside from the new free-diving mode, it also includes other professional workout modes like golf driving range mode, running, walking, mountain climbing, hiking, cross-country running, cycling, open water swimming, triathlon, skiing, snowboarding, cross-country skiing, free training, elliptical machine and rowing machine.
The new HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro Series is equipped with a professional Free Diving Mode: The watch achieves the EN 13319 standard, a ground-breaking diving-level waterproof performance, which can support free dive at up to 30 metres deep, accompanying its users to explore underwater wonders.
The HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro supports Bluetooth calls.
 In addition, you can receive read and reply to SMS messages right form your wrist thanks to the convenient message notifications.
 With Petal Maps on-board, users can also navigate their way around right form their wrist.
 The HUAWEI WATCH GT 3 Pro also supports watch faces to bring consumers a more personalized experience.
 There are also over ten thousand of watch faces themes for download.
For more information visit here : https://bit.
ly/3kTw5cB.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Partner Content By KT Engage

Published: Fri 20 May 2022, 9:18 AMFinding a genuine - and we mean it by the word genuine - all-rounder in the world of mobiles can be very difficult task.
 So when we unboxed the HONOR X9 and reviewed all the way to the end, we went through the checklist twice.
So many times in the past, models have come trying to upsell as flagship phones when they are not.
 And there are phones which will compromise on many things to make it fit in a certain price bracket.
 The HONOR X9 is affordable and yet comes out unflinchingly well - not just on its build quality but for the features inside as well.
We got to review the HONOR X9 with 8GB+2GB RAM and 128GB memory.
 There is also a 256GB version available.
 Here are X things that we liked.
For all its efficiency in handling whatever was thrown at it, some highlighted as below, the most impressive part of the HONOR X9 was that it hardly broke into a sweat.
 An industry-leading 66W SuperCharge battery, with a capacity of 4,800mAh, drives the long-lasting power horse to navigate all the challenges Without gaming, the battery lasted nearly 3 days.
 Even with it, it took two days before it was time to take out the 66W charging brick from the box.
 And it takes only 43 minutes for a full charge; that is 81% in half an hour.
 In the 20 minutes that I had a shave and shower, the phone went up from 4 to 70%.
At 6.
81 inches long, this one is a tall beauty.
 The HONOR X9 comes in two colours - the premium looking Titanium Silver, and the regal Midnight Black, which we got.
 At the back is a circular camera tray with three lenses and the flash placed in symmetrical fashion.
 The singular sim tray, type-C charging port and the microphone are placed at the bottom.
 On the side is the volume rocker and a fingerprint sensor for your right thumb.
The front real estate is where it matters most.
 The IPS LCD display has a resolution of 2388x1080 with 120Hz refresh rate and 385 ppi density.
 Watching your screen for long for your share of entertainment and gaming will not become a chore with the HONOR X9.
 The bezel is barely over 1mm thickness to add to the display values.
Let's cut to the chase.
 Powering your multimedia needs as well as the official ones is the Snapdragon 695 octacore 6nm 5G chipset and the Adreno 619 CPU.
 It can handle up to 35 apps simultaneously.
 So what happens when it comes to gaming.
 Well, the HONOR X9 can chip in with an extra 2GB RAM Turbo boost, so you can increase it to 10GB RAM on demand.
 Pioneers of the Turbo GPU technology, the HONOR offering in the X9 ensures smooth running of intense action whether it is Fortnight, PUBG or Minecraft.
 Even while gaming and handling up to 20 apps in a heavy demanding situation, the phone held its ground.
Beyond its looks and the hardware, the whole setup comes together in a body as rigid as the Himalayas.
 The mountains may be too high, but drop the phone from a tall table height or sending it sliding away from waist level to the ground - the HONOR X9 will not break; or even get into much scratch either.
 It can withstand your body weight up to 70kg and temperatures ranging from -20°C to 55°C.
There's the 16MP selfie camera that sits near the top of the display, right in the center.
 Turning around the back, in the halo-shaped tray, a 48MP shooter with f/1.
8 aperture takes the pride of placing.
 There are two 2.
4MP macro and bokeh cameras that enable super macro and portrait shots respectively.
 For the Vloggers, there is a dual front and back live view feature.
 The setup delivers well even in low light.
 HONOR is taking their cameras seriously.
 Even then, photos taken in night mode tend to be overexposed.
 We tried it at a restaurant and notice the difference below the tables.
 With the night mode on (right), the exposure was just about right without going overboard on the light meter.
 Even though a wide-angle camera is missing, life is good.
The HONOR X9 comes with Android 11 out-of-the-box and its inbuilt Magic UI 4.
2 Launcher.
 And the best thing about it is that it comes with Google Mobile Services.
 Google products are back on this device.
 Playing PUBG with a Turbo GPU was a breeze with the refresh rate and effectively 10GB of RAM.
 As for the Antutu 3D benchmark, the HONOR X9 scored 391339 points on the review device.
 It missed the 400k mark just a little bit but the overall gaming performance is really good.
With all the results and considering how much of features are similar to a flagship phone, you would think that the HONOR X9 does not come cheap.
 But you would be pleasantly surprised when you find out the price In the UAE, our review version comes for AED 1,099 while the 256GB version starts AED 1,199.
Given its price and capabilities and the 6nm 5G chipset powering the HONOR X9, it is a rare match of meeting beauty and brawn.
 The HONOR X9 is a genuine all-rounder and a treat to have.
Please visit : https://bit.
ly/3LpJi7T.
