
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Mon 23 May 2022, 2:38 PMLast updated: Mon 23 May 2022, 6:47 PMDubai Festivals and Retail Establishment (DFRE), has revealed the dates of the much-anticipated upcoming three-day super sale, which will run between May 27 and May 29 across Dubai’s key shopping malls and retail outlets.
The bi-annual event will offer residents and visitors savings of up to 90 per cent on a selection of lifestyle, beauty, fashion, electronics, and other items across the city.
From amazing offers to cash back promotions and valuable rewards, shoppers will get a chance to avail amazing deals on their favourite brands including Banana Republic, Calvin Klein, Harman House, and Karl Lagerfeld to name a few.
The sale offers shoppers deals and promotions on a huge number of local and international brands.
The city-wide event will take place across all of Dubai’s key shopping malls including Mall of the Emirates, City Centre Deira, City Centre Mirdif, City Centre Al Shindagha, City Centre Me’aisem, My City Centre AL Barsha, The Dubai Mall, Dubai Marina Mall, Dubai Hills Mall, Mercato, Town Center Jumeirah, Ibn Battuta, Dragon Mart 1 & 2, Circle Mall, The Pointe, Nakheel Mall, and Gate Avenue at DIFC.
Stores will be offering customers up to 75 per cent off on skincare, make-up, fragrances.
ALSO READ:If you’re looking to revamp your home this year, there are plenty of deals that you can take advantage of to transform your living space.
 Some of Dubai’s most loved home furnishing stores will be offering up to 90 per cent off across their stores including Danube Home, Dwell, Homes R Us, Simply Kitchen, and Think Kitchen.
 While Pottery Barn and West Elm are both offering 25-40 per cent off .
UAE AttractionsMattar bin Lahej reveals the challenges that went into designing the façade of the most beautiful building on earthUAE Attractions1 month agoUAE AttractionsThe Kalba Heritage Museum, on a total area of 32,000 square metres, will house exhibition halls designated for various activitiesUAE Attractions1 month agoUAE AttractionsThe hydro performers twirl and jump through the air and their routine consists of daring stunts and flips.
UAE Attractions1 month agoUAE AttractionsThe Wadi Wurayah is the only permanent waterfall in the UAE and has a large population of endangered plants and animalsUAE Attractions2 months agoUAE AttractionsThe island, which recorded impressive growth during the pandemic, provides visitors with a 'highly connected and vibrant ecosystem' to help them thriveUAE Attractions2 months agoUAE AttractionsThe tower design was inspired by modern Islamic architecture, with a spacious dome covered with gilded mosaicUAE Attractions2 months agoUAE AttractionsAl Hosn heritage neighborhood project includes a market, which was reconstructed to include more shops for young entrepreneursUAE Attractions2 months agoUAE AttractionsRhinos, Arabian sand cats, blue wildebeests and several reptile species were exchanged UAE Attractions2 months ago.
