
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Mon 23 May 2022, 3:22 PMLong weekend alert, the likely dates of Islamic festival Eid Al Adha have been revealed.
The start of an Islamic month in the Hijri lunar calendar is determined by the sighting of the crescent moon.
 However, the likely dates can be predicted based on astronomical calculations.
Eid Al Adha or the festival of sacrifice is marked on 10th of Islamic month Dhul Hijjah.
According to Ibrahim Al Jarwan, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Emirates Astronomy Society, Saturday, July 9, is likely to be the first day of Eid Al Adha.
According to the UAE’s official holidays calendar, Arafah Day — which is marked on the day before Eid Al Adha — is also a day off.
 Residents will, therefore, enjoy a four-day holiday from Dhul Hijjah 9 to 12.
As per astronomical calculations, this would likely be from Friday, July 8, to Monday, July 11.
 That means it’s going to be a four-day weekend for public and private sector employees in the UAE for Eid Al Adha 2022.
The UAE holidays list specifies four more breaks after Eid Al Adha.
 The breaks for Islamic new year and Prophet Muhammad’s (Peace Be Upon Him) birthday are likely to fall on Saturdays, so those won’t convert into long weekends.
However, residents will get December 1-3 off to mark Martyrs’ and National Days.
 Residents will get a four-day weekend — from Thursday, December 1, till Sunday, December 4.
ALSO READ:UAE HolidaysVisitors will also be able to enjoy a dinner and watch the dazzling fireworks from viewing spots in cafes and restaurants UAE Holidays4 months agoUAE HolidaysExecutives in the travel and hospitality sectors say the UAE is regarded as one of the safest destinations UAE Holidays4 months agoUAE HolidaysChurch leaders and believers have said the festival "brings hope in darkness.
" UAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysParking arrangements, QR codes requirement for access: All you need to knowUAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysThe festivities would adhere to extensive Covid safety measuresUAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysRas Al Khaimah will first attempt the 'largest number of drones used simultaneously in fireworks displays'UAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysOutdoor, adventure destinations are preferred among UAE nationals and expatriatesUAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysActivities include children workshops, colouring, decoration, pottery restoration, art, painting, Islamic beads, aviation and creative installations, in addition to food trucksUAE Holidays5 months ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Wed 11 May 2022, 10:59 AMLast updated: Wed 11 May 2022, 11:47 AMDubai parks witnessed a huge turnout of families during the long Eid Al Fitr holidays, Dubai Municipality announced on Wednesday.
Parks in the Emirate received more than a quarter of a million visitors, which is an increase of 76.
38 per cent over the same period last year.
 Al Mamzar Park received the largest share of visits.
The parks had opened their doors to receive families and individuals after authorities took all necessary safety measures.
ALSO READ:Residents in the UAE enjoyed a week-long holiday during Eid Al Fitr this year.
 While a vast majority of people travelled abroad during the holidays, many expatriates took advantage of the local tourist and entertainment facilities.
UAE HolidaysVisitors will also be able to enjoy a dinner and watch the dazzling fireworks from viewing spots in cafes and restaurants UAE Holidays4 months agoUAE HolidaysExecutives in the travel and hospitality sectors say the UAE is regarded as one of the safest destinations UAE Holidays4 months agoUAE HolidaysChurch leaders and believers have said the festival "brings hope in darkness.
" UAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysParking arrangements, QR codes requirement for access: All you need to knowUAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysThe festivities would adhere to extensive Covid safety measuresUAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysRas Al Khaimah will first attempt the 'largest number of drones used simultaneously in fireworks displays'UAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysOutdoor, adventure destinations are preferred among UAE nationals and expatriatesUAE Holidays5 months agoUAE HolidaysActivities include children workshops, colouring, decoration, pottery restoration, art, painting, Islamic beads, aviation and creative installations, in addition to food trucksUAE Holidays5 months ago.
