
Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 9:48 PMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:35 PMThe Pakistan Embassy in Abu Dhabi has advised Pakistani expats against holding any public procession or protests in the UAE.
No reason has been given for this fresh advisory, but it comes a day ahead of the planned long march announced by former Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan on May 25.
Seeking fresh elections in Pakistan, Khan has asked his supporters to join him in his march to the capital city of Islamabad.
“This is to bring to the notice of all Pakistanis in the UAE that as per local laws, any kind of procession or protest is illegal,” the Pakistani embassy said on Tuesday.
“It is also informed that misuse and out of context activity on social media is also prohibited.
 All Pakistanis are advised to abide by the local laws and refrain from involving in any such activity,” the embassy added.
Khan, who served as the prime minister for over three and half years, was ousted in a no-confidence vote in parliament by an alliance of all major political parties.
According to reports, the Pakistani government has banned Khan from holding a protest march to Islamabad and cracked down on his supporters during raids held across the country, arresting hundreds.
UAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE8 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours agoUAEThe NCM has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expectedUAE13 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 7:19 PMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:31 PMThe UAE has reported its first case of viral zoonotic disease monkeypox.
 The Ministry of Health and Prevention said the virus was detected in a 29-year-old visitor from West Africa.
She is currently receiving the required medical care in the country.
The ministry has reassured residents that it is following all due safety measures, including investigation, contact tracing and follow-up.
The case was detected as part of the ministry’s early monitoring system that was activated when monkeypox cases were reported in multiple countries around the world.
The MoHAP has been “closely monitoring” the spread of monkeypox worldwide and said it had “intensified the local epidemiological surveillance”.
 All medical facilities in the country were told to report any suspected cases to prevent the local spread of the virus.
"We have put in place precise mechanisms for diagnosing suspected patients.
 The technical advisory team for pandemic control has also prepared a comprehensive guide for surveillance, early detection of the disease, management of clinically infected patients and precautionary measures," the ministry had said earlier.
The precise mechanism includes proactive steps to identify suspected cases, prevent its spread and ensure early treatment.
The ministry has called on residents not to promote or be misled by rumours and to take information from official sources only.
As of May 24, the World Health Organisation has registered more than 250 confirmed and suspected monkeypox infections.
UAE health authorities had earlier said that monkeypox occurs primarily in tropical rainforest areas of Central and West Africa and is occasionally exported to other regions.
The disease is transmitted to humans through close contact with an infected person or animal, or with material contaminated with the virus.
The virus is transmitted from one person to another by close contact with lesions, body fluids, respiratory droplets and contaminated materials such as bedding.
 Though rare and usually mild, monkeypox can still potentially cause severe illness.
The incubation period of monkeypox is usually from seven to 14 days, but can extend to 21 days.
sahim@khaleejtimes.
comALSO READ:UAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE8 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours agoUAEThe NCM has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expectedUAE13 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 8:14 PMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:32 PMThe UAE reported its first case of viral zoonotic disease monkeypox on Tuesday in a 29-year-old visitor from West Africa.
The Ministry of Health and Prevention has reassured residents that it is following all due safety measures, including investigation, contact tracing and follow-up.
Earlier today, the Dubai Health Authority (DHA) had tweeted an advisory about the disease, how it spreads, symptoms and prevention methods.
Monkeypox is a zoonotic disease that occurs primarily in tropical rainforest areas of Africa, and is occasionally exported to other regions.
Animal to human: Through direct contact with the blood, bodily fluids, cutaneous or mucosal lesions of an infected animal, or eating insufficiently cooked meat from an infected animal.
Human to human (rare): Through close contact with respiratory secretions, skin lesions of an infected person or contaminated objects.
The interval from the infection to the onset of symptoms is usually from 6-13 days but can range from 5-21 days.
Signs and symptomsFever, exhaustion, lymphadenopathy, back and muscle aches, intense headaches and skin rash which usually begins after one to three days of feverIt is usually a self-limited disease with the symptoms lasting from two to four weeks.
 Symptomatic supportive care is to be considered.
The health authorities in the UAE are currently studying and evaluating the situation.
 Residents have been asked to avoid spreading rumours and seek information from official channels.
 According to the DHA, the risk of getting infected or the risk of an outbreak is minimal as transmission requires close contact with the infected person or the person’s contaminated object.
ALSO READ:UAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours agoUAEThe NCM has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expectedUAE13 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 9:18 PMA Pakistani expat is among the two people killed in a gas explosion at a restaurant in Abu Dhabi City on Monday.
“One deceased person in the unfortunate incident is a Pakistani national,” a spokesperson of the Pakistan Embassy said.
Two people died and 120 were injured in a gas explosion during lunchtime at a popular restaurant in the Khalidiyah area.
 64 people suffered minor injuries and 56 others had moderate injuries.
Earlier in the day, the Indian Embassy confirmed that an Indian expat had passed away in the incident.
Abu Dhabi Police expressed “sincere condolences and sympathy to the families of the deceased”.
The Department of Health – Abu Dhabi on Tuesday confirmed that all injuries have resulted from the gas cylinder explosion incident.
The incident occurred in an area near Khalidiyah Mall and Shining Tower, which is densely populated, with several residential buildings and restaurants.
 A large majority of expat community in the vicinity hail from the Indian subcontinent and the rest from Arab countries and the Philippines.
ALSO READ:UAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours agoUAEThe NCM has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expectedUAE13 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 4:34 PMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:36 PMThere have been a number of incidents involving gas cylinder explosions in the UAE over the recent years that have caused loss of lives and left many injured.
 Negligence, careless handling of cylinders and failure to follow necessary safety measures are mostly found to be the mains reasons that lead to such incidents.
In the latest incident on May 23, 2022, Abu Dhabi Police said a gas cylinder explosion in a restaurant in Al Khalidiya, Abu Dhabi killed two people and injured 120 others.
 The blast set off fires that damaged the facades of six buildings and several stores before being brought under control by the Civil Defence.
Four of the damaged buildings were “safely” evacuated, with efforts underway to find temporary housing for tenants “until the buildings are completely secured”, the police said.
Police and civil defence authorities have always reminded the public to be careful when dealing with gas connections and other power sources.
The Abu Dhabi Civil Defence Department stressed the need to adhere to safety requirements when using gas cylinders, including ensuring the accuracy of gas system installations and having gas leak detectors.
 It recommended that periodic maintenance be carried out to ensure safety for all.
According to authorities, gas cylinders may become dangerous and cause fires due to negligence, and the lack of awareness of many in the use of non-conforming to the specifications and standards adopted.
Cooking gas cylinders if not handled properly, can lead to disastrous and fatal consequences.
 It’s almost impossible to have gas cylinder blast on its own without related factors.
According to safety experts, a gas leak from a cylinder or regulator gets mixed with air, forming a combustible mixture.
 To complete the fire triangle, it needs a spark or a source of ignition.
 This spark ignites the combustible gas cylinder-air mixture and this leads to an explosion.
According to Abu Dhabi Civil Defence, it’s imperative to follow safety measures while handling cooking gas cylinders as mostly negligent and careless handling leads to cooking gas cylinder explosion.
Embracing these effective safety measures will help in avoiding such accidents.
Advice for individuals in homesAdvice for facilities and businessesALSO READ:UAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours agoUAEThe NCM has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expectedUAE13 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:58 AMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 12:14 PMA dust storm has hit parts of Abu Dhabi, with visibility reduced to less than 100 metres in some areas.
 The UAE’s National Centre of Meteorology (NCM) has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expected:Suspended dust reduced visibility to less than 100 metres in Al Hamra (Al Dhafra) and Umm Al Sheif Island on Tuesday morning.
 Visibility has been brought down to less than 500 metres on Dalma Island, according to the NCM.
Countries in the Middle East have been hit by sand storms, with flight operations in two Arab countries – Kuwait and Iraq – affected.
Last night, the NCM had predicted that a storm brewing over the Arabian Gulf would hit the western part of the UAE today after blowing over Saudi Arabia.
On Tuesday, social media handle Storm Centre posted satellite images showing the movement of the dust:Earlier today, forecasters predicted severe dusty weather conditions in the UAE with a decrease in temperatures over the next few days.
 Windy conditions will persist, with speeds reaching 45kmph, affecting visibility.
Severe dust storms have engulfed parts of the Middle East over the past few days.
 For the second time this month, Kuwait International Airport suspended all flights temporarily on Monday because of the dust.
A heavy sandstorm in Iraq forced the closure of some state schools and offices and halted flights at Baghdad International Airport.
 Other countries, including Saudi Arabia, have issued dust storm alerts as well.
ALSO READ:UAEEvent to focus on exploring and shaping the futureUAE8 hours agoUAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 4:34 PMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:32 PMBy now, we are sure you have all heard about the massive sale happening in Dubai this weekend.
 The three-day super sale will offer up to 90 per cent discounts on a selection of lifestyle, beauty, fashion, electronics, and other items from May 27 to 29.
The Dubai Festivals and Retail Establishment (DFRE) has now revealed the premium brand stores that will be taking part in the sale.
Shoppers can choose from over 100 premium brand stores, including Tory Burch, Karl Lagerfield, Harvey Nichols, Bloomingdales, Rivoli, Kenzo, Christian Louboutin, Emporio Armani, Coach, Puma, Jashanmal, All Saints, Steve Madden, Chattels & More, Ralph Lauren and Lacoste.
Which are the participating malls?Shopping destinations where you can find offers include:sahim@khaleejtimes.
comALSO READ:UAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours agoUAEThe NCM has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expectedUAE13 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 7:02 PMLast updated: Tue 24 May 2022, 10:33 PMPrivate sector companies in the UAE will get discounts of up to 93 per cent on ministry fees if they exceed government-mandated Emiratisation rates and meet some other criteria.
This came as the Ministry of Human Resources and Emiratisation announced a new categorisation system for private sector firms on Tuesday.
The new system, which goes into effect from June 1, categorises companies into three.
 Firms that get the first rating stand to get massive discounts on fees, while those getting the third will need to pay all the fees in full.
Discounts apply to a number of services that include two-year work permit issuance and contract renewals.
Dr Abdulrahman Al Awar, Minister of Human Resources and Emiratisation, explained that the criteria include Emiratisation, cultural diversity of employees and commitment to labour rules.
Category 1Private sector firms are required to increase their Emiratisation rates by 2 per cent annually, as mandated by a recent UAE Cabinet resolution.
 Companies that exceed this requirement will get a ‘first rating’ that help them get the maximum discounts.
“Such companies will pay only Dh250 instead of an original fee of up to Dh3,450,” explained Al Awar.
Firms will get this rating if they follow all labour rules and commit to the Wage Protection System, in addition to achieving one of some other criteria, including:1.
 Increasing the annual Emiratisation rate by at least three times more than the set target of 2 per cent.
2.
 Teaming up with Emirati Talent Competitiveness Programme Nafis to hire and train at least 500 citizens every year.
3.
 Is classified as a small and medium-sized enterprise.
Category 2Private establishments that follow all UAE labour laws and regulations, but do not fulfil the other standards will get this rating.
“They will also receive discounts, and pay Dh1,200 in fees.
 Their discount rate won’t be as high as the companies coming under the first category,” Al Awar added.
Category 3Businesses that break rules or do not adhere to the labour law will get this rating.
“Such companies would need to pay all fees in full,” the minister said.
Al Awar said recruiting employees from diverse backgrounds to ensure a balanced cultural environment at the workplace will help private businesses benefit from the reductions.
“Private companies hiring a maximum of 20 per cent employees from a specific nationality will meet the standard of cultural diversity,” said Al Awar.
“This will not only help companies get discounts on ministry service fees but provide them with more flexibility to attract talents.
”An electronic system developed over the past few months has been put in place.
 The ratings will be done based on inputs given by the ministry’s inspectors.
“The process of rating companies will be entirely done by the smart system after our inspectors give their inputs based on their visits to establishments,” said Al Awar.
The UAE Cabinet had earlier approved increasing private firms’Emiratisation rates to 2 per cent annually.
 The aim is to raise this rate to 10 per cent by 2026.
 This will create more than 12,000 job opportunities annually for citizens in all economic sectors.
Non-compliant companies will have to pay an amount of Dh6,000 per month from January 2023 for every citizen who has not been employed.
ALSO READ:UAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours agoUAEThe NCM has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expectedUAE13 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Mon 23 May 2022, 6:09 PMLast updated: Mon 23 May 2022, 6:46 PMPolice in Abu Dhabi have urged motorists to avail of the early payment of traffic fines initiative, under which they are offered a 35 percent discount if they make the fine payment within 60 days of the violation.
In a new statement issued on Monday Abu Dhabi Police said it was continuing with the early payment of traffic fines initiative to make it easy for motorists to clear all their fines.
The discounts also apply to fees charged on impounded vehicles and late fine payments (if any).
Motorists can pay the traffic fines through www.
adpolice.
gov.
ae or via the AD Police app.
Abu Dhabi Police had earlier this month appealed to motorists who have committed several traffic offences to benefit from the initiative of paying traffic fines in interest-free installments to avoid their vehicles being impounded under Abu Dhabi’s traffic law.
The force said the initiative, which allows drivers with traffic fines to pay them in parts as per their affordability, is being carried out in cooperation with five banks in the UAE.
 These include Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank (ADCB), Abu Dhabi Islamic Bank (ADIB), First Abu Dhabi Bank (FAB), Mashreq Al Islami and Emirates Islamic Bank.
To avail of the service, drivers must have credit cards issued by one of these banks.
 A motorist has to contact the bank directly, within a period not exceeding two weeks from the date of being booked, to request for payment of traffic fines in installments.
ALSO READ:UAEEvent to focus on exploring and shaping the futureUAE8 hours agoUAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Tue 24 May 2022, 2:58 PMHis Highness Sheikh Mohamed Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, President of the UAE, has issued directives to allocate a Dh6 million grant to purchase books from the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair (ADIBF).
It launched its 31st edition yesterday (Monday, May 23).
The purchased books and materials will be distributed to school libraries across the UAE to support the publishing and education sectors by enriching libraries with useful reference works, supporting students of all levels to pursue knowledge and education.
His Excellency Dr Ali Bin Tamim, Chairman of the Abu Dhabi Arabic Language Centre (ALC), part of the Department of Culture and Tourism – Abu Dhabi (DCT Abu Dhabi), said: “This generous grant from His Highness Sheikh Mohamed Bin Zayed offers a strong foundation to continue our efforts to keep the local and Arab publishing market globally competitive.
“It will also play an effective role in advancing knowledge and culture in the UAE, providing students with a wide variety of books and reference materials from the Abu Dhabi International Book Fair.
 Through this, the next generation’s increased accessibility to content will inspire their enthusiasm for knowledge and learning, while enhancing their imagination, innovation and creativity.
”ALSO READ:UAEEvent to focus on exploring and shaping the futureUAE8 hours agoUAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours agoUAEThe NCM has issued a dust storm alert, with varying intensities expectedUAE13 hours ago.

Wednesday, May 25, 2022 | Shawwal 24, 1443Published: Mon 23 May 2022, 6:29 PMLast updated: Mon 23 May 2022, 6:46 PMDoctors in the UAE are reiterating that “precise mechanisms” for diagnosing suspected patients of monkeypox have been put in place for the early detection of the disease, if any.
This comes after the UAE’s health ministry is “proactively investigating and closely monitoring any suspected cases” of the viral zoonotic disease that has been identified in some patients abroad.
Doctors also say that the health regulatory body has already issued a clear directive to all the healthcare institutions and the code of conduct has been implemented at each facility.
Dr Abhinav Gupta, Specialist Internal Medicine, Aster Clinic Arabian Ranches said: “Monkeypox has become a cause of concern and worries with the increasing number of cases in other parts of the world, especially in the West.
 The latest reports suggest that the number of human-to-human transmissions is increasing in these countries.
 However, in the UAE, the Ministry of Health and Prevention has already taken proactive steps to identify suspected cases, prevent the spread and ensure early treatment.
”He adds, “in the UAE, the healthcare institutions are ready, and we are equipped to address the concern.
”Doctors state that so far, the UAE remains safe and there is no real cause for concern.
 “Smallpox vaccines are found to be effective against the virus.
 We’ve also observed quick recovery of the patients from the infection.
“Wae have not seen any patient coming to our hospital complaining of any of the symptoms associated with monkeypox.
 But we are ready to face any contingency.
 We are following strict preventive measures at our hospitals to triage patients coming with symptoms of monkeypox,” adds Dr Gupta.
Shedding light on the triage system he says patients who come with fever along with rashes on their body will be sent to the isolation room first.
ALSO READ:“The infection control team has made all the arrangements for this.
 These patients are thus separated from the public at the hospital and are attended to in a safe place.
 Doctors, nurses, and other clinical staff who attend to these will be wearing a PPE kit and will be taking all precautionary measures before they attend to the patient.
 Thus, the risk of transmission is reduced.
""There is nothing to worry about at the moment.
 The Ministry of Health has taken all necessary steps to surveil the suspected cases and to prevent the spread of the infection in the country.
 In the UAE, we have successfully battled a worse pandemic.
 So, the healthcare ecosystem in the country is well-positioned to prevent another outbreak.
”Healthcare professionals underline the country possesses the technological and diagnostic capabilities and the efficiency to treat people.
Dr Gupta highlights: “We should continue to follow precautionary measures such as social distancing, regular cleansing of hands, and avoiding using things used by the infected person”The Ministry of Health and Prevention (MoHAP) earlier said it is currently studying and evaluating the seriousness of the disease locally.
Dr Kumaraswamy, Specialist Internal Medicine, Medeor Hospital, Abu Dhabi said, “as the UAE is a tourist destination, it receives people from across the globe, and with monkeypox being reported in several countries, it is a public health concern.
“But rest assured that the health authorities in the UAE are aware of the situation and fully prepared to deal with it.
 At present, in our facility, we have not noticed patients coming in with monkeypox-related symptoms.
 However, we are on high alert.
”Patients experiencing fever, chills, myalgia fatigue, headache, rash, or lymphadenopathy are advised to isolate themselves and meet the doctor at the earliest.
The disease primarily occurs in tropical rainforest areas of Central and West Africa and is occasionally exported to other regions.
Dr Adel Al Sisi, CMO and consultant intensive care, also echoed that there is no real cause for concern now.
He said, “Fortunately, in the UAE, so far not a single case has been reported.
 But all community members should be aware about the sign and symptoms.
 Everyone should watch for the symptoms.
 There is an isolation protocol, which they must adhere to, as per the advice from the health authorities.
 There is no cause to panic, as it is self-contained and lasts for one to two weeks.
 Further, it is not easily transmissible from one person to another.
”UAEEvent to focus on exploring and shaping the futureUAE8 hours agoUAE The deceased had no identification documents on himUAE9 hours agoUAEGoogle’s Impact Report found that 90 per cent of surveyed Internet users used Google Search to keep up to date with the latest Covid-19 public health information, while 87 per cent used Google Search to stay up to date with travel restrictionsUAE9 hours agoUAEThe purchased materials will be distributed to school librariesUAE9 hours agoUAENigeria topped the list of country-specific nominations with 33 entriesUAE9 hours agoUAEShe was sentenced to three months in prison UAE11 hours agoUAESheikh Zayed Housing Programme has so far completed 36,000 homes for EmiratisUAE11 hours agoUAEThe storm will move from the country’s western regions towards the south and the eastUAE11 hours ago.
