Scandinavian airline SAS has filed for bankruptcy protection in the US as a strike by its pilots added to its financial problems.
The move will allow the carrier to continue operating, although the strike has grounded about half its flights.
SAS said the industrial action meant the airline had brought forward plans to restructure its finances.
The aviation sector was hit hard by the coronavirus pandemic as demand for travel collapsed.
However, in recent months airlines and airports - which shed thousands of jobs during the pandemic - have struggled to cope with the rebound in air travel.
EasyJet's chief operating officer resigned on Monday after a series of flight cancellations and disruption at the airline in recent weeks.
Some of the disruption in the sector has been caused by staff shortages, but several airlines are facing the threat of strike action over summer as workers push for higher pay.
SAS pilots are striking in a row over plans to cut their salaries as part of the airline's restructuring plan.
The Chapter 11 bankruptcy mechanism allows a company to restructure its debts under court supervision while continuing to operate.
SAS said that talks to raise $756m to continue its immediate operations were "well advanced".
Other non-US airlines including Aeromexico and Philippine Airlines have used Chapter 11 protection while they renegotiate contracts and financial arrangements with key suppliers. 
"Through this process, SAS aims to reach agreements with key stakeholders, restructure the company's debt obligations, reconfigure its aircraft fleet, and emerge with a significant capital injection," SAS said in a statement.
The airline said that the strike by pilots was "estimated to lead to the cancellation of approximately 50 percent of all scheduled SAS flights," affecting about 30,000 passengers a day.
SAS cut 5,000 jobs - 40% of its workforce - in 2020, as it attempted to reduce losses resulting from the pandemic.
Flight cancellation plan aims to ease summer chaos
EasyJet executive quits after flight disruption
Airlines should be fined for refund delays, MPs say
Zahawi among cabinet ministers about to tell PM to resign
PM vows to keep going amid pressure from ministers
Chicago gunman confessed to shooting, court hears
How might Boris Johnson be removed as PM?
'Let's make history' - Euro 2022 to break records
Arabs believe economy is weak under democracy
The Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site. VideoThe Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site
‘We need an international shelter for trans people’
Sydney floods aftermath: 'Everybody is traumatised'
The man who came back from the dead
The biggest ships on the ocean
Murdered Indian rapper's 'protest music' lives on
The case for turning off your Zoom camera
Workers may have a strong argument against appearing on screen
America's first interracial love song
How a taboo-busting duet became a hit and broke new ground
A breakfast staple created by accident
More than a century ago, a glut of oranges kick-started a craze
© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
