Scientists hope patchworks of multi-coloured crops will help hide them "in plain sight" from pests as a natural alternative to pesticides.
Using dyes, the so-called "camo-cropping" trial has been started by the Norwich-based British Beet Research Organisation (BBRO).
It has been introduced at Morley Farms, near Wymondham, Norfolk, in an attempt to protect sugar beet from aphids.
Farmer David Jones said pests can "reduce yield by 50% in a bad year".
Fields of sugar beet have been dyed different colours using food dye at the farm.
Scientists hope to find out if the camo-crops deter aphids from landing on the sugar beet and, if they do, which colours prove most effective.
Mr Jones, from the Morley Agricultural Foundation, said growing sugar beet was a "a challenge".
He said the farm has to cope with "lots of things all of the time, principally the weather, but also weeds, and particularly aphids come and attack the crops and transfer virus into the crop".
"We're always looking for new ways to control the problems we've got, if it's without pesticide [then] that can be beneficial to what we do," he said.
Dr Alistair Wright, from the BBRO, said had used "colour as a dye to reduce the contrast between the immature beet and the soil".
He said: "We're trying any approaches to deter the aphids from the crop and we know they use all sorts of senses when they are migrating in the spring.
"One of them is colour and the contrast between the plant and soil, so using the dye we are hoping to effectively hide the crops in plain sight form the aphids."
Dr Wright said there were "early positive signs" but added results would not be fully known until the harvest.
He said the organisation was also trialling other methods such as increasing ladybirds and planting a grass from New Zealand which releases chemicals that kill aphids.
"There's no silver bullet, no one thing we can rely on," Dr Wright added.
Find BBC News: East of England on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter. If you have a story suggestion email eastofenglandnews@bbc.co.uk
'The price of fertiliser is absolutely bonkers'
Farm pesticides killing more bees - study
British Beet Research Organisation (BBRO)
Lynn Parkrun founder a Batonbearer for Queen’s Baton Relay
Hospital's long-awaited maternity bereavement suite is open
Norwich named one of the most community-driven places in the UK Owen Sennitt
Father-of-four gets driving ban after night out in resort
'I'm proud of Boris' - Norfolk village gives its verdict on namesake PM George Thompson, Local Democracy Reporter
The days you can visit Wroxham Barns for a fiver this month
Zahawi among cabinet ministers about to tell PM to resign
PM vows to keep going amid pressure from ministers
Chicago gunman confessed to shooting, court hears
How might Boris Johnson be removed as PM?
'Let's make history' - Euro 2022 to break records
Arabs believe economy is weak under democracy
The Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site. VideoThe Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site
‘We need an international shelter for trans people’
Sydney floods aftermath: 'Everybody is traumatised'
The man who came back from the dead
The biggest ships on the ocean
Murdered Indian rapper's 'protest music' lives on
The case for turning off your Zoom camera
Workers may have a strong argument against appearing on screen
America's first interracial love song
How a taboo-busting duet became a hit and broke new ground
A breakfast staple created by accident
More than a century ago, a glut of oranges kick-started a craze
© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
