The Faroe Islands is to provisionally limit its controversial dolphin hunt to 500 animals, after receiving widespread criticism over last year's cull, where more than 1,400 were killed.
A review was ordered in February, in response to the outcry.
Animal rights activists have long decried the hunt, deeming the slaughter cruel and unnecessary.
Faroe Islanders give the practice their broad support, arguing the dolphins have fed them for centuries.
Known as the grind (or Grindadrap in Faroese), the hunting of sea mammals - primarily whales - is a tradition that has been practised for hundreds of years on the remote islands, a Danish autonomous territory in the North Atlantic.
But the scale of the killing last year shocked many locals and even drew criticism from groups involved in the practice. Records showed that it was the largest number of dolphins ever killed on one day in the Faroe Islands.
A petition with almost 1.3 million signatures calling for a ban on the traditional hunt was submitted to the Faroese government.
Now the government has limited the annual catch of white-sided dolphins to 500 for the next two years. Only the dolphin hunt is currently being reviewed, not the entire grind tradition.
The quota was set after the "unusually large catch" of 1,423 white-sided dolphins in September, the government said in a statement.
"Aspects of that catch were not satisfactory, in particular the unusually large number of dolphins killed," it added.
However, the government stated that the hunt serves as an "important supplement to the livelihoods of Faroe Islanders".
Whale hunt turns sea red with blood
The islands that want tourists as well as fish
The islands that closed down for repairs
Leak reveals top politicians secretly helped Uber
Protesters 'will occupy palace until leaders go'
Fifteen shot dead in South Africa bar
Inside the presidential palace now full of Sri Lankans
'Protests have changed thinking for the better'
The race gap between black and white homeowners
The lingering scars of South Africa's deadly riots
Who could be the next UK prime minister?
Americans in the crosshairs of China's spy game
Why Euro 2022 stars in small stadiums is a good thing
The Indian man making art from sunlight. VideoThe Indian man making art from sunlight
A welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children. VideoA welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children
The world's weirdest border?
How a railway blurred the line between Belgium and Germany
11 films to watch this July
The month’s most unmissable released include the return of Jordan Peele and Thor
Why modern dating is exhausting
Can online dating burnout be stopped?
© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
