
https://www.wsj.com/articles/audit-watchdog-stiffens-rules-on-lead-auditors-supervision-of-outsiders-11655842751
The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board adopted a rule strengthening the requirements for lead auditors in supervising other auditors outside their firms, the first standard to pass under the watchdog’s new leadership.
Typically, an accounting firm that issues an annual report on a company’s financial statements assembles a team involving several outside auditors, usually individual accountants or accounting firms. Under existing rules, lead auditors must supervise the outsiders and assume responsibility for their work, which could include the auditing of certain investments. Under the new rule, lead auditors will have to obtain avowals from outside auditors about the quality of their work—in writing.
The regulator, which oversees the audits of U.S.-listed public companies, on Tuesday voted to approve the new standard, aimed at better guiding lead auditors in planning and supervising others’ work and reducing the risk of misstatements, for example, stemming from errors or fraud, or deficient audits.
The new rule requires the lead auditor to obtain a written statement from the other auditors asserting they have adequate ethics and independence policies in place and skilled workers for performing their part of the audit, the PCAOB said. The lead auditor also needs to secure a written description of the other auditors’ relationships to avoid conflicts of interest.
 The Morning Ledger provides daily news and insights on corporate finance from the CFO Journal team. 
The board continues to see enforcement cases and inspection deficiencies that point to failures by certain lead auditors in overseeing the work of others, Chairwoman









      
      Erica Williams



      said at the meeting Tuesday.
“These observations indicate that there is room for improvement and that investor protection could benefit from the lead auditors’ increased involvement in and evaluation of the work of other auditors,” she said.
The Center for Audit Quality, an accounting-industry group, last November said the proposal was overly prescriptive, but didn’t provide a clear framework enabling lead auditors to determine how much documentation they need to review from auditors. On Tuesday, a CAQ spokesman declined to comment, saying the organization is waiting to review the text of the rule, which hasn’t yet been released.
About 30% of public-company audits in 2020 used at least one outside audit firm, according to a review by research firm Audit Analytics. That was slightly above the 29% average of the previous three years, data show.
Audit firms that seek out other firms generally use at least three of them on average in their work, Audit Analytics said.


The PCAOB standard is the first to be approved under a new slate of board members, though the watchdog was well along in the rule-making process upon their arrival. First proposed in 2016, it was revised in 2017 and again last September before it was approved by the board on Tuesday. The rule, subject to Securities and Exchange Commission approval, is set to take effect for audits of financial statements for fiscal years ending on or after Dec. 15, 2024.
Last November, the SEC, which oversees the PCAOB, appointed four new board members, including Ms. Williams, after firing the former chairman,









      
      William Duhnke,



      in June.
Ms. Williams, who became the PCAOB’s chairwoman in January, has been working with other new board members and staff to develop its strategy. In May, the PCAOB said it would craft proposals this year on audit quality controls and auditors’ consideration of potentially illegal acts in the audit by their clients. The watchdog said it wants to unveil a proposal in 2023 on auditors’ role in evaluating and reporting of companies’ ability to continue operating, or remain “a going concern.”
In recent weeks, the PCAOB also launched two new advisory groups—one to air investors’ concerns, and the other to address standards and emerging issues—both aimed at bringing in the views of investors and other stakeholders. In the past, investors had complained they had been cut out of the PCAOB rule-making process.
Write to Mark Maurer at Mark.Maurer@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

