
https://www.wsj.com/articles/logistics-provider-db-schenker-to-buy-usa-truck-for-about-285-million-11656095237
Global logistics provider DB Schenker is moving to bolster its reach in North American freight markets with the acquisition of truckload carrier










            USA Truck


      for about $285 million, excluding debt.
The acquiring company said Friday that it agreed to pay $31.72 a share, more than double USA Truck’s closing share price of $14.58 on Thursday. Including assumed cash and debt, the total value of the deal is about $435 million, according to the companies.
DB Schenker, a unit of German national railway Deutsche Bahn AG and one of the world’s largest freight forwarders by revenue, is gaining an operation that counted about 1,800 trucks in its network and generated about $710.4 million in revenue last year. USA Truck, based in Van Buren, Ark., offers services including truckload freight transport and third-party freight management for retailers and manufacturers.
 Top news and in-depth analysis on the world of logistics, from supply chain to transport and technology. 
The deal, which has been approved by USA Truck’s board, advances DB Schenker’s “strategic ambition to expand our network in North America and foster our position as a leading global logistics provider,” said Jochen Thewes, chief executive of DB Schenker.
Investment firm










            Cowen


      said in a research report that it was “encouraged to see a likely successful sale…given the market has continued to discount the company compared to” its peers in the trucking sector. “With valuations coming down across the transportation sector, we believe there may be more deal activity to come,” the firm said.
DB Schenker’s move is the latest step by European freight operators to extend their operations in North America through acquisitions.
Consolidation in the U.S. trucking sector has accelerated this year and European operators have shown interest in deals to expand their positions in the market. Shipping giant










            A.P. Moller-Maersk


      A/S earlier this year acquired Pennsylvania-based Pilot Freight Services.
DB Schenker said it plans to expand USA Truck’s presence in North America once the deal closes, expected before the end of 2022.
Shares in USA Truck more than doubled to $30.80 in afternoon trading Friday. The stock is up more than 50% so far this year and more than 90% for the past 12 months.


Write to Will Feuer at will.feuer@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8

      Appeared in the June 25, 2022, print edition as 'Logistics Provider Buys Trucking Firm.'
    
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

