Major retailers benefited from consumer spending during the height of the pandemic, when many people were ordering goods to make being at home so much more comfortable. But now, consumer habits are shifting, and retailers are struggling to keep up. Target is the latest retailer to report extra inventory that’s expected to weigh on profits. WSJ retail reporter Sarah Nassauer joins WSJ What’s News host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss the challenges ahead for retailers.
This transcript was prepared by a transcription service. This version may not be in its final form and may be updated.
Annmarie Fertoli: During the height of the pandemic, many retailers benefited from consumers staying at home and ordering goods to make being at home so much more comfortable. Now, those habits are changing, and so is consumer spending. It's been challenging for retailers to keep up. Target is a prime example. Just two weeks ago, the retailer reported a drop in quarterly earnings, saying that shoppers were buying more groceries and luggage, but fewer big ticket items. On Tuesday, Target had to revise its profit outlook downward again, because its stores are full of items no one's buying. Target said it needs to offer discounts to clear out unwanted goods and cancel orders. So what does that mean for Target's business? And what can it tell us about the challenges major retailers are facing, as the nation continues to emerge from the pandemic? I'm Annmarie Fertoli from the Wall Street Journal, and joining me now with more on this is Wall Street Journal retail reporter Sarah Nassauer.
Hi, Sarah. Thanks for being here.
Sarah Nassauer: Hi. Thanks for having me.
Annmarie Fertoli: So Sarah, to start us out, how unusual is it for a retailer to come back and change their profit expectations after two weeks?
Sarah Nassauer: It's pretty unusual, and it's definitely unusual for Target in the current environment, where over the last two years, we've seen really strong results from them.
Annmarie Fertoli: So tell us what's going on with Target right now. It has said it needs to cancel orders and offer discounts. What went wrong here?
Sarah Nassauer: They bought too many things that we aren't buying anymore. These big pandemic purchases that we all did, of computers, and patio furniture, and home goods, we're doing less of those. They say that demand for that shrunk faster than they anticipated. And the supply chain issues played a role, because they ordered aggressively in some cases. And in some cases, those items were delayed, so they showed up after the ideal buying window, and now they have to deal with that inventory.
Annmarie Fertoli: So is it sort of a misassessment or incorrect assessment of supply and demand here? Is that the major player?
Sarah Nassauer: Exactly. It's a misassessment, as well as some supply chain effects. There was nothing that Target could do about a container ship getting stuck in Shanghai, but they definitely say that they overestimated how much we want some of these big pandemic buying trend type products.
Annmarie Fertoli: So how much of a hit is Target likely to take from this? What will it mean for the business?
Sarah Nassauer: So they basically said that for the current quarter, the second quarter, their profits are going to be down more than they predicted when they announced earnings three weeks ago, because they're going to move through that inventory. They're going to cancel orders, they're going to sell it at a discount. That's going to eat into the margins. And that will affect the full year, though they hope that painful process will be done by the current quarter.
Annmarie Fertoli: So we've been talking a bit about emerging from the pandemic and we've seen how consumer habits are shifting now. The last jobs report found that retailers shed tens of thousands of jobs. Is what's happening at Target right now indicative of the struggle other retailers are facing as well, as they try to follow this shift in consumer behavior?
Sarah Nassauer: You saw many retailers, when they reported earnings over the last few weeks, say that inventories are really elevated compared to last year. That just means they have a lot of products. Some of that, executives said, is because of inflation. When things are worth more, they're going to look like it's a bigger pile of goods on their P&L. Some of it is stuff that they want, but maybe arrived early. So Walmart, for example, talked about having goods that they're going to hold and sell over the rest of the year. And some of it is goods that people don't really want anymore. And lots of retailers have talked about, there's going to be some sales. There's going to be some discounts on those types of items. And that includes like casual apparel, because we're buying dressy stuff. That includes home goods and patio furniture.
Annmarie Fertoli: So that may be good for consumers, but what does this tell us about the challenges that retailers will be facing in the coming months?
Sarah Nassauer: It means we're going to see lower profits from many of them, because they're going to have to deal with this imbalance. It also means that they're spending quite a bit of time now on trying to get better at forecasting. Forecasting, this idea of forecasting sales in the future, or fashion trends, that type of thing happens far in advance of the moment that those purchases are made. And so some of them have talked about tweaking some of those systems.
Annmarie Fertoli: And Sarah, what might this mean for markets? You mentioned earnings reports not so long ago that sort of dragged down the major indexes. What's the expectation here?
Sarah Nassauer: Well, we'll see, but Target's announcement has definitely... I've seen some analysts talk about, well, this doesn't bode well for the entire retail industry, because it means others are going to be dealing with this. It means discounting is back. Discounting kind of was on hold during the pandemic when demand was so high and supply was a little restrained. And so they're bracing for that to be an industry-wide issue.
I think that we'll see stores with some clearance racks, some over-stuffed shelves in some product categories, but overall, prices are still high for many goods. This could alleviate some of that, if there's discounts on certain types of products. But we're all still paying quite a bit for food and gas. So that consumer pressure is still here.
One thing I think that investors are interested in is what's different three weeks later. They talked about their profits, they talked about having too much inventory and needing to go through that inventory three weeks ago. And when I spoke with Brian Cornell, the CEO of Target, he said that they watched other retailers report higher inventories over the last three weeks. They looked at consumer trends, and they decided that they needed to be more aggressive getting rid of this inventory so that they can have more relevant, fresh merchandise on shelves and not lose any market share. They sort of think this is a competitive play to move a little bit faster, perhaps, than some peers.
Annmarie Fertoli: That's Wall Street Journal retail reporter Sarah Nassauer. Sarah, thanks so much for your time.
Sarah Nassauer: Thank you.
Annmarie Fertoli: To hear more stories on business and politics from the Wall Street Journal, ask your Google Assistant to play WSJ What's News podcast.
