
https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-new-policy-is-making-corporate-compliance-chiefs-uneasy-11655404453
Compliance officers are worried that a new Justice Department policy, aimed at raising their stature within companies, will actually make their jobs harder—and even leave them open to criminal prosecution.
The policy, previewed by a senior Justice Department official in March, is meant to give compliance officers a voice and provide them with access to information and resources needed to guarantee that their company’s compliance program is effective. It was applied for the first time last month in a settlement agreement with commodities giant Glencore PLC.
But lawyers say the policy could have unintended consequences, and that it gives compliance officers leverage only by handing them the equivalent of a nuclear option.
“I think it could make a compliance officer’s job really difficult,” said









      
      Brian Michael,



      a partner at law firm Morrison Foerster who has also been a chief compliance officer. “It runs the risk of creating a lot of resentment and friction between chief compliance officers and other senior executives.”
The policy applies to companies that, like Glencore, are settling allegations of criminal wrongdoing. As part of such settlement agreements, companies are typically required to make improvements to their compliance programs and submit to increased monitoring over a several-year period.
 Our Morning Risk Report features insights and news on governance, risk and compliance. 
At the end of that time, the new policy would require both the company’s chief executive and chief compliance officer to personally certify that its compliance program is “reasonably designed to prevent and detect” future violations.
The policy was first floated in March by









      
      Kenneth Polite,



      the assistant attorney general in charge of the Justice Department’s criminal division. At a speech in New York, Mr. Polite, once a chief compliance officer himself, said the policy wasn’t meant to be punitive.
Despite his reassurances, the announcement has caused consternation among compliance chiefs, according to lawyers who spoke to The Wall Street Journal. While it wasn’t entirely clear at the time how the new measure would work, compliance officers balked at what might happen if they signed such a certification only to uncover violations later on.
Unease over the policy stems in part from the constraints many compliance officers face daily in fulfilling their mandate, lawyers say. Although compliance chiefs are tasked with making sure their companies are taking appropriate steps to ensure employees don’t violate the law, they typically have less influence than other top executives over budgets and business decisions.
In the worst cases, their programs aren’t sufficiently funded or lack the authority to push back on overzealous salespeople.
In the past few years, the Justice Department has set its sights on changing that, devising an array of novel policies to get those highest up in a company to take compliance seriously. In theory, the certification policy gives compliance officers a new cudgel to increase their clout: the ability to refuse certification.
“It is the type of resource that compliance officials, including myself, have wanted for some time, because it makes it clear that you should and must have appropriate stature in corporate decision-making,” Mr. Polite said in March.
But Mr. Michael, the Morrison Foerster attorney, said the policy could put compliance officers in a bind. Though it empowers them to a degree, to actually threaten to withhold certification runs the risk of fracturing their relationship with the CEO and other executives.
“The CEO is not going to look kindly on a CCO who is not willing to sign this thing, particularly if the CEO or other senior executives think they ought to be able to,” said Mr. Michael.
The new policy was fleshed out last month when it was applied to Glencore’s $1.2 billion settlement over foreign bribery and market manipulation violations. Glencore subsidiaries reached two separate plea agreements with prosecutors, each of which included a copy of the prospective certification as an attachment, to be signed at the conclusion of Glencore’s three-year probation period.


Glencore’s chief executive officer said in a statement at the time of the settlement that the company acknowledged the misconduct and had taken steps to put the matter behind it. “This type of behavior has no place in Glencore, and the board, management team and I are very clear about the culture that we want and our commitment to be a responsible and ethical operator wherever we work,” CEO









      
      Gary Nagle



      said.
Some lawyers expressed relief that the Glencore certifications weren’t overly broad, and instead tailored to the specific legal violations at issue. But exactly how the policy will play out in practice remains to be seen. The Justice Department has said it expects to apply the certification in future cases.
The Glencore certifications also make clear that a false certification could lead to criminal prosecution for perjury. But the Justice Department maintains that the purpose behind them isn’t to provide “fodder for criminal prosecution of CEOs or CCOs.”
“Instead, the certification memorializes the company’s commitment to take its compliance obligations seriously and its primary aim is to help set CCOs up for success,” a department spokeswoman said.










      
      Michael Ward,



      a partner at Baker Botts who has also worked as a CCO, said the impact of the new policy may be somewhat limited, since it will only come into play in the context of a settlement agreement, when the Justice Department is already requiring that a company make changes to their compliance program. Even so, the idea behind the policy, though well-intended, is flawed, he said.
“A compliance officer who has a coercive relationship with his management team is unlikely to be successful,” Mr. Ward said. “You may get compliance officers withholding certification, but you’re doing that only because you’re making their job more dangerous.”
Write to Dylan Tokar at dylan.tokar@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

