Dwindling Russian gas supplies are proving a threat to chemicals companies and their disruption would reverberate well beyond the sector, threatening Europe’s economy at a time of high inflation and slowing growth.
Georgi Kantchev
June 27, 2022
At the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service Forensics Lab in Oregon, researchers are building a chemical database of trees threatened by illegal harvesting.
Lyndsie Bourgon
June 23, 2022
The Supreme Court this week denied an effort to stem thousands of lawsuits alleging the weedkiller caused cancer, but it remains prized by farmers for its effectiveness and low cost compared with other chemicals.
Patrick Thomas
June 22, 2022
The plan goes beyond a European Commission proposal by including some chemical makers and setting a more aggressive timeline for taxing imports based on the greenhouse gases emitted to make them.
Matthew Dalton and Kim Mackrael
June 22, 2022
Russia intensified its offensive to take a chemical plant that serves as the last bastion for Ukrainian forces, as Ukraine pledged to continue its defense of the strategic eastern city and said it was rooting out suspected spies in state structures.
Matthew Luxmoore, Drew Hinshaw and Mauro Orru
June 21, 2022
Sinopec Shanghai said the fire had effectively come under control. The cause of the explosion is under investigation.
Joyu Wang
June 18, 2022
Legislation earns bipartisan support to expand the number of health conditions the Department of Veterans Affairs will consider tied to military service.
Ben Kesling
June 16, 2022
The agency cut the level at which it said substances known as PFAS might be harmful. 
Kris Maher
June 15, 2022
The funds come from last year’s infrastructure bill and target substances linked to health problems including kidney cancer and high cholesterol.
Timothy Puko
June 15, 2022
Messrs. Macron, Scholz and Draghi plan to meet with the Ukrainian president this week, officials said, as reports showed Russia making gains in the country’s east.
Ian Lovett and Bojan Pancevski
June 12, 2022
The cause of a blaze that set off a series of explosions at a container depot where chemicals are stored isn’t yet known, but the death toll is expected to grow.
Shan Li and Vibhuti Agarwal
June 6, 2022
A legal tussle over animal testing in Europe is threatening to jeopardize what has become a key marketing tool for cosmetics companies: selling their shampoos and skin creams as “cruelty free.”  
Saabira Chaudhuri | Photographs by Lauren Fleishman for The Wall Street Journal 
June 1, 2022
Manufacturers, spurred in part by sustainability concerns, are removing the water in shampoos and lotions, and selling them as powders. 
Kate Murphy
May 27, 2022
Natural-gas exporter Venture Global LNG said it would build a new, multibillion-dollar liquefied natural gas export facility in Louisiana, as demand for U.S. gas exports surges in Europe following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Collin Eaton
May 25, 2022
The number of deaths caused by industrial pollution, including from chemicals and the burning of fossil fuels, rose between 2015 and 2019 even as the toll exacted by household pollutants and unsafe drinking water fell, new research shows.
Nidhi Subbaraman
May 17, 2022
The biotechnology company said it didn’t know about the financial-reporting investigation by Jorge Gomez’s former employer until after he started with Moderna. 
Joseph Walker
May 13, 2022
The state attorney general is investigating fossil-fuel and petrochemical companies including Exxon Mobil, accusing them of overstating the role of recycling in reducing plastic pollution.
Christopher M. Matthews
April 29, 2022
Tiny Peshtigo is considering joining a nearby city to address problems with its water supply, which is polluted with chemicals known as PFAS.
Kris Maher
April 24, 2022
Plan would compress the existing timeline under which a shipper’s petition for relief is considered, speeding up any potential intervention by regulators.
Ted Mann
April 22, 2022
Eliminating emissions from chip making hinges on addressing emissions of highly-polluting gases that are currently essential to the process. 
Dieter Holger
April 13, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
