
https://www.wsj.com/articles/financial-watchdog-fatf-curbs-russias-influence-within-group-11655502001
A global financial watchdog has moved to limit Russia’s role and influence in the organization, citing the Kremlin’s invasion of Ukraine, the group said Friday.
The Financial Action Task Force, a Paris-based intergovernmental body that sets anti-money-laundering law standards, said Russia would no longer be allowed to hold any leadership or advisory roles or participate in decision-making on standard-setting, peer-review processes, and governance and membership issues. Russia, which joined the FATF in 2003, can also no longer provide assessors, reviews or other experts for the organization’s peer-review processes.
“The FATF determined that Russia’s invasion runs counter to the FATF’s core principles and represents a gross violation of their commitments as members of the FATF,” Marcus Pleyer, the group’s president, said at a press conference following a four-day plenary meeting in Berlin. He added that the decision “significantly limits Russia’s role and influence within the FATF and is a direct consequence of members’ condemnation of Russia’s invasion in Ukraine.”
 Our Morning Risk Report features insights and news on governance, risk and compliance. 
The U.S. Treasury Department welcomed the watchdog’s censure of Russia. “At its core, the FATF is committed to the values of international cooperation and the protection of international security and stability. By waging its unprovoked war on Ukraine, Russia violated these core standards and I welcome the serious steps the FATF took to restrict Russia’s presence in its community,” Treasury Secretary









      
      Janet Yellen



      said in a statement Friday.
The organization on Friday also made changes to its “gray list,” a terror-financing watch list, removing Malta and adding Gibraltar.
The FATF said Gibraltar, a British territory that borders Spain, needs to strengthen the effectiveness of its anti-money-laundering and counterterrorism regulations regime. Gibraltar has made some progress on a number of recommended actions since 2019, but still needs to work on a few issues, including ensuring that supervisors for nonbank financial institutions and other gatekeepers, such as lawyers and accountants, use a range of effective and dissuasive penalties for money-laundering breaches, the FATF said.
A representative for Gibraltar’s press office said the territory “continues to work closely with the FATF and is proud of the relationship that it has with this international standard setting body which we believe is mutually beneficial and designed to deliver the highest standards in our jurisdiction.”
The watchdog said it was removing Malta from the list, which it joined a year ago, because the country had made significant progress in improving its anti-money-laundering regime. Malta has doubled the resources of a registry showing the ultimate owners of companies in the country and has taken dozens of related enforcement actions, up from zero cases at the time of listing, Mr. Pleyer said.
“And importantly, the majority of these breaches related to foreign-owned companies and I think that shows that Malta is now cracking down on a major money-laundering risk related to shell companies,” he said.
Pakistan remains on the list, though the FATF said the country has finished its two action plans, warranting an on-site visit by FATF staff to ensure the country will sustain the overhauls.

Representatives for Russia’s and Pakistan’s embassies in the U.S. and Malta’s Ministry for Foreign and European Affairs and Trade didn’t respond to requests for comment.
The gray list now includes 23 countries or territories, including the United Arab Emirates, which was added in March. Jurisdictions on the list have agreed to work with the FATF on plans to address identified deficiencies in their counter-terror-financing regimes within agreed time frames and are subject to extra checks, according to the group.
Write to Mengqi Sun at mengqi.sun@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

