
https://www.wsj.com/articles/plans-to-address-audit-failures-in-the-u-k-raise-concerns-11656063000
Plans to tighten controls over audits and accounting in the U.K. may end up giving corporate insiders too much leniency to be effective, some regulators and academics say.
The U.K. government revealed a plan last month that would require directors from large listed companies to either comply with newly proposed audit rules or explain why they don’t, a move that would be a step back from previous plans to hold directors personally liable for failed oversight of internal controls. The proposed change is part of a broader strategy to overhaul audit and governance rules as the U.K. aims to bolster confidence in corporate accounting.
The “comply or explain” approach is a mainstay of the U.K. corporate governance code, but some worry that marrying the principle with audit reforms may not renew trust in an audit sector that has experienced high-profile scandals recently.
 The Morning Ledger provides daily news and insights on corporate finance from the CFO Journal team. 
“The principle may be generally effective in the U.K., because it’s something that investors and larger U.K. companies do take seriously,” said Marc Moore, chair in corporate and financial law at the University College London’s law school. “But these reforms are taking comply and explain into relatively [uncharted] territory.”
Jan du Plessis, chair of the Financial Reporting Council that oversees audit and accounting in the U.K., last week described the government’s decision to back off of stricter oversight requirements for directors as a missed opportunity.
“Just to put all of the onus on the audit profession, and to hold the audit firms accountable for when things go wrong, really misses the point,” Mr. du Plessis said at City and Financial Global’s Regulation of Listed Companies Summit. “That would be the argument in favor of boards pressurized to take more responsibility to check that their own house is in order.”
The FRC has said it expects to issue guidance soon on how it plans to respond to the government’s proposal.
Introduced in 1992, the comply or explain principle applies to corporate matters such as guidance on board composition and keeping board chair and chief executive roles separate. The flexibility stands in contrast to the mandates that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act imposes in the U.S., and is seen by some as beneficial for companies. However, critics have said the comply or explain principle gives too much leeway.
Among FTSE 350 companies, 44% indicated compliance with the corporate governance code that was last updated in 2018, according to data shared with the CFO Journal by professional services firm Grant Thornton UK LLP for the 14 months ended May 2021. That is down from 57% in the prior-year report. Of those companies that don’t comply with code principles, 41% provided a meaningful statement on why, according to the latest analysis, compared with 32% in the 2020 report.
In the face of audit scandals involving construction and facilities management company Carillion PLC, department-store chain BHS Ltd. and cafe chain Patisserie Valerie Ltd., the audit industry in the U.K. has faced pressure to make changes. The government’s suggested revisions announced in May confirmed the creation of a new regulator called the Audit, Reporting and Governance Authority, which will replace the FRC. They also seek to limit the dominance of Big Four audit firms Deloitte, Ernst & Young, KPMG and PricewaterhouseCoopers.










      
      Jan Babiak



      sits on company boards in both the U.S. and the U.K., and said comply or explain has been effective in the U.K. One early practice the principle applied to was on separating a company’s chair and CEO roles so that the same person doesn’t hold both jobs. Within a few years, most companies came into compliance with that guidance, said Ms. Babiak, who spoke based on general board experience. She is currently on the boards at










            Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc.


      and










            Euromoney Institutional Investor


      PLC.
Meanwhile, U.K. companies aren’t subject to rigid rules that apply regardless of circumstances, Ms. Babiak said. “It kind of rejects the whole idea that one size fits all,” she said.
Ms. Babiak warned against interpreting numbers showing that companies aren’t complying or explaining to mean that the principle doesn’t work. In her view, audit committees often apply the same rigor when it comes to oversight of financials, regardless of whether they are in the boardrooms of U.K. or U.S. companies.
Because of Sarbanes-Oxley in the U.S., chief executive and financial officers have to attest to the accuracy of financial statements and face civil and even criminal penalties if they certify that corporate books are accurate when they aren’t. The law also stipulates that a company’s audit committee oversee reporting of financial statements.
Ms. Babiak said Sarbanes-Oxley also creates more procedures for finance teams and audit committees, “and those things are expensive.” She added: “And that costs shareholders,” noting that while costly, Sarbanes-Oxley works well in the governance context. 
Valentina Bruno, a professor of finance at American University in Washington, considered whether the comply or explain approach was working more than a decade ago, in 2009. In research that looked at 245 nonfinancial companies, she and co-researchers found that companies provided “boilerplate” explanations on noncompliance rather than detailed explanations.
And this practice continues, she said this month. “Explanations are typically opaque and uninformative, suggesting that companies comply with the letter but not the spirit of regulation,” Ms. Bruno said, adding that she is uncertain that the proposed changes will enhance accountability.
The proposed reforms lack the necessary teeth, according to Mr. Moore. As is, shareholders police companies’ compliance with the corporate governance code, and if they don’t apply pressure on companies to provide more fulsome information about noncompliance, companies aren’t required to do so, he said.
Mr. Moore cautions against extending that task to financial accounting. “On the quality and reliability of a company’s financial disclosures—I just don’t know how well-equipped shareholders are to really pass judgment on that.”
Write to Jennifer Williams-Alvarez at jennifer.williams-alvarez@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

