President Biden responded to comments Elon Musk reportedly made in an email to staff that said he has a "super bad feeling" about the economy and plans to cut about 10% of Tesla’s salaried jobs. Photo: Patrick Semansky/AP
President Biden called the availability of Covid-19 vaccines for young children a “monumental step,” speaking a few days after the CDC recommended that children as young as 6 months receive the newly authorized shots. Photo: Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images
Every day, millions of sailors, truck drivers, longshoremen, warehouse workers and delivery drivers keep mountains of goods moving into stores and homes to meet consumers’ increasing expectations of convenience. But this complex movement of goods underpinning the global economy is far more vulnerable than many imagined. Photo illustration: Adele Morgan
On June 29, 2007, the first iPhone went on sale. On that same day, a boy named Noah Schmick was born. Over the next 15 years, the iPhone grew…and so did Noah. Through interviews with current and former Apple executives, WSJ’s Joanna Stern traces how Apple’s invention matured and changed all of us—perhaps the youngest generation most of all.
Political Cuts: The gas tax holiday is another way of diverting attention from one of the contributors to inflation: a rushed transition to green energy. Images: AFP/Getty Images Composite: Mark Kelly
Electric-vehicle startups like Rivian, Lucid, Fisker, Canoo and Lordstown are having to adjust to the realities of making vehicles in a harsh economy. WSJ’s George Downs explains some of the challenges they’re facing and why some even risk going out of business. Photo composite: George Downs
Elon Musk said Tesla’s factories in Germany and Texas are losing billions of dollars as supply-chain snags and battery-cell manufacturing hurdles limit production. Output at the company’s Shanghai plant also took a hit during the city’s Covid-19 lockdown. Photo: Patrick Fallon/Reuters
Electric-scooter rental companies are hitting speed bumps in the U.S. over safety and other concerns. But in Tel Aviv, one in 10 residents has rented a Bird e-scooter, and the city appears to be embracing them. WSJ’s Jason Bellini takes a look at the challenges and potential lessons of the e-scooter craze.

Luxury home tours on YouTube are exploding, and transforming the way high-end real estate is discovered and sometimes sold. YouTube personality Enes Yilmazer walks us through the making of a video for his channel, which gets an average of 15 million views a month. Photo: Michal Czerwonka for The Wall Street Journal
Zoom CFO Kelly Steckelberg shares the company's latest investments in technologies such as conversation AI with the acquisition of Solvvy, and how that can improve the experience for their customer base in a hybrid workplace.
