“As We Work” is a new  podcast from the Wall Street Journal about the changing workplace and what you need to know to navigate it. Every week, we’ll speak with experts, Journal reporters, and you about how our jobs intersect with everything else. In season one, we break down how our relationship to work has evolved in the wake of the pandemic and other social phenomena. Hosted by Tess Vigeland. For further reading on pay transparency, check out WSJ reporter Chip Cutter's January article "You'll Soon Get to See Pay on NYC Job Postings," as well as Dr. Jake Rosenfeld's book "You're Paid What You're Worth – and Other Myths of the Modern Economy." Questions? Story ideas? Want to tell us how much you make? Email us at AsWeWork@wsj.com.
Toni Ko, founder of NYX Cosmetics and Bespoke Beauty Brands, tells WSJ's Veronica Dagher how she's launching a new makeup line amid the pandemic. Help us shape our future coverage of women and money. Share your feedback at wsj.com/secrets 
Katie Rodan and Kathy Fields, co-founders of skincare treatment Proactiv and their namesake brand, Rodan + Fields, tell WSJ's Veronica Dagher what they've learned about partnership and building companies.
Emily Ramshaw, cofounder of women-focused nonprofit media company the 19th*, tells WSJ's Veronica Dagher how she's adapted her organization to the coronavirus and why the untold stories of the female electorate matter.
Angela Yee, co-host of the nationally syndicated radio show The Breakfast Club, tells WSJ's Veronica Dagher how she manages multiple streams of income and what she's learned about investing.
Tami Erwin, executive vice president and chief executive of Verizon Business Group, tells WSJ's Veronica Dagher how she's adapted her 26,000 employees to remote work and what managers can do to help working parents thrive in the pandemic. 
Marla Beck, co-founder and chief executive of beauty company Bluemercury, tells WSJ's Veronica Dagher how she's adapted her business amid the pandemic and what's ahead for the luxury beauty industry.
Vanessa Williams, award-winning actress and singer, tells WSJ's Veronica Dagher how she's coped with racism in the entertainment industry and how she's working to end inequality for other performers. 
Erin Loos Cutraro, founder of She Should Run, tells  WSJ's Veronica Dagher what prevents women from running for elected office and how she's working to change that.
Sarah Deer, Native American lawyer and MacArthur fellow, tells WSJ's Veronica Dagher how she's worked for justice for Native survivors of sexual abuse and domestic violence and why the recent Supreme Court Oklahoma land ruling matters.
