
https://www.wsj.com/articles/banks-face-risks-from-geopolitics-staff-turnover-occ-says-11656099709
Banks are facing a number of challenges this year, including more complex sanctions compliance and increasing staff turnover, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency said.
The OCC, which regulates national banks and federal savings associations, said in its semiannual risk report published Thursday that banks have continued to navigate challenges related to the Covid-19 pandemic. Geopolitical events, such as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, inflation and higher interest rates are posing more headwinds, the OCC said, but banks are financially strong enough to deal with the challenges.
 Our Morning Risk Report features insights and news on governance, risk and compliance. 
Banks are also facing growing operational and compliance challenges, the regulator said. Financial institutions are managing to comply with complex sanctions on Russia imposed by the U.S. and its allies following the Kremlin’s invasion of Ukraine, while facing growing competition for compliance professionals, at both the management and staff levels, according to the report. In particular, more cryptocurrency companies are looking to hire experienced compliance staff, including by hiring directly from the traditional finance sector, to help them navigate an evolving regulatory landscape. 
The OCC also noted an increase in cyberattacks on the financial-services sector, adding that the geopolitical situation highlights the importance of cyber threat monitoring and defense.
Write to Mengqi Sun at mengqi.sun@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
In a world where data is often an organization’s most valuable asset, data management is fast becoming a fundamental competency for realizing value from M&A transactions
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
In a world where data is often an organization’s most valuable asset, data management is fast becoming a fundamental competency for realizing value from M&A transactions
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

