A.M. Edition for July 5. The White House is divided on whether to remove duties on Chinese goods. WSJ reporter Yuka Hayashi explains President Biden’s options. Plus, the private sector appears more committed to climate change than governments. What does that mean for a warming world? Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for July 1. Airlines are working to resolve flight delays, cancellations and other issues that have saddled the industry as they head into a busy stretch during the summer travel season. One thing that isn't abating? Demand from travelers. WSJ airlines reporter Alison Sider joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss.
A.M. Edition for July 1. Global markets have closed out their most bruising first half of a year in decades. WSJ markets reporter Akane Otani explains that while history suggests the next six months could see a turnaround, investor sentiment remains pessimistic. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for June 30. The Supreme Court has ended its term with a blockbuster ruling that limits the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency. The ruling could have far-reaching implications, not just  for the EPA and the Biden administration’s climate plan, but for other federal agencies as well. WSJ energy policy reporter Tim Puko joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss.
A.M. Edition for June 30. An overwhelming majority of Ukrainians say it would be unacceptable to reach a peace deal with Russia by ceding territory to Moscow, according to a new WSJ-NORC poll carried out earlier this month. WSJ news editor Aaron Zitner explains what Ukrainians had to say about President Volodymyr Zelensky and international support for the country. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for June 29. In 2020, the Supreme Court ruled that nearly half of the state of Oklahoma is Native American territory. But today, the court partially reversed that decision, ruling that Oklahoma can prosecute non-Native-Americans on tribal lands. WSJ justice and judiciary editor James Graff joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss what the ruling means for Oklahoma, and for tribal sovereignty.
A.M. Edition for June 29. Many small communities across the U.S. have seen an infusion of remote workers drawn away from big cities during the pandemic. Wall Street Journal labor economics reporter Sarah Chaney Cambon spoke to business owners in one community who are capitalizing on this labor shift and explains whether this rural resurgence is likely to last. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for June 28. Three people believed to be part of a migrant-smuggling operation have been taken into custody, following the deaths of at least 51 people who were among those found in a sweltering tractor-trailer in San Antonio, Texas, on Monday. Immigration reporter Alicia Caldwell joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss the tragedy and what it tells us about the situation at the southern border.
A.M. Edition for June 28. The city of Shanghai may be emerging from a monthslong Covid-induced lockdown, but for companies across China, concerns about abrupt future lockdowns loom large. WSJ China corporate correspondent Liza Lin explains how a recent cycle of pandemic restrictions could complicate future business decisions and risk denting consumer activity. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for June 27. The Supreme Court’s ruling to end protections for abortion access has left it to the states to decide whether to allow or restrict the procedure. On today’s episode, Congressional reporter Natalie Andrews, Supreme Court correspondent Jess Bravin, and legal affairs reporter Laura Kusisto join host Annmarie Fertoli to answer some of your questions about the historic decision.
Annmarie Fertoli hosts the PM edition of the What's News podcast. She joined The Wall Street Journal in 2017 after more than a decade in public radio: first with WFUV at her alma mater, Fordham University, then at WNYC, where she worked as a news host, reporter and producer for All Things Considered. Annmarie has also worked as a reporter and arts and entertainment editor for weekly newspapers on Long Island and in Queens. Her first print story for the WSJ focused on how the popular video game “Animal Crossing” became a form of therapy during the coronavirus pandemic—for her and many others.
Luke Vargas is the AM host of the What’s News podcast. He joined the WSJ in 2021 from the Skimm, where he was the senior producer of Skimm This. He previously spent seven years as a U.N.-based correspondent, hosting The World in 2:00 radio newscast and reporting from more than 35 countries for a consortium of local and regional AM/FM radio stations. Luke is a published poet and an avid permaculture landscaper, and designs detailed video game maps in his spare time.

