P.M. Edition for July 8. The labor market in the U.S. is still tight, and employers are struggling to hire enough workers. In the construction industry, that has meant stalled projects that the Biden administration had hoped would get a jumpstart from last year's $1 trillion infrastructure law. WSJ Washington reporter Julie Bykowicz joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss how contractors are trying to overcome the shortage.
 A.M. Edition for July 8. Former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was assassinated while campaigning Friday. He left power in 2020 as one of Japan’s best known and most polarizing officials. Plus, an interview with WSJ reporter Josh Mitchell about how red states are recovering quicker from the pandemic than blue ones. Luke Vargas hosts. 
P.M. Edition for July 7. Following scores of resignations, a series of scandals, and mounting political pressure, U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced that he is stepping down. It’s a remarkable fall for a once formidable figure in British politics. U.K. correspondent Max Colchester joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss how we got here and what comes next.
A.M. Edition for July 7. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is expected to announce today that he’ll resign. WSJ bureau chief at large Stephen Fidler explains what led to Johnson’s fall and what’s next for the British government. Plus, European businesses and governments race to shore up energy supplies after Russia reduced its natural gas exports. Luke Vargas hosts. 
P.M. Edition for July 6. Millions of doses of Covid-19 vaccines, once in high demand, are going unused. Drugmakers and health authorities say supply is outstripping demand. WSJ pharmaceutical reporter Peter Loftus joins host Annmarie Fertoli discuss.
A.M. Edition for July 6. Military strategists are learning in real time how future wars will be fought. WSJ Brussels bureau chief Dan Michaels explains how the war in Ukraine could shape future conflicts. Plus, the doom cycle haunting Italian banks. Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for July 5. Consumers have been paying higher prices for so long, they may be getting used to it. That’s a problem for the Federal Reserve, which is trying to bring down prices without landing the economy in a recession. WSJ chief economics correspondent Nick Timiraos joins host Annmarie Fertoli to explain.
A.M. Edition for July 5. The White House is divided on whether to remove duties on Chinese goods. WSJ reporter Yuka Hayashi explains President Biden’s options. Plus, the private sector appears more committed to climate change than governments. What does that mean for a warming world? Luke Vargas hosts.
P.M. Edition for July 1. Airlines are working to resolve flight delays, cancellations and other issues that have saddled the industry as they head into a busy stretch during the summer travel season. One thing that isn't abating? Demand from travelers. WSJ airlines reporter Alison Sider joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss.
A.M. Edition for July 1. Global markets have closed out their most bruising first half of a year in decades. WSJ markets reporter Akane Otani explains that while history suggests the next six months could see a turnaround, investor sentiment remains pessimistic. Luke Vargas hosts.
Annmarie Fertoli hosts the PM edition of the What's News podcast. She joined The Wall Street Journal in 2017 after more than a decade in public radio: first with WFUV at her alma mater, Fordham University, then at WNYC, where she worked as a news host, reporter and producer for All Things Considered. Annmarie has also worked as a reporter and arts and entertainment editor for weekly newspapers on Long Island and in Queens. Her first print story for the WSJ focused on how the popular video game “Animal Crossing” became a form of therapy during the coronavirus pandemic—for her and many others.
Luke Vargas is the AM host of the What’s News podcast. He joined the WSJ in 2021 from the Skimm, where he was the senior producer of Skimm This. He previously spent seven years as a U.N.-based correspondent, hosting The World in 2:00 radio newscast and reporting from more than 35 countries for a consortium of local and regional AM/FM radio stations. Luke is a published poet and an avid permaculture landscaper, and designs detailed video game maps in his spare time.

