
https://www.wsj.com/articles/higher-financing-costs-lower-valuations-crimp-m-a-11657272602
Companies in the market for deals are grappling with higher financing costs and lower valuations as inflation and an uncertain economic outlook threaten to weigh on mergers and acquisitions for the remainder of this year.
Last year saw a record year for deal making, fueled by low interest rates and large cash piles. But companies are now facing headwinds when it comes to buying and selling businesses. Among them: rising interest rates, Russia’s war in Ukraine and a selloff in capital markets.
During the first six months of the year, companies globally announced deals worth $2.17 trillion, down 21% from a year earlier, according to data provider Refinitiv.
“The year has started off with an unprecedented amount of turbulence,” said David Harding, an advisory partner at consulting firm Bain & Co. Bain estimates the value of deal making globally will reach $4.7 trillion in 2022, a 20% decline from the year before but still the second best year for M&A in the past two decades.
Despite the uncertain economic backdrop, companies continue to move forward with large, strategic deals in a tougher regulatory environment. Top transactions announced this year include










            Microsoft Corp.’s
$75 billion purchase of videogame maker










            Activision Blizzard Inc.,


      microchip company










            Broadcom Inc.’s
$61 billion acquisition of software provider










            VMware Inc.


      and warehouse giant










            Prologis Inc.’s
all-stock takeover of competitor










            Duke Realty Corp.


      , for $26 billion. 
Prologis in June raised its offer after Duke rejected an earlier bid of nearly $24 billion. “We viewed it as a fair price,” Chief Financial Officer









      
      Tim Arndt



      said last month after Prologis announced the revised deal. The transaction will add 160 million square feet of warehouse space in 19 U.S. logistics markets to Prologis’s portfolio. It currently manages about 1 billion square feet of industrial space globally.
Companies accumulated large cash piles early on during the pandemic that continue to bolster their balance sheets. Cash balances, including short-term investments, at S&P 500 companies, increased 1% during the first quarter from a year earlier, to $8.3 trillion, according to S&P Global Market Intelligence, a data provider.
 The Morning Ledger provides daily news and insights on corporate finance from the CFO Journal team. 
But the downturn in stocks and bonds in recent months has made the capital markets less attractive to companies looking to line up financing. U.S. businesses—particularly those with non-investment grade credit ratings—raised less money through debt and equity issuance during the first half of 2022 compared with the prior-year period.
Many acquirers are relying more on bank loans to fund deals instead of tapping the capital markets, as bond investors are demanding higher yields and the pricing on bank loans is more affordable, said Stephen Philipson, head of commercial products at Minneapolis-based lender










            U.S. Bancorp.


      “It’s been a big turn this year, particularly over the last few months,” Mr. Philipson said.
But bank loans also come with limitations, including the fact that they often provide companies with less capital than bond issuances, he said. 
Meanwhile, private-equity firms are turning to private lenders to fund deals, following a sharp decline in the issuance of junk bonds and leveraged loans. Leveraged loans are typically syndicated by a group of banks and other financial institutions, which set the terms and, in volatile markets, can change them or cancel the loan late in the process. But banks have become more cautious out of concerns including geopolitical uncertainty and the Federal Reserve’s aggressive rate increases.
“We’ve seen our private-equity clients be more willing to turn to [private lenders] in an environment where the money-center banks simply won’t write the commitments,” said









      
      Paul Bird,



      a senior M&A partner at law firm Debevoise & Plimpton LLP, referring to large commercial banks.
A slump in financing markets contributed to drugstore chain










            Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc.’s


      decision to shelve its plans to sell its Boots and No7 Beauty Co. businesses. The company, which began discussions with potential acquirers of the businesses in January, attracted between eight and 10 interested buyers for Boots, the U.K.’s biggest pharmacy chain, Chief Executive









      
      Rosalind Brewer



      said on a June 30 earnings call. But Walgreens said it was unsatisfied with the bids it received.
“We had very productive discussions, and got into a detailed due diligence just as the market began to turn on us,” Ms. Brewer said on the call, adding that the change was “unexpected and dramatic.” The company declined to comment further.
Deal valuations—calculated as a target’s median enterprise value, divided by earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization—have dipped across industries for strategic transactions from last year’s record high, falling to 12.6 times this year through June 1 compared with 15.4 times in 2021, according to Bain. 
Buyers are also factoring their inflation expectations for the months ahead into their offers. “What you’re modeling for inflation could drastically change the enterprise value for what you’re willing to pay,” said Colin Wittmer, U.S. deals leader at audit and advisory firm PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
Lower valuations will likely create buying opportunities for some companies this year, advisers said. U.S. Bancorp’s Mr. Philipson said he is advising investment-grade companies with targets in mind to lock in financing before rates increase further. “Take the money today,” he said.
Write to Kristin Broughton at Kristin.Broughton@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
Corporate travel spend remains below pre-pandemic levels but should grow significantly over the rest of 2022. Still, many uncertainties remain.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
Corporate travel spend remains below pre-pandemic levels but should grow significantly over the rest of 2022. Still, many uncertainties remain.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

