Cuban court sentences rapper Maykel Castillo and artist Luis Manuel Otero for contempt, public disorder and desecrating national symbols. 
Santiago Pérez and José de Córdoba
June 24, 2022
Gustavo Petro proposed jobs for all and cuts to oil output, but many doubt he will have the funds or clout to implement sweeping change.
Kejal Vyas
June 24, 2022
The Argentine soccer star’s doctors and nurses face up to 25 years in prison for alleged negligence tied to his 2020 death. 
Ryan Dube and Silvina Fryldewsky
June 23, 2022
The remote region where the killings took place Monday is a battleground for drug gangs that fight over opium, marijuana and illegal logging. 
Juan Montes and José de Córdoba
June 21, 2022
The shift signals less influence for the U.S., particularly on migration and drugs.  
Juan Forero and Kejal Vyas
June 21, 2022
Former guerrilla Gustavo Petro, who pledges to expand state control of the economy, overcomes decades of establishment rule in the U.S.’s top Latin America ally.
Juan Forero and Kejal Vyas
June 20, 2022
The U.S.’s top regional ally joins countries across Latin America where frustrated voters have ushered in antiestablishment politicians. “The forces that operated in the center of the political spectrum have perished.”
Juan Forero and David Luhnow
June 17, 2022
Both candidates on Sunday’s presidential ballot oppose fracking, while state company Ecopetrol is looking to try the practice to bolster dwindling reserves.
Kejal Vyas
June 16, 2022
President Gabriel Boric shifts gears to halt violent attacks on forestry companies and police by radical Mapuche members with claims on ancestral lands.
Patricia Garip | Photographs by Carlos Villalon for The Wall Street Journal 
June 14, 2022
An armed fisherman has been arrested as authorities search for British journalist Dom Phillips and indigenous expert Bruno Pereira, missing for a week in the rainforest. 
Samantha Pearson, Luciana Magalhães and Vinod Sreeharsha
June 13, 2022
Populist President Andrés Manuel López Obrador is seeking to reclaim state control over the oil-and-gas and electricity sectors. “It’s a closing off of Mexico.”
David Luhnow and Santiago Pérez
June 12, 2022
The summit agreement calls on countries to build up their own asylum systems, create more work visas and step up their own border enforcement. 
Michelle Hackman and Tarini Parti
June 10, 2022
The president outlined his vision of shared goals on climate and migration at a summit boycotted by some nations.
Ken Thomas and Samantha Pearson
June 10, 2022
Brazil has been testing ways to boost farm productivity and reduce the need for imported fertilizers for years, trying solutions that are now subjects of widespread interest because of the Ukraine war’s effect on global supplies.
Vinod Sreeharsha and Samantha Pearson | Photographs by Dado Galdieri for The Wall Street Journal 
June 8, 2022
Dom Phillips, who is writing a book about the Amazon, was last seen with indigenous expert Bruno Pereira Sunday morning in the Javari Valley, a vast territory plagued by illegal logging, mining and poaching.
Luciana Magalhaes and Samantha Pearson
June 7, 2022
The Biden administration will exclude Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela from the Summit of the Americas despite pressure from Mexico and other countries.
Michelle Hackman and José de Córdoba
June 6, 2022
Known for folksy zingers, construction tycoon Rodolfo Hernández rose in the polls as an anticorruption outsider riding voter disgust with the establishment. But the septuagenarian faces legal challenges.
Kejal Vyas and Juan Forero
June 4, 2022
The drug gang run by Gilberto Rodríguez Orejuela, who died at age 83 of undisclosed causes, once sent about 80% of the cocaine that entered the U.S.
José de Córdoba and Ryan Dube
June 2, 2022
The lengthy charter would scale back mining, grant sweeping social rights and decentralize power, benefiting indigenous groups and local officials.
Ryan Dube
May 30, 2022
Gustavo Petro, a former guerrilla, took the most votes in Sunday’s first round of voting by pledging to insert the state into Colombia’s market economy, heavily tax the rich and move the country away from its dependence on oil and coal.
Juan Forero  and Kejal Vyas 
May 30, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
