
https://www.wsj.com/articles/small-businesses-plead-with-sec-to-show-restraint-on-climate-rules-11655916721
Small businesses, normally outside the domain of the Securities and Exchange Commission, say the regulator’s proposal on climate disclosures will saddle them with a compliance burden they won’t be able to handle.
Farms, independent manufacturers and other small businesses that don’t trade on stock exchanges normally don’t fall within the SEC’s purview; the agency regulates public companies and some other market participants. But small firms fear they will be forced to cough up heaps of information on their roles, however small, in emitting carbon because the SEC wants large public companies to catalog emissions in their entire supply chains.
“Small and independent businesses cannot afford the experts, accountants and lawyers needed to comply with complex government reporting regimes,” the National Federation of Independent Business said in a comment letter filed with the SEC.
The agency on Friday closed a period during which it solicited public comment on its proposed rule, which would require public companies to report on their emissions and on their risks from climate change. The regulator got about 3,400 letters, significantly more than usual, including from businesses, trade associations, politicians, churches and individual citizens. 
The SEC generally considers such feedback in deciding whether to change its proposals. The regulator didn’t respond to a request for comment.
While larger companies gave the climate proposal mixed reviews, with some welcoming it and others focusing on technical hurdles to compliance, small businesses’ responses had a tone closer to existential dread.
Family-owned egg farms could be disqualified from doing business with larger companies, and the rule could thus “push small and medium-sized farmers out of business,” the National Association of Egg Farmers said in its letter to the SEC.
Like many critics, the farmers took issue with the proposed requirement for public companies to disclose what are known as Scope 3 emissions, those related to a company’s activities but outside its operational control. Emissions associated with a publicly traded company’s supply chain, for instance, how much carbon is emitted by the farmers supplying a food maker’s grain or emissions associated with a small manufacturer that makes parts for a major company, could all be included in Scope 3.
The proposed rule would impose “unrealistic, unwarranted and costly obligations” on restaurants at a time when the industry is “already reeling,” the National Restaurant Association said in its letter. In what the association described as a perverse possible outcome, publicly traded restaurant chains could end up moving away from local farmers and suppliers to source their inventories from larger companies with the resources to catalog their emissions.
Gas stations, most of which are owned and operated as small businesses, might have to report their emissions information to publicly traded suppliers like oil companies and beverage companies, as those suppliers try to work out the emissions associated with the use of their products, the National Association of Convenience Stores said. Coming up with that information could be a major burden for the low-margin industry, the group said.
Like the restaurant association, the convenience-store group said that the rule, if adopted, could drive large, publicly traded companies to simplify their own compliance by doing business with other large entities with more resources to track emissions data.
“That loss of business would be difficult for small firms,” the convenience-store group said.
The National Association of Home Builders, a trade group whose average member employs five people, said that the Scope 3 requirements would give the SEC de facto regulatory authority over businesses it couldn’t otherwise touch.
The SEC rules aren’t final, and they are almost certain to face a legal challenge.
The National Association of Manufacturers, which has voiced its opposition to the climate disclosure rule, sued over a rule mandated by the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act that required manufacturers to declare that their minerals were “conflict-free,” that is, not tied to the civil war in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
An appeals court held that requiring a company to “confess blood on its hands” violated its rights, and the SEC, whose leadership passed into Republican hands while the litigation was under way, backed away from enforcing the rule in 2017.










      
      Jay Timmons,



      chief executive of the National Association of Manufacturers, said small manufacturers that are in his organization’s membership “simply can’t take” the regulatory costs they might be facing.
The SEC could also propose changes that blunt some of the more controversial impacts of its proposal. The National Federation of Independent Business in its letter pleaded for that kind of regulatory restraint.
“Please keep small and independent businesses in your mind and out of your grasp,” it said.
Write to Richard Vanderford at richard.vanderford@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

