
https://www.wsj.com/articles/cohnreznick-to-pay-1-9-million-in-sec-settlement-over-audit-issues-11654725386
CohnReznick LLP has agreed to pay $1.9 million to resolve Securities and Exchange Commission charges accusing the audit and advisory firm of improper professional conduct in connection with its audit of Longfin Corp., a cryptocurrency company accused of fraud by the regulator.
In an audit just before Longfin’s collapse, a CohnReznick manager unknowingly idenfitied fraudulent transactions that dramatically inflated the company’s revenue, but the firm failed to properly follow up, according to the SEC.
The settlement announced by the SEC on Wednesday also resolves charges over CohnReznick’s audit work for Sequential Brands Group Inc., a now-bankrupt brand management company that once owned a majority stake in celebrity Jessica Simpson’s fashion line.
 Our Morning Risk Report features insights and news on governance, risk and compliance. 
Three firm partners—Stephen M. Wyss, Stephen H. Jackson, and Robert G. Hilbert—also settled with the SEC in connection with CohnReznick’s work for Sequential. Neither CohnReznick nor the partners have formally admitted or denied the SEC’s allegations.
CohnReznick said Wednesday that over the past five years it has significantly expanded its national assurance team and implemented a “continuous improvement initiative” to enhance its quality control. The three partners didn’t immediately respond to requests for comment.
The SEC filed charges against Longfin in April 2018, just months after the company listed its shares on Nasdaq. Longfin’s shares soared days after their December 2017 listing, giving the company a $5.5 billion valuation.
The SEC said CohnReznick failed to grasp fraudulent transactions at Longfin during its audit of the company because of a lack of clear policies and procedures. 
The firm’s engagement team didn’t exercise “appropriate professional skepticism,” and a review by its national office worked on a highly compressed timetable, despite the complexity of the audit, the SEC said.
Longfin shut down completely in November 2018 and the SEC obtained a $6.8 million default judgment against the company in 2019. Its chief executive settled with the SEC.
In their audit work for Sequential, CohnReznick auditors too readily accepted how the brand manager valued its goodwill despite misgivings of the firm’s valuations specialists, the SEC alleged. Sequential was delisted from Nasdaq and filed for bankruptcy in 2021.
CohnReznick caused Sequential and Longfin to make misleading financial disclosures because of its “deficient system and repeated failures to exercise due professional care at all levels,” said Melissa Hodgman, associate director in the SEC’s division of enforcement.
In addition to auditing, New York-based CohnReznick provides assurance services and advice on risk, mergers and a range of other areas.
Write to Richard Vanderford at richard.vanderford@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
Related coverage, selected by the editors
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

