
https://www.wsj.com/articles/glencore-subsidiary-pleads-guilty-to-bribery-charges-in-u-k-11655832126
A subsidiary of commodities giant










            Glencore


      PLC entered a corporate guilty plea in the U.K. on Tuesday as part of a series of deals with authorities in that country, the U.S. and Brazil to resolve allegations of bribery and market manipulation. 
The subsidiary, Glencore Energy (UK) Ltd., admitted to paying more than $28 million in bribes to secure access to oil across its operations in five African countries—Nigeria, Cameroon, Ivory Coast, Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan—according to an indictment filed in London’s Southwark Crown Court.
The financial penalty the company will pay in the U.K. will be determined at a sentencing scheduled for early November, according to the U.K.’s Serious Fraud Office, which oversaw that country’s investigation into Glencore. 
 Our Morning Risk Report features insights and news on governance, risk and compliance. 
The guilty plea is an achievement for the U.K.’s SFO at a time when it has been bruised by a series of legal defeats. The agency, which oversees the investigation and prosecution of major economic crimes, has faced scrutiny in particular over its handling of a probe into oil-services firm Unaoil Group.
The guilty plea by the Glencore subsidiary is part of a series of coordinated resolutions struck with the SFO and authorities in the U.S. and Brazil, which were announced in detail last month. Two other Glencore subsidiaries entered guilty pleas in the U.S. in May, and agreed to pay about $700 million to resolve a U.S. Justice Department bribery probe into the company, and about $485 million to settle separate U.S. criminal and civil investigations into the company’s manipulation of fuel-oil prices.
Glencore has said it expects to pay between $1.2 billion and $1.5 billion in total to resolve the investigations in the U.S., U.K. and Brazil. Meanwhile, the Anglo-Swiss company has said it continues to cooperate with investigations by Swiss and Dutch authorities.


A Glencore spokesman declined to comment Tuesday on the guilty plea by Glencore Energy. 
Chief Executive









      
      Gary Nagle



      said in a statement in May that Glencore acknowledged the misconduct identified by U.S. authorities and had taken steps to put the matter behind it, including by making improvements to its compliance program.
The company last week said it made more money trading oil, metals and other commodities in six months than it had expected to bring in all year, and expected to post half-year earnings of more than $3.2 billion before interest and taxes. Glencore’s trading division earned $3.7 billion in 2021, according to the company.
Write to Dylan Tokar at dylan.tokar@wsj.com
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8

      Appeared in the June 22, 2022, print edition as 'Glencore Unit Admits Bribes in U.K..'
    
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
As companies weigh the strategic benefits of a blockchain-enabled metaverse, they may need to take a fresh approach to account for nonfungible tokens (NFTs) and other technologies.
The Wall Street Journal news department was not involved in the creation of this content.
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
Copyright © 2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved

