With the Supreme Court ruling in favor of religious schools in Maine and a football coach's right to pray in public, plus the historic overturning of Roe v. Wade, the conservative legal movement are winning cases at an unprecedented rate.  So why now? And will Democrats plan on going as far as they can to fight these decisions, including threatening the impeachment of Justices?  
In a historic 6-3 ruling, the Justices uphold Mississippi's ban on abortions after 15 weeks, while a 5-4 majority reverses Roe v. Wade to send abortion policy back to the states. President Biden responds that Congress could pass a national abortion law, but would that be unconstitutional? And will rallying the Democratic base on this issue upend the November elections?
In a 6-3 decision led by Justice Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court struck down a New York law on issuing concealed-weapons permits by saying it was in violation of the Second Amendment. So where does that leave Joe Biden and others who opposed the ruling? Plus, the Senate advances a bipartisan gun safety bill despite complaints from some Republicans, including Donald Trump. 

Officials from Arizona and Georgia testify that Donald Trump's legal team provided no evidence in 2020 for his claims that the election had been stolen. So why does Trump continue to repeat disproven theories? Plus, the Supreme Court rules in favor of religious parents excluded from Maine's school-choice program.
Voters go to the polls in Virginia and Alabama, as a Republican Senate candidate in Missouri, former Gov. Eric Greitens, faces backlash for a "RINO hunting" ad. Plus, Joe Biden considers whether to call for a holiday on the 18.4-cent federal gas tax. But could that get through Congress, and with gas prices near $5 a gallon nationwide, would voters even give Biden credit for savings of 18.4 cents?
As Joe Biden's approval numbers sag, Democrats begin saying that his age means he should step aside in 2024. Why the sudden change, since this question was treated as taboo in 2020, and where would Democrats turn if Biden declined to run for re-election? Plus, Sarah Palin leads a 48-candidate field in a race for Alaska's only House seat. 
As Donald Trump roars back at the House inquiry into the Capitol riot of Jan. 6, 2021, why isn't Congress moving more swiftly to head off a repeat by repealing the Electoral Count Act? Plus, why are investigators now seeking the testimony of Ginni Thomas, the wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas?

The January 6th Committee examines how much pressure Donald Trump put on Mike Pence to overturn the results of the 2020 election. Plus, the Capitol Police casts doubts on claims from Democrats that Republicans led "reconnaissance tours" of the Capitol days before the riots, and the White House says oil companies have a "patriotic duty" to lower gas prices.  
Faced with 8.6% inflation, the Federal Reserve raises interest rates by 75 basis points, the largest increase since 1994. But instead of acknowledging Washington's mistakes, Joe Biden continues to blame oil companies and Vladimir Putin for rising prices at the gas pump. Plus, Donald Trump's influence is tested by this week's primaries in South Carolina, as the GOP flips a Hispanic district in Texas.  
Twenty Republicans and Democrats announce a framework for gun legislation in response to the school shooting in Uvalde, Texas. How does the plan balance the Second Amendment with proposals like expanded background checks and "red flag" laws? Plus, the House finally moves on a bill to increase security for the families of Supreme Court Justices, and a listener suggests one way President Biden could lower the temperature.

Paul Gigot is the editorial page editor and vice president of The Wall Street Journal, a position he has held since 2001. He is responsible for the newspaper's editorials, op-ed articles and Leisure & Arts criticism and directs the editorial pages of the Journal's Asian and European editions and the OpinionJournal.com Web site. He is also the host of the weekly half-hour news program, the Journal Editorial Report, on the Fox News Channel.
Mr. Gigot joined the Journal in 1980 as a reporter in Chicago, and in 1982 he became the Journal's Asia correspondent, based in Hong Kong. He won an Overseas Press Club award for his reporting on the Philippines. In 1984, he was named the first editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal, based in Hong Kong. In 1987, he was assigned to Washington, where he contributed editorials and a weekly column on politics, "Potomac Watch," which won the 2000 Pulitzer Prize for commentary.
Mr. Gigot is a summa cum laude graduate of Dartmouth College, where he was chairman of the daily student newspaper.
