How a 57-year-old nurtures friendships by training to race the 9.5-mile Trans Tahoe Relay.
Jen Murphy
June 25, 2022
Scientists are increasingly evaluating the possible damage that too much exercise can do if you don’t allow enough time to rest.
Betsy Morris
June 19, 2022
A legal campaign to force changes at giant healthcare systems has new backing from John Arnold, a philanthropist who confronted pharmaceutical giants over drug prices.
Melanie Evans
June 13, 2022
The Food and Drug Administration’s positive assessment could bode well for the prospects the agency will authorize the vaccine’s use in young kids.
Peter Loftus
June 10, 2022
Did you or a loved one use Cerebral’s services for ADHD treatment, and receive an Adderall or other stimulant prescription? Fill out the form below.
Rolfe Winkler
June 10, 2022
Abbott Laboratories received a complaint filed by a former employee concerning problems at an infant-formula plant months earlier than previously publicly known, according to a government official, a person familiar with the matter, and documents viewed by The Wall Street Journal.
Jesse Newman and Peter Loftus
June 8, 2022
You’ve repeatedly tested negative on rapid tests despite having symptoms and recent exposure. Here’s what to do next.
Sumathi Reddy
June 8, 2022
The Federal Trade Commission is probing the six largest pharmacy-benefits managers over what impact their business models have on the accessibility and affordability of prescription drugs.
Kathryn Hardison and Joseph Walker
June 7, 2022
A wave of rescheduled reunions is sending alums right back into the anxious, awkward melodrama of their school days. 
Alex Janin
June 7, 2022
New research shows suicidal thoughts and attempts are more common in younger children than previously thought.
Andrea Petersen
June 5, 2022
The British pharmaceutical giant agreed to acquire the vaccine maker in a deal that would hand it a new vaccine technology targeting common bacterial diseases such as meningitis and pneumonia. 
Denise Roland
May 31, 2022
The pandemic has made us more accustomed to plans falling through at the last minute. We are more comfortable moving ahead with plans when others back out.
Alina Dizik
May 30, 2022
Parents are increasingly alarmed about the dangers of fentanyl as overdose deaths rise.
Betsy Morris | Photographs by Preston Gannaway for The Wall Street Journal 
May 29, 2022
A pandemic hobby for two South Carolina-based Brits has them prepping for an adventure of 3,000 nautical miles from the Canary Islands to Antigua.
Jen Murphy | Photographs by Peter Frank Edwards for The Wall Street Journal 
May 28, 2022
The decisions come amid a federal investigation and a leadership change at Cerebral.
Rolfe Winkler and Sarah Nassauer
May 26, 2022
New research shows a modest overall reduction in the likelihood of experiencing symptoms six months after an infection compared with those who were unvaccinated
Sumathi Reddy
May 25, 2022
Sleep experts say a consistent sleep schedule could help you perform better at work and forge better relationships.
Alex Janin
May 25, 2022
Biological age won’t help you live forever, but a “credit score for your body” can prolong your lifespan, some scientists say.
Betsy Morris
May 24, 2022
The directors agreed on a plan to replace Chief Executive Kyle Robertson, sparking leadership tumult at the mental-health startup as it contends with scrutiny over its prescription practices for controlled substances.
Rolfe Winkler
May 18, 2022
Trying to push yourself will often make the symptoms worse. Try these strategies instead.
Sumathi Reddy
May 16, 2022
Page
WSJ Membership
Customer Service
Tools & Features
Ads
More
Dow Jones Products
