P.M. Edition for June 8. Both Democrats and Republicans are eyeing New Hampshire as a key battleground in the midterm elections. WSJ politics reporter Eliza Collins spoke to candidates and voters about abortion, the economy, and other issues driving them, and joins host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss. 
Correction: New Hampshire's electoral map has been finalized. A previous version of this podcast and accompanying transcript incorrectly stated the map is still under consideration because of redistricting.
This transcript was prepared by a transcription service. This version may not be in its final form and may be updated.
Annmarie Fertoli: New proposals from the SEC could fundamentally change market dynamics. What impact would they have on everyday investors? Plus, how much of a wedge issue will abortion rights be heading into the midterm elections? We'll hear from voters and candidates in New Hampshire.
Eliza Collins: There are independent voters who were really torn on this issue. But of course, there are voters on both sides of the aisle who feel very strongly.
Annmarie Fertoli: Plus, our love-hate relationship with Google Docs. It's Wednesday, June 8th. I'm Annmarie Fertoli for the Wall Street Journal. This is the PM edition of What's News, the top headlines and business stories that moved the world today.
We report exclusively that baby formula maker Abbott Labs was alerted to allegations about problems with its Sturgis plant months earlier than previously known. According to a person familiar with the matter, an Abbott employee filed a complaint in February of 2021, alleging a host of issues, including failing equipment and formula released without adequate evidence that it was safe for consumption. A government official says the labor department provided the complaint to Abbott and the FDA in the same month.
Details of the complaint offer a fuller picture of the timeline leading up to the shutdown of the plant in February of this year, which has contributed to a severe shortage of baby formula in the US. A spokesman for Abbott said it investigated the federal OSHA complaint and has not been able to confirm the allegations. Abbott restarted production at Sturgis on Saturday.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is considering a revamp of stock market rules that would require brokerages to route investors' orders into auctions. That could have a major impact on retail trading. In a speech today, SEC Chair Gary Gensler laid out the details, saying the change would increase competition in the market to provide the best prices for retail investors. Our financial regulation reporter Paul Kiernan says it would mean a major shakeup.
Paul Kiernan: Over the years, companies have developed lucrative business models around the execution of investors' stock orders. So when you place an order to buy or sell a stock, your broker wraps that order to a market maker. If you're an individual investor, it's probably one of a handful of firms called wholesalers. They're big electronic trading firms, and they make a profit based on the spread between the buy and the sell price.
But the SEC thinks that it can become more efficient and that it can narrow the spread that these wholesalers collect by introducing more competition. And so one of the ideas that Chair Gensler put forth today is to create auctions, whereby different market makers compete to execute investors' orders.
Annmarie Fertoli: A top executive at online brokerage Robinhood blasted the proposal, saying that individual investors enjoy benefits from the current structure, like not having to pay for trades and fast execution of their orders. Paul says retail brokerages like Robinhood are also benefiting.
Paul Kiernan: A lot of the changes that they are proposing might make it harder for brokerages like Robinhood to simply route customers' orders to a big wholesaler like Citadel Securities or Virtue Financial in exchange for what is known as payment for order flow. Payment for order flow is a significant source of revenue for a lot of retail brokerages that do it. Not all of them do, but the ones that depend on it would like to keep that revenue stream alive.
Annmarie Fertoli: For years, big tech stocks have driven the major indexes higher. But now, investors are turning away from risky bets. The S&P 500's Information Technology sector has dropped nearly 20% this year. And the broader index is down 13%. It's the sector's worst start to the year since 2002. Our markets reporter Caitlin McCabe says some investors believe the era of tech's market dominance could be coming to an end.
Caitlin McCabe: To many investors, the bets against tech and the months long turmoil in the market echo the dot com bubble of 2000. But while tech stock valuations soared in recent years, they still haven't approached the level seen in March 2000. Still, some investors say they are bracing for losses ahead.
Annmarie Fertoli: Caitlin says the Federal Reserve's plan to continue raising interest rates this year could also put more pressure on tech and other growth stocks.
Spirit Airlines has delayed a stockholder meeting set for this week to allow the company time to assess a takeover offer from Jet Blue. The discount carrier says it still recommends shareholders adopt a merger with Frontier, but says it's postponing the meeting until the end of the month to continue discussions with both bidders.
Vaccine maker Moderna says its modified COVID-19 booster shot provided a stronger immune response against the Omicron variant compared to the original vaccine. The company says it will submit preliminary data from its new study to US health regulators and is hopeful it can make the modified booster available in late summer. The study did not measure whether the modified booster actually reduces the risk of the virus caused by Omicron.
And dozens of women and girls, including Olympic gymnasts Simone Biles and Aly Raisman are seeking a billion dollars in damages from the FBI for ignoring their concerns about then USA Gymanastics doctor Larry Nassar. They drew on a report by the Justice department's inspector general, which found FBI agents disregarded gymnasts' allegations of sexual assault and later made false statements to cover up their mistakes. Nassar is serving an effective life sentence in prison on sexual abuse and child pornography charges.
Coming up, both Democrats and Republicans are eyeing New Hampshire this election season as a potential battleground. What are the candidates focusing on? And what do voters say are the major issues driving their ballots? That's after the break.
New Hampshire is shaping up to become a battleground state in the midterm elections. Republicans think there's a key Senate seat they can flip, which could give them control over the chamber in Washington. Democrats hope the threat of the Supreme Court overturning abortion rights could push votes their way. Meanwhile, independent voters make up the largest share of the electorate. Wall Street Journal politics reporter Eliza Collins went to New Hampshire to talk to candidates and voters to see how abortion is coloring their opinions. And she joins me now. Hi, Eliza. Thanks for being here.
Eliza Collins: Thanks for having me.
Annmarie Fertoli: Eliza, a recent Wall Street Journal poll found more than two-thirds of Americans do not want Roe v. Wade to be overturned. How does that compare to what you heard on the ground in New Hampshire?
Eliza Collins: I was hearing very similar sentiment from voters in New Hampshire. I talked to voters across the state and found pretty broad support for at least some access to abortion. A University of New Hampshire poll recently came out that said 61% of voters in the state oppose overturning Roe v. Wade. So that's close to what we're seeing nationally.
But I also found that for these voters, abortion was not the only issue they were voting on. So I met some people who do feel like it's important to support someone who wants access to abortion, but they also felt conflicted because they're unhappy with how the economy is going right now. The rising gas prices and food costs, people were citing to me.
So I picked New Hampshire because it is a state with competitive races up and down. It's a true battleground state. And Senator Maggie Hassan is one of Republican's top targets. If her seat flips, the US Senate could flip to Republican control. And Hassan is talking about abortion. So I wanted to see how this was playing out with voters.
Annmarie Fertoli: And Democratic Senator Hassan won her last election by just over a thousand votes. So how is she making her pitch to voters?
Eliza Collins: So Senator Hassan is talking about abortion, access to abortion, the potential of Roe v. Wade being repealed. This was something that she ran on in 2016, her support of Planned Parenthood and access to abortion. But when I was talking to her, she also was very careful to talk about other things that were important to voters, including the economy.
Senator Maggie Hassan: Ultimately, we need to help people lower costs. We need to help people move forward with their lives, get to the other side of the pandemic, and rebuild our economy and make sure that people have a chance to thrive (inaudible).
Eliza Collins: Senator Hassan's first ad of the year is about her effort to repeal the federal gas tax and lower gas prices. Now, that idea has not gone anywhere in the Senate. She's running into resistance from Republicans and some Democrats. But she says that's a way forward. And I think that really shows that abortion is not the only issue that she's talking about, even if she hopes that that mobilizes voters. She's having to talk about other issues related to the economy.
Annmarie Fertoli: Tell us some more about her opponents and their campaign promises.
Eliza Collins: So she has several opponents that are competing against each other ahead of the September primary. They have a very late primary. But one of her top opponents is Chuck Morse. He's the president of the State Senate right now. And he helped shepherd in a 24-week abortion ban that was passed in the state budget last summer. I went to an event where Senator Morse was speaking, and he touted that abortion ban as something that he was very proud of. But he also emphasized fiscal responsibility and the economy.
Chuck Morse: Let me tell you what we've accomplished as Republicans in this state. We built a budget that took down the business taxes in New Hampshire.
Eliza Collins: Both he and Kevin Smith, who is another top opponent, he's the former town manager of London Dairy, said that voters were most focused on the economy. And when I talked to Kevin Smith, he mentioned that abortion wasn't coming up when he was talking to voters. Now, both of them say that they do oppose abortion, but they tried to steer clear of that topic. And when I was with Kevin Smith, he was actually having a round table with small business owners where they focused on the issues they were having with the supply chain and inflation. And that's what Smith says that conversation is what can win for Republicans in November.
Annmarie Fertoli: So we heard how the candidates are making their pitches. What are voters telling you, Eliza?
Eliza Collins: There are independent voters who were really torn on this issue. But of course, there are voters on both sides of the aisle who feel very strongly. They just tended to be people who were going to vote for Democrats or Republicans regardless. But I met one woman Laura Weisic, who was a legal assistant and university student, and talking about the potential of Roe v. Wade to be overturned was very emotional for her.
Laura: Our rights are being taken away, where I don't know what other country ... Is this supposed to be a democracy? I don't know what other countries, comparable that are developed to the US, are doing something like this.
Eliza Collins: And then she said something else. She said that she feels tired of voting in general. She's feeling really let down. She says Democrats are in the White House, there are majorities in Congress, and yet she feels like Republicans are still calling the shots. And so she said she plans to vote, but she's really not feeling very optimistic about what her vote will do.
Annmarie Fertoli: So how about Republican voters?
Eliza Collins: So I spoke to another woman named Marie Drury, who said she was going to vote for Republicans regardless, because of a host of issues.
Marie Drury: Definitely inflation, the economy, the border, just about everything.
Eliza Collins: So she's a Republican regardless of the issue, but she is someone who opposes abortion rights and said it was a bonus to have the potential for the Supreme Court to overturn Roe v. Wade and support candidates who also wanted to limit access to abortion.
Annmarie Fertoli: Eliza, how important is New Hampshire for the final makeup of Congress? And what do you think their voting picture says about the country?
Eliza Collins: So New Hampshire is one of several states that we are watching very closely. And in any one of these states, especially in the US Senate, if they flip, it could determine which party controls the Senate. The Senate currently is split 50/50, but Democrats have the majority, because Vice President Kamala Harris can be the deciding vote of 51.
So Democrats are trying to defend New Hampshire, Nevada, Arizona, and Georgia. Those are the top targets for Republicans. Meanwhile, Republicans are trying to hold on in Wisconsin and Pennsylvania. So it's a competitive map.
In the House, it's also very narrow. Democrats do have a majority there, but just a handful of seats need to flip, and then they would lose that. And New Hampshire has two seats. But under the current map, both seats are competitive. Republicans are playing in both seats. So we'll be watching New Hampshire closely to see if that's a sign of things to come. Republicans feel like it's a state they can really make some gains.
At the federal level, Democrats control all four seats, but Republicans have the governor's mansion and the whole state legislature. So it's a real battleground state.
Annmarie Fertoli: That's Wall Street Journal Politics reporter Eliza Collins. Eliza, thanks so much for joining me.
Eliza Collins: Thanks for having me.
Annmarie Fertoli: And finally, if you work in an office, "Let's start a doc" is a phrase you might hear a lot. It means someone's creating a shared document, often using Google's Docs or Sheets, so that multiple people can collaborate from anywhere. But our Life and Work reporter Katie Bindley says many workers have begun to dread them.
Katie Bindley: People just feel like, "Oh my gosh, there's someone reading over my shoulder while I'm trying to type," and they get a bit of performance anxiety or just feel self-conscious about someone watching them type, the idea that someone might be watching you while you're trying to work.
Annmarie Fertoli: Katie says some people are finding workarounds.
Katie Bindley: One guy I chatted with, he's supposed to be working in this shared doc that I think about a dozen people tend to be able to view and they do brainstorming in there. But then when it's time for him to actually write copy for a campaign or a project, he will copy everything from the original file, make a shadow copy that's private to only him, he'll do all his work in there, all the writing, and then he pastes the finished product back into the shared doc. And that way, no one can spy on him during his process.
Annmarie Fertoli: And that's what's news for this Wednesday afternoon. We'll be back tomorrow morning. If you like what you hear, please rate and review us. I'm Annmarie Fertoli for the Wall Street Journal.
Annmarie Fertoli hosts the PM edition of the What's News podcast. She joined The Wall Street Journal in 2017 after more than a decade in public radio: first with WFUV at her alma mater, Fordham University, then at WNYC, where she worked as a news host, reporter and producer for All Things Considered. Annmarie has also worked as a reporter and arts and entertainment editor for weekly newspapers on Long Island and in Queens. Her first print story for the WSJ focused on how the popular video game “Animal Crossing” became a form of therapy during the coronavirus pandemic—for her and many others.
Luke Vargas is the AM host of the What’s News podcast. He joined the WSJ in 2021 from the Skimm, where he was the senior producer of Skimm This. He previously spent seven years as a U.N.-based correspondent, hosting The World in 2:00 radio newscast and reporting from more than 35 countries for a consortium of local and regional AM/FM radio stations. Luke is a published poet and an avid permaculture landscaper, and designs detailed video game maps in his spare time.

