One of the cases the Supreme Court will be deciding this month is Oklahoma vs. Castro-Huerta. The issue at hand is who has the authority to prosecute non-tribal citizens who commit crimes against Native Americans on tribal lands. The Wall Street Journal’s Justice Department reporter Sadie Gurman joins WSJ What’s News host Annmarie Fertoli to discuss the case and its implications.
This transcript was prepared by a transcription service. This version may not be in its final form and may be updated.
Annmarie Fertoli: One of the cases that the Supreme Court will be deciding this term is Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta. The issue at hand is who has the authority to prosecute non-tribal citizens who commit crimes against Native Americans on tribal lands. In 2020, the Supreme Court ruled in McGirt v. Oklahoma that much of the eastern part of the state would remain a Native American reservation. And that meant that hundreds of legal cases involving Native Americans could no longer be heard by state courts as they had been for more than a century. The Supreme Court refused Oklahoma's request to reverse that decision outright, but now the state has asked the Court to narrow its scope. And that has implications for both tribal and non-tribal citizens.
I'm Annmarie Fertoli with the Wall Street Journal. And joining me now to explain this complex legal system is Wall Street Journal Justice Department reporter, Sadie Gurman. Hi, Sadie. Thanks for being here.
Sadie Gurman: Thank you for having me.
Annmarie Fertoli: So Sadie, first, let's get up to speed about the issue of jurisdictions in Oklahoma. Can you explain the differences between what's considered the state and what is considered tribal territory?
Sadie Gurman: Yes. So in Oklahoma, there are at least 38 federally recognized tribes, which creates a jurisdictional thicket in terms of who is going to prosecute what types of crimes. The biggest difference between what is known as Indian country and what is not, is that on Indian country, state prosecutors don't have the authority to handle crimes involving Native Americans. So things like murders and shootings and rapes that have been traditionally handled by local prosecutors in other places, are instead handled by the Justice Department. And the tribal courts ... the tribes have their own legal system. And they are set up to handle lesser offenses.
Until very recently, Indian country was much smaller. It consisted mainly of things like casinos and government buildings. But the Supreme Court in 2020, like you said, ruled that much of the eastern half of the state is still a reservation. It's actually home to about two million people. So that, among other things, means that the Justice Department is taking on a lot more cases that had been normally handled by local authorities.
Annmarie Fertoli: Sadie, McGirt was a big win for the tribal communities pushing for sovereignty. What did the McGirt ruling mean for them?
Sadie Gurman: Yes. This decision really was a watershed of Indian law, because it upheld 19th century treaties with Oklahoma's five main tribes that were relocated to that state after white settlers drove them from their ancestral lands in Georgia and Alabama. That is what is continued to be called today as the Trail of Tears. Since then, there have been a number of moves that have chipped away at tribal sovereignty, and this decision restores that. But it also upended the state's justice system, as neither the tribal nor the federal courts had the manpower to accommodate the deluge of cases. So the Justice Department had to call in dozens of prosecutors from elsewhere to accommodate the new workload, and so did the courts.
The state's Republican governor, Kevin Stitt, has been particularly critical of this decision, saying it sowed chaos and left crimes unpunished. And some violent crimes did fall into jurisdictional cracks, but the tribes strongly reject the notion that is not being done. I spoke to Sara Hill, the attorney general for the Cherokee Nation, who said, what tribes want is the ability to make their own laws and be governed by them. And she rejects any notion that justice is not being done here.
Sara Hill: We run a pretty good operation up here. I mean, we're not perfect, but no justice system is. And everyone here cares a lot about this community. We all live here. Most of us are tribal citizens of the Cherokee Nation or of some other tribe. And so this work really matters to us. We want to do the best job that we can. These are my relatives. These are my ... I mean, we're all tied into this community. So it matters a lot that we do a good job here. It's not like there are people up here who don't care what happens to these tribal communities.
I would argue that no one cares about it more than we do, which is why it's always particularly noxious to see comments by people in the state saying, well, the tribe just can't protect Indian people. They just, there's just no way. As if we have less investment than they do in our communities and in their futures and in their safety. I mean, how does the math on that check out? I don't understand it.
Sadie Gurman: So what Hill is really expressing here is the investment that the tribes have made in upgrading their judicial systems to accommodate this decision. And what they're trying to show here is that they are capable of policing their own citizenry. And it's been almost two years now since the decision came down, and law enforcement officials, including the tribes are really settling into this new legal world. When I visited Tulsa late last year, I did not see signs of disorder and chaos. I saw what appeared to me to be a normal municipal court system. A lot of cases, but they were being heard.
Annmarie Fertoli: So what changed for the state and for federal prosecutors?
Sadie Gurman: Well, immediately overnight, hundreds of cases that were being handled by state prosecutors, things like beatings, assault, child abuse were thrown to the Justice Department to prosecute. So dozens of federal prosecutors had to be called in to handle the workload. And so you have federal prosecutors and federal agents who usually handle things like counter-terrorism and white collar and fraud cases in other districts who are now relocated to Eastern Oklahoma full-time. And they're focusing on these more traditional law enforcement cases that normally would've been handled by local district attorneys.
I spoke to Clint Johnson, US Attorney for the Northern District of Oklahoma, who said his prosecutors are learning more skills, they're becoming more proficient, and basically doing the best they can with the hand they were dealt.
Clint Johnson: We were doing about 200 cases, indictments a year. I think for this calendar year, we're pushing close to 600. And so we've seen a massive increase in the amount of cases that we're doing. And because of that, we've had to have a massive increase in the amount of people that are in the office, attorneys and support staff and victim witness individuals.
Sadie Gurman: So one type of case Johnson's office is seeing a lot more of is just your routine, run-of-the-mill domestic violence cases. I had the opportunity to sit in on one such case in federal court when I visited Tulsa, and I was surprised to see a domestic violence case being handled by federal prosecutors. But in that case, the victim was a Cherokee woman. And so it was representative of the kind of cases that prosecutors are handling more and more.
Annmarie Fertoli: Sadie, can you talk about what's now before the Supreme Court, the case of Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta? What is Oklahoma seeking here and what are the legal implications?
Sadie Gurman: So the Supreme Court has refused to undo the McGirt decision outright, but Oklahoma wants to restore at least some of the prosecutorial power it lost after that ruling. What they are asking for is the ability for state prosecutors to still be able to take cases against Non-natives who commit crimes in Indian country. So what they're proposing is that they have concurrent jurisdiction with the federal government to prosecute these types of cases. And if that were the situation, it would be an open question as to who is going to prosecute each case.
Some defendants have raised concerns about double jeopardy, about being prosecuted by both state and federal legal systems. And people who have successfully appealed their state convictions after the McGirt decision and are now facing new trials in federal court, would they have to switch back to state court? Would state prosecutors charge them in addition to existing federal charges? So this has really raised a lot of uncertainty for defendants, and it's an open question about how things are going to proceed, if in fact the Supreme Court rules in Oklahoma's favor.
Annmarie Fertoli: To expand on that a little bit, what kind of justice or closure can victims receive, especially tribal citizens right now? And how would that change if the Supreme Court rules in favor of the state?
Sadie Gurman: After the McGirt decision, opponents of what had happened in that case argued that victims were not getting closure because cases that they thought were closed and adjudicated were then reopened and sent to different venues, requiring them to, in some cases, testify again. Or speak to investigators, sometimes years after these crimes had been committed. And so local prosecutors had argued that the McGirt decision revictimized some of those folks. And indeed, there were some violent crimes that went unpunished because of things like federal statute of limitations issues, or eyewitnesses died, or evidence vanished.
And in one particularly egregious case, a man suspected of raping five people in the 1990s, who had been charged by the state after DNA evidence was surfaced, had his case dismissed on McGirt grounds because of a five year statute of limitations that kept the Justice Department from taking the case. So basically he was allowed to go free without facing trial. Now, that's one of the examples that state prosecutors point to in an effort to encourage the Supreme Court to rule in their favor. But it's an open question about what would happen to victims in those cases, if their cases were then sent back to state court after being shifted to federal court.
Annmarie Fertoli: And Sadie, the decision in this case could come anytime this month, is that right?
Sadie Gurman: That's right. The Supreme Court keeps it close to the chest as to when they're going to decide what cases, but it is one of the ones that remains to be seen. So we are looking forward to that in coming weeks.
Annmarie Fertoli: That's Wall Street Journal Justice Department reporter, Sadie Gurman. Sadie. Thanks so much for joining me today.
Sadie Gurman: Thank you for having me.
Annmarie Fertoli: To hear more stories about business and politics from the Wall Street Journal, ask your Google assistant to play WSJ What's News podcast.
