
		Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.	
Hillary Clinton has warned fellow Democrats that their obsession with transgender issues and defunding the police could cost the party the 2024 presidential election.
The failed presidential candidate — who insisted it was “out of the question” that she would run again — agreed when the Financial Times pointed out that her party appeared to be “losing focus by elevating activist causes” that “are relevant only to a small minority.”
In particular, Democrats appeared fixated on the “transgender debate,” the FT’s US national editor, Edward Luce, pointed out, asking, “What sense does it make to depict JK Rowling as a fascist?”
Clinton, 74, agreed with his premise, telling Luce, “We are standing on the precipice of losing our democracy, and everything that everybody else cares about then goes out the window.
“Look, the most important thing is to win the next election. The alternative is so frightening that whatever does not help you win should not be a priority,” she said.
While Luce focused on transgender issues, singling out the abuse flung at “Harry Potter” author Rowling, Clinton singled out the widely derided push by progressives to “defund the police.”
“You need accountable measures. But you also need policing,” the former secretary of state insisted.
“It doesn’t even pass the common-sense politics test not to believe that.
“Some positions are so extreme on both the right and the left that they retreat to their corners . . . Politics should be the art of addition not subtraction,” she told the financial paper.
Her comments came just days after President Biden marked Pride Month by ordering federal agencies to craft “inclusive” school and foster-parent policies — while slamming states he accused of trying to curb medical options for transgender minors.
Clinton suggested that had she beat Donald Trump in her doomed 2016 presidential bid, the Jan. 6 storming of the Capitol would have just happened at the time.
Asked about her victor’s future political aspirations, Clinton said of Trump, “I think if he can he’s going to run again.”
“I don’t know who will challenge him in the Republican primary,” she said.
As for making another run herself, Clinton insisted, ““No, out of the question.”
“First of all, I expect Biden to run. He certainly intends to run,” she said of the commander in chief currently suffering humiliating low approval in polls and who will be 81 at the next election
“It would be very disruptive to challenge that,” she said of running against Biden.
Share Selection
