Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Morale is at an all-time low at the beleaguered Mouse House after Disney CEO Bob Chapek dumped TV content boss Peter Rice.
Rice, who joined Disney after the media giant acquired 21st Century Fox in 2019, was replaced on Thursday by his number two, Dana Walden, in what many have described as a “shocking” shakeup.
“It’s not good for the company. Morale is terrible,” a Disney insider told The Hollywood Reporter.
No reason was given by Disney as to why Rice was let go, but sources buzzed Thursday that Chapek sharpened the axe before it fell on him after he butted heads with Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis.
“During all the press about the DeSantis fiasco, it’s incredibly uncomfortable, for a CEO whose power is slipping away, to have the person who is seen as your successor sitting in the room with you,” the source told The Hollywood Reporter. “You kill that person.”
Chapek has had a slew of missteps since he took the helm in 2020, including grappling with the fallout from his fumbling response to Florida’s “Don’t Say Gay” law.
As his boss flip-flopped on his response to DeSantis’ legislation, enraging Disney employees, Rice issued his own memo at the time, saying, “Personally, I see this law as a violation of fundamental human rights.”
That likely didn’t win any points with Chapek, or other execs, who viewed Rice as someone who didn’t conform to Disney’s more buttoned-up corporate culture.
Rice broke the news of his firing to employees Thursday in a collegial memo, capping a tumultuous ride at the company.
“I am so proud of the work we have done together, the friendships we have forged and the consistent success we have celebrated,” he wrote. “As I depart Disney, may I leave you with a last thought: remain committed to excellence and always recognize that our stories are dependent upon the imagination and artistry of the writers, directors, producers, actors, and craftsman that we have engaged to call Disney home.”
Rice, who had more than three decades of experience in the entertainment industry, soared at Rupert Murdoch’s Fox Entertainment, where he grew the profile of Fox Searchlight, green-lighting some of its highest grossing, critically-acclaimed films like “Slumdog Millionaire” and “Little Miss Sunshine.”
His success at the division led him to a promotion overseeing the media giant’s TV assets. The star exec was brought over to Disney three years ago, where he oversaw the division that made over 300 shows a year for platforms like ABC, Disney Channel, Disney+, Hulu and FX.
“He’s not a bad guy, just grew up in the wrong corporate culture,” a source told The Post Thursday, citing cumulative issues over time for the rift.
But the bad press for a company that had run rather smoothly under Chapek’s predecessor, Bob Iger, caused some in Hollywood to speculate if Chapek was up to the job.
“Chapek’s contract is up in a year and a half,” a Hollywood executive told The Post in April. “I’d be worried.”
According to reports, Disney has yet to re-sign Chapek, but Rice’s dismissal did come with a vote of confidence from Disney’s chairman Susan Arnold, who backed the CEO’s decision on Thursday.
“The strength of The Walt Disney Company’s businesses coming out of the pandemic is a testament to Bob’s leadership and vision for the company’s future,” she said. “In this important time of business growth and transformation, we are committed to keeping Disney on the successful path it is on today, and Bob and his leadership team have the support and confidence of the Board.”
Axing a potential successor isn’t new in the cutthroat world of media, nor is it an anomaly at Disney.
Iger purged chief operating officer Tom Staggs in 2016 when the exec was widely seen as the CEO’s successor, and Michael Eisner pushed out Jeffrey Katzenberg in 1994.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Where we’re going, we don’t need roads — we need ticket sales!
The new “Back to the Future” musical, based on Robert Zemeckis’ classic 1985 science-fiction film that starred Michael J. Fox, will open on Broadway in 2023, producers announced Wednesday.Sources told The Post that next spring, the time-traveling DeLorean will land at the Winter Garden Theatre, where “The Music Man,” starring Hugh Jackman, is currently waiting for the Wells Fargo wagon.
Wolverine will depart when his contract expires, and the oh-so-bankable star will not be recast, a source close to the production said. Makes sense. Jackman just listed his West Village home for $38.9 million.
I saw the “Back to the Future” musical last summer at London’s Adelphi Theatre. Thankfully, the show only covers the first flick, so there’s no Biff’s baseball book or Wild West shootouts. And it’s very much a musical. Marty, Doc and George sing and dance about the flux capacitor (“It Works”), and then sing and dance some more about how George can win Lorraine (“Gotta Start Somewhere”).
The problem, unfortunately, is all those oddball songs. None of the new tunes by Glen Ballard are any good — a strange dream sequence number called “21st Century” that starts Act 2 looks like a New Age cult ritual and should be axed pronto — but fans will be relieved to know that movie favorites like Huey Lewis & the News’ “The Power of Love” and Chuck Berry’s “Johnny B. Goode” are kept in and have 1.21 gigawatts of energy.
And the nonsinging sections are great fun, too. Especially the impressive DeLorean that flies partly over the audience, lights up and spins around. Broadway has been overdue for a new chandelier or helicopter from Britain.
No casting has been confirmed yet, but the talented British actor Olly Dobson plays Marty McFly in London and captures every inflection and mannerism from the movie, and Broadway stalwart Roger Bart plays Doc Brown. Don’t expect to see Dobson, a production source said, but Bart, who tackled a similar role in “Young Frankenstein,” will likely come to New York — Christopher Lloyd wig and all.
“Back to the Future” boasts a great title that could appeal to tourists, and it won this year’s Olivier Award for best new musical across the pond over heavy hitters “Moulin Rouge!” and “Frozen.” But it also brings to mind another production that played the Winter Garden back in 2014: “Rocky.” The boxing show had name recognition, jaw-dropping technical achievements and a lousy score. It closed as a massive flop.
We’ll soon see just how powerful “The Power of Love” is.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Exactly 15 years ago, millions frantically yelled, thinking they lost their cable connection as HBO’s “The Sopranos” ended its final season — thanks to creator David Chase inventing one of the most brilliant, suspenseful last scenes in television history.
That finale, “Made in America,” draws to an epic and ambiguous close the story of northern New Jersey crime boss Tony Soprano, played by the late, remarkable James Gandolfini.
You know the scene: Journey’s “Don’t Stop Believin'” plays as Tony, Carmela (Edie Falco) and their son, A.J. (Robert Iler), eat the best onion rings in Jersey at Holsten’s. The song cuts off at “Don’t stop” and we see 10 seconds of black screen before the final, silent credits roll.
Now, with years of hindsight and a prequel, “The Many Saints of Newark,” the mystery behind Tony’s fate has been chipped away at — and it’s much more subtle than “Saw” meeting “The Godfather.”
Falco revealed on Chuck D’s New York Knicks podcast that an alternate ending to the show was filmed with her and Gandolfini in 2010 in an effort to attract LeBron James to play in Madison Square Garden — even though she didn’t know who he was.
Similar to the end of “Goodfellas,” it depicted Tony’s life in witness protection, likely thanks to the symbiotic relationship he had established with federal agent Dwight Harris (Matt Servitto). Despite heightened fanfare and speculation, the scene was never included in the show’s canon and simply remains an unused, alternate-ending take.
So, what actually happened to Tony?
In the show, Tony previously acknowledged to Dr. Jennifer Melfi (Lorraine Bracco) that “there’s two endings for a guy like me, a high-profile guy: dead or in the can.”
Thanks to the anticipated testimony of Carlo Gervasi (Arthur J. Nascarella) after his troublemaking son Jason was arrested, Tony is left preparing for an indictment that would likely put him behind bars for the rest of his life — so even if Soprano lives past dinner, his old ways are essentially over, symbolizing a proverbial death.
Although, it doesn’t appear Tony lives to see a trial.
As the ’80s rock song rings throughout the diner, there is a recurring shot of a man seated at the eatery’s counter constantly looking back at Tony. He’s credited as Man in Members Only Jacket, a reference to the first episode of Season 6, “Members Only,” which saw FBI informant Eugene Pontecorvo (Robert Funaro) of Soprano’s crew commit a very graphic suicide after neither party allowed him to retire with family to Florida.
The final moments of the show see that man walk into the Holsten’s bathroom, about 30 seconds before the cut to black. The move mirrors Tony’s favorite scene in “The Godfather,” when Michael Corleone takes a planted gun behind a restaurant’s toilet to avenge his father’s attempted assassination.
While Members Only is in the bathroom, Meadow (Jamie-Lynn Sigler) parallel parks successfully after many false starts. She runs toward the entrance of Holsten’s as Tony looks up right before … the end.
If Tony was clipped at that moment, it would align with the shot continuity that Chase, who directed only the first and final episodes of the series, had selected.
Tony is the first of his family to arrive at Holsten’s, and several people enter afterward, including Members Only. Each time someone comes in that front door, a bell rings and a close-up of Tony’s face is shown to visualize his point of view to the audience.
In the episode’s closing seconds, that bell is heard, as Meadow is implied to be entering the restaurant. The camera cuts to Tony, presumably as Members Only emerges from the background, gun in hand, before the blackout. That silent darkness becomes Tony’s point of view, something the show’s final season symbolized on multiple occasions.
“You probably don’t even hear it when it happens,” Bobby Baccalieri (Steven Schirripa) tells Tony a few episodes before, in “Soprano Home Movies,” as the duo share a morbid conversation about how they could perish. In “The Blue Comet,” the penultimate episode of the series, Bobby is gunned down on the orders of an opposing mob boss. Later, Tony holds the gun that now deceased Bobby gave him for his birthday and flashes back to the “Don’t even hear it” line.
Another instance of silence surrounding a mob hit is in “Stage Five,” when consigliere Silvio Dante (Steven Van Zandt) has dinner with Gerry Torciano (John Bianco) and a shellshocked hush emerges while a gunman opens fire on Torciano.
In 2020, Chase may have slipped up in interviews. After a decade-plus of refusing to explain the final scene, he referred to it as Tony’s death.
During a leaked interview for his book “The Sopranos Sessions,” Chase inadvertently revealed the outcome when co-author Alan Sepinwall asked: “When you said there was an endpoint, you don’t mean Tony at Holsten’s, you just meant, ‘I think I have two more years’ worth of stories left in me.’ ”
Chase responded “Yes, I think I had that death scene around two years before the end … But we didn’t do that.”
“You realize, of course, that you just referred to that as a death scene,” co-author Matt Zoller Seitz then said.
It didn’t take the accidental admission to put the pieces together, though.
The entire sixth season revolves around Tony’s failures, even leading into the last scene.
Tony sees he could not put an end to Christopher’s (Michael Imperioli) rampant drug use in “Kennedy and Heidi,” just before killing his cousin, whose former fiancee became an FBI informant.
That’s followed up by A.J.’s attempted suicide in Tony’s pool in “The Second Coming.”
Tony then drains the pool water, which at the show’s beginning he waded in to feed ducks that symbolized his family. The Sopranos are now left with an empty, covered pool during colder weather.
In the last episode, Tony has a quiet visit to Silvio in the hospital, who is not expected to regain consciousness.
Again in silence, the boss likely reflects on the situation, which he could have done more to prevent.
He later sees a demented Junior (Dominic Chianese), who throughout the show teased Tony for never having “the makings of a varsity athlete.”
Sure enough, a mural of a local high school football standout is painted on the wall in Holsten’s in the next scene.
A question remains even if he is dead: Who killed Tony Soprano?
Was it a relative of Eugene’s? Did the New York crew not honor the ceasefire? Or did an interior decorator who killed 16 Czechoslovakians get his revenge? Where has Furio (Federico Castelluccio) been all this time?
Not knowing for sure is a symbol in itself. Just as the family and loved ones of other killed-off characters never got their closure throughout the series, neither does Chase’s audience, with the future of both the nuclear and criminal Sopranos family up in the air and no closure for one of television’s most cryptic puzzles.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
This rumor is no laughing matter for Lea Michele fans.
The 35-year-old is reportedly the producer’s pick to play Fanny Brice in “Funny Girl” once Beanie Feldstein leaves the role in September, according to Showbiz 411.
A representative for Michele declined to comment when contacted by The Post, which has also reached out to show publicists.
Michele has publicly manifested her desire to play the Barbra Streisand-original character for years. She got a taste on the first season of “Glee” when she sang “Don’t Rain on My Parade.” She also performed the show tune at the 2010 Tony Awards.
At that time, rumors swirled that she could be joining the musical after “Glee” creator Ryan Murphy’s bought the rights to “Funny Girl,”  but a source told People she declined “mainly because she thought what was done on ‘Glee’ was everything she could have brought to the role.”
“We were thinking of doing it to do it right after ‘Glee’ but I did a lot of the songs from ‘Funny Girl’ on ‘Glee’ so it felt a like little soon, but I feel really ready to do it now, so maybe we could do it soon,” Michele told Andy Cohen on “Watch What Happens Live” in 2017.
Last fall Michele also threw her support behind Feldstein, telling the “Little Me: Growing Up Broadway” podcast, “I just think that Beanie is an incredible choice for the production, and I think it’s going to be so wonderful.”
Fellow “Glee” alum Jane Lynch will also leave her role as Fanny’s mother in “Funny Girl” on Sept. 25. She has yet to be recast.
On Sunday, Michele performed “Touch Me” alongside the original cast of “Spring Awakening” at the 2022 Tony Awards. She has also previously appeared on Broadway in “Les Miserables,” “Ragtime” and “Fiddler on the Roof.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A man with at least 40 prior arrests and a history of menacing transit workers was released by a Bronx judge Tuesday night after he allegedly threatened to kill two MTA employees earlier the same day, The Post has learned.
Leonard Bethune, 46, was walking on the D train tracks at the Bronx’s Kingsbridge Road station around 1 a.m. when the two MTA cleaners urged him to get off track, according to a representative for their union.
“I will kill you,” Bethune allegedly snarled as he pulled out the weapon.
The man then threatened them with a boxcutter, labor and law-enforcement sources said.
Bethune was arraigned Thursday night on charges of menacing, criminal possession of a weapon, and harassment.
Bronx Criminal Court Judge Christopher Chen granted him supervised release per prosecutors’ request.
Bethune has about 40 prior arrests for menacing, burglary and petit larceny and past history of mental illness, according to law-enforcement sources and cops.
Chen asked for a higher level of supervision given the defendant’s warrant history. He ordered that he check in at the courthouse on Tuesday to be placed with The Fortune Society, a nonprofit that promotes alternatives to incarceration.
After his court hearing, Bethune told a Post reporter he went onto the tracks to grab a cigarette when the MTA workers “started cursing me out.”
The 46-year-old was sleeping on a bench inside Bronx Criminal Court and broke down when asked if he had a place to go. He shook his head.
Stay up on the very latest with Evening Update.
Please provide a valid email address.
By clicking above you agree to the 						Terms of Use
“I’m going to be here until someone kicks me out,” he said, adding it was the safest place for him right now. “I’m going to stay close to here, otherwise I’ll miss my appointment. I’m scared the streets ain’t safe.”
Bethune is also facing charges in Long Island for getting into an altercation with another transit worker.
Bethune currently has an open menacing case in Nassau County, LI, for allegedly threatening an LIRR worker at the Garden City train station on Feb. 26, court records obtained by The Post show.
While onboard a train there, Bethune allegedly whipped out a boxcutter and told a worker, “I will slice you” after the two got into an argument, the records state.
He later allegedly admitted to an MTA cop that he took the boxcutter out of his pocket.
Bethune was given a desk-appearance ticket for the incident and will be arraigned June 30 in that case, the Nassau County District Attorney’s Office said.
Additional reporting by Desheania Andrews, Craig McCarthy and David Meyer

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Tennessee volunteer firefighter allegedly set a series of suspicious fires that burned a church, Masonic Lodge and other buildings in a small community over the past month.
Leslie Roy Winchester, 19, was arrested in connection to multiple fires that were set in the community of Waverly beginning in June, the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI) said.
The first fire linked to Winchester happened last month in the 5500 block of Bakerville Road in Waverly, the TBI said. Four other suspicious fires occurred between July 1 and July 8 at various locations in the community.
Buildings damaged or destroyed in the fires included a church, Masonic Lodge, a former fire hall and a vacant house, according to authorities.
Two firefighters were injured while battling two of the fires, WSMV-TV reported.
Investigators identified the volunteer firefighters as the suspect and charged him with three counts of aggravated arson, three counts of arson, six counts of criminal trespassing, and six counts of vandalism over $10,000.
Winchester was booked into the Humphreys County Jail on a $1,746,000 bond.
Winchester was awarded firefighter of the year in December 2021 by Humphreys County, the station reported.
Waverly is located about 66 miles west of Nashville.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Robert Downey Jr. celebrated Johnny Depp’s victory in his defamation case against Amber Heard with a call to his pal over FaceTime.
Depp’s close friend Josh Richman revealed the FaceTime conversation with a group of Depp supporters during a charity live stream event for Children’s Hospital Los Angles.
“John, thank God it’s over,” Downey Jr. told his old pal Depp over FaceTime.
The 59-year-old actor was “stoic” in a UK hotel room while his friends and staff cried and screamed around him when the verdict was announced. Even Jeff Beck flipped off the television screen, Richman explained.
A spokesman for Depp confirmed to The Post that Downey Jr. FaceTimed the “Pirates of the Caribbean” star after the verdict was announced.
Richman also said that Depp had no intention of asking his ex-girlfriend Kate Moss to testify during the trial yet things quickly changed once Heard took the witness stand.
Heard mentioned Moss’ name during her testimony and the notoriously private model was ‘pissed’ and was ‘like, f-ck this,’ Richman said.
Richman continued “Her [Moss] goddaughter was like did Johnny Depp push you down the stairs?
Depp ended up inviting his former flame to see him perform alongside Beck at a concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London a day before his trial win.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Jim Carrey is the latest celebrity to get sucked into the non-fungible token craze with the purchase of digital art piece that has direct ties to the Soviet Union.
Outbidding others, Carrey, 60, paid 20.0Ξ  — which equates to $39,535 — for an NFT titled “Devotion.” The work is one of “The Wild Within” series (which consists of 13 NFTs in total) by artists Ryan Koopmans and Alice Wexell, who capture abandoned buildings from the USSR.
The image shows a dilapidated Soviet-era sanatorium in Georgia — specifically, the once-famed Tskaltubo resort, which was a popular health destination known for its therapeutic waters.
“This one stops me. James Joyce said that’s a good thing. Thank you @ryankoopmans for gently capturing nature’s exquisite and relentless reinvention. BTW you’re my first NFT,” Carrey revealed in a Twitter post.
The Canadian-Dutch artist Koopmans told The Post of his excitement to learn that Carrey was the one that purchased his piece.
“It is very exciting to learn that Jim Carrey was the collector, as I greatly respect him as a multidisciplinary artist!” Koopmans said. “Jim Carrey is an awesome painter, illustrator and artist in his own right. It’s fun that someone who champions creativity, positivity and mindfulness connected with the work that Alice and I created over several years and is therefore very close to my heart.”
As for the former resort, according to the description of the piece, “between the 1940s to 1980s thousands of people visited, including Stalin and his high-ranking officials from Moscow. When the Soviet Union collapsed, the buildings were deserted and fell into disrepair.”
Since the early 1990s, the buildings have been slowly dismantled and stripped of their valuable materials, leaving empty shells of what were once grandiose classical structures.
Over the last several years, Koopmans visited the region photographing the ruins. With Wexell, they took these photographs, and digitally transformed them into a work of art by manipulating the lighting and structure, adding sound by Erik Thome, and animating the scenes with the intention of reviving the empty spaces.
The goal, according to the Koopmans was “essentially bringing life back into the rooms.”
Shortly after purchasing his first NFT, the Grammy-winning and Academy Award-nominated comedian purchased another NFT titled “Nuclear Taco Trucks.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Jim Seals of the iconic 1970s singing duo Seals & Crofts died on Monday. He was 80.
No cause of death was released. The passing of Seals, who formed the musical pair with Darrel “Dash” Crofts in 1969, was confirmed by multiple friends and relatives online, including his musician cousin, Brady Seals.
“I just learned that James ‘Jimmy’ Seals has passed. My heart just breaks for his wife Ruby and their children,” the country singer wrote on Instagram. “Please keep them in your prayers. What an incredible legacy he leaves behind.”
Seals & Crofts helmed the era of soft rock, with a string of hit tracks in the ’70s including “Summer Breeze,” “Diamond Girl” and “Get Closer,” which featured Carolyn Willis. While none of their tunes reached No. 1, they did make it in the Top 10 of Billboard’s Hot 100 chart. “We May Never Pass This Way (Again),” “I’ll Play for You,” “Goodbye Old Buddies” and “You’re the Love” reached the adult contemporary chart’s Top 10.
Other singers also weighed in on Seals’ passing.
“I spent a large portion of my musical life with this man. We toured together, he and Dash invited us to sing on Seals and Crofts records, and we played with him for years,”  wrote fellow musician John Ford Coley in a lengthy Facebook post. Coley — who was half of the singing group England Dan & John Ford Coley alongside Jim Seals’ brother, Dan, who died in 2009 — noted that while the two “didn’t always see eye to eye,” Coley called Seals an “enigma.”
“I thought he was a bona fide, dyed in the wool musical genius and a very deep and contemplative man,” Coley continued. “We didn’t always agree and it wasn’t always easy and it wasn’t always fun but it definitely was always entertaining for sure. Dan adored his older brother and it was because of Jimmy opening doors for us that we came to Los Angeles to record and meet the right people.”
“This is a hard one on so many levels as this is a musical era passing for me. And it will never pass this way again, as his song said,” he wrote, a nod to Seals & Crofts’ 1973 hit song.
Despite a breakup in 1980, Seals & Crofts reunited in the early ’90s and 2000s, but only produced one album after their initial claim to fame in the ’70s, “Traces,” in 2004.
Prior to their success as a duo, both Seals and Crofts were part of the group the Champs, most known for their hit “Tequila,” in which Seals played the saxophone.
Seals first took up the sax at age 13 after years of playing the fiddle that his oilman father bought him as a child, according to Variety. In 1952, Seals dominated the fiddle division of a contest while his own father won in guitar. Three years later, Seals played in a local band dubbed the Crew Cats until he met Crofts and was offered a spot in the Champs in 1958, staying in the group until 1965.
From there, the duo move to Los Angeles, joining yet another group – the Dawnbreakers – where they discovered the Baha’i faith through the band’s manager Marcia Day. In 1967, the pair converted.
Between 1969 and 1971, Seals & Crofts released three albums as a pair, with Seals playing the guitar and Crofts the mandolin. While those works went under the radar, “Summer Breeze” finally caught the attention of mainstream listeners in 1972.
After playing for oceans of fans who hooted and hollered as they performed, they juggled controversy in 1974 with their anti-abortion tune “Unborn Child” following the landmark Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade.
Yet, not long after, the duo dispersed in ’80, as disco dominated. While Seals moved to Costa Rica and reportedly began a coffee farm and raised three kids, Crofts took his family to Mexico and then Australia. Seals moved back to the US and settled in Nashville. He suffered a stroke in 2017, although he had essentially retired from his musical career before that.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A rising college basketball star cut down by a stray bullet in Harlem on Father’s Day was collateral damage in a wild shootout that involved 13 guns and scores of shots fired, police said.
Darius Lee, 21, was among nine people shot in Harlem early June 20 at a party hosted by local rapper Troy “Rich” Rhymer, authorities said.
Lee, incredibly, was the only person to die in the mass shooting. He was not an intended target, cops said.
The NYPD revealed this week that Lee was felled during a cascade of gunfire that involved 13 guns and 53 shots.
Investigators determined 10 firearms were used based on casings found at the scene of the shootout. Three more guns were recovered at the scene of the shooting, authorities said.
Two women and seven men, including  Lee, were shot near the intersection of East 139th Street and Fifth Avenue around 12:40 a.m., according to the NYPD.
Lee was pronounced dead at Lincoln Medical Center, while others were treated at Harlem Hospital for non-life-threatening injuries.
The promising hoopster had dreams of playing for his hometown Knicks, his tearful grandma told The Post.
The former standout at St. Raymond High School for Boys in The Bronx, went on to play for SUNY Sullivan Community College in upstate New York before being recruited by Houston Baptist University in Texas.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The new musical “The Bedwetter,” based on comedian Sarah Silverman’s memoir, is not as tight as a fitted sheet.
Potential abounds in the tangled show, which opened Tuesday night off-Broadway at the Atlantic Theater Company, especially in its central idea: that, to the mile-a-minute mind of a 10-year-old, waking up wearing wet pajamas can feel as emotionally traumatic as an adult dealing with divorce or depression. Life already sucks, even at 10.
“The Bedwetter” uses little Sarah’s nighttime problem as an insightful window into the struggles of the eccentric grown-ups in her family.
2 hours, with one intermission. Atlantic Theater Company, 336 W. 20th St.
That smart framework screams out for a bold and moving musical. So why does it come off so slight and tentative?
Holding the show back the most is an understandable flaw, considering the piece is about a famous person: There is way too much Sarah in it.
At the start, the exuberant and proudly weird girl (Zoe Glick) shows up for her first day at a new school in Bedford, New Hampshire, and introduces her family in peppy song.
Her pop (Darren Goldstein, perfectly cast) owns Crazy Donny’s Factory Outlet, a discount women’s clothing store; her old-Hollywood-obsessed mom, Beth Ann (Caissie Levy), spends most of her days in bed reeling from a tragedy; her teenage sister Laura (Emily Zimmerman) is too ashamed to so much as make eye contact with Sarah; and Nana (Bebe Neuwirth, miscast) is an acerbic alcoholic who has her granddaughter whip up Manhattans. Sarah grins and bears it, says “f–k” a lot and makes fart noises.
Comparisons to “Fun Home,” another autobiographical musical about similarly aged kid with an unusual family dynamic, are unavoidable. However, while that show went deep into the stormy lives of Alison Bechdel’s parents, “Bedwetter” is mostly a light, young-adult-style tale about Sarah. We don’t delve into her family nearly enough, and when we do, it’s casual and fleeting.
The humor also isn’t so sidesplitting as to make up for giving other characters the cold shoulder.
In the musical’s book, by Silverman and Joshua Harmon, nothing is as hilarious as her stand-up or the fabulous “Sarah Silverman Program.” And the jingle-like tunes by Adam Schlesinger, the “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” songwriter who sadly died of COVID in 2020, don’t get laughs like “I’m F–king Matt Damon” from “Jimmy Kimmel Live” or “Nobody’s Perfect” from Silverman’s music-heavy special “Jesus Is Magic.”
Most of the funny is front-loaded into Act 1 (the booze gags are grating). Then in the second half, after Sarah’s friends (Charlotte MacLeod, Charlotte Elizabeth Curtis and Margot Weintraub) discover her bedwetting secret and a careless doctor prescribes Xanax for her outbursts, she becomes a shell of herself. A ghost. Noticing her grief, Nana and Beth Ann elaborate on the difficult roads they’ve also walked. Finally the show begins to be about something — but it’s too late.
Steeper hills to climb than the script are Anne Kauffman’s clueless direction and Laura Jellinek’s threadbare designs. The Silverman house, Nana’s abode, the school and a hospital room are all identical save for a bed here and a desk there. Bland walls rotate to reveal blander walls with a single sad shelf holding a few trophies or a TV set. For the theater that has housed Best Musical Tony winners like “Spring Awakening” and “The Band’s Visit,” plus the upcoming “Kimberly Akimbo” on Broadway, this set is surprisingly dowdy and devoid of character.
Kauffman, a pro at ushering new plays to the stage, lacks musical theater chops. The numbers (choreography is by Byron Easley) feel as if they were improvised at the last minute. And when characters speak, they are often propped against a wall on the side of the stage, half visible, not landing jokes because the jokes haven’t been visually set up or properly paced.
The most poignant and attention-grabbing scenes belong to Levy, in part because of her open-hearted portrayal of a person experiencing immense pain, but also because the bed she sits in is center stage. We can fully see her.
There are three superb comic performances: Goldstein bopping his head during a cheesy ’80s commercial for Crazy Donny’s is a scream; Rick Crom plays some wacko doctors and does a spot-on Johnny Carson; and Ashley Blanchet is campy as the fantastical Miss New Hampshire.
But they are all stymied by a production that is barely half-finished. The neglected “Bedwetter” needs some Pampers. Er, sorry — pampering.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Meryl Streep's first breakout role was in the CBS miniseries "Holocaust," a drama about a Jewish family living in Nazi Germany. Streep won a Primetime Emmy for her performance, which opened many more doors in Hollywood.
Everett Collection / Everett Col
In 1979, Streep starred in "Kramer vs. Kramer" alongside Dustin Hoffman. Streep won a Golden Globe and the Oscar for Best Supporting Actress for her role in the film.
Streep continued to pursue stage acting throughout her career. Here, she performs in Shakespeare's "The Taming of the Shrew" at the Public Theater in 1979.
In 1985, Streep starred alongside Robert Redford in "Out of Africa," which cemented her reputation as one of the most talented actors in Hollywood.
In 1995, Streep starred in Clint Eastwood's "Bridges of Madison County." Streep was nominated for an Oscar for her performance.
In one of her most recognizable roles of the 2000s, Streep played a fashion editor inspired by Anna Wintour in "The Devil Wears Prada" in 2006.
Streep starred in the film adaptation of smash hit musical "Mamma Mia" in 2008. The musical was an instant success, quickly becoming Streep's highest grossing film after netting $602 million at the box office.
In 2009, Streep played legendary chef Julia Child in the biopic "Julie & Julia." Streep was nominated for Best Actress for her performance.
Streep returned to musicals in 2014 when she portrayed the Witch in Disney's film adaptation of Stephen Sondheim's "Into the Woods."
Streep also continued to star in critically acclaimed television series, including HBO's "Big Little Lies" in 2018.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Growing up in Las Vegas, singer-songwriter Ne-Yo, aka Shaffer Chimere Smith, was surrounded by tons of estrogen in the form of tourists, transient folks and even in his own house. Specifically, the now-42-year-old lived with his mother, sister, grandmother and five aunts.
“Not a lot of testosterone to this house,” he told me on this week’s “Renaissance Man” episode. He said it taught him to be a good listener. “But this is where I fell in love with an independent woman because these were the kind of women that were going to get up and get their hands dirty if they needed to. It ain’t no man around to change a tire, so we got to change the tires … It was those types of women.”
He attended a performing arts high school in Sin City but said he did get into some trouble when he was coming of age. “I started being a knucklehead a little bit, getting in trouble, doing stupid stuff. And that’s when my mom made me start writing. It started out as journal entries and then eventually transformed into songs.”
We can thank his mother’s disciplinary measures for the Ne-Yo we know today.
“I credit my entire writing ability and career to my mother. She gave me that red notebook and said, ‘Write it down.’ And as I write said, ‘Write what down?’ She said, ‘I don’t give a damn. Just write it down.’ And then from there, everything else happened the way it’s supposed to. I’m Ne-Yo now.”
The man is known for wearing many hats, literally and figuratively. He has his own hits and he’s written for major singers, many of whom go by only one name: Mario, Rihanna and, of course, Beyoncé, whose anthem “Irreplaceable” he penned. He said it was inspired by one of his aunts’ love lives, which included a string of boyfriends.
“One dude that stuck around a little longer than everybody else, but he found a way to mess it up. Everything in the song is true. She really did buy this dude a car and this dude really was rolling the car around in the city with another chick in it. She’s about to put all this stuff in a box to the left of the closet and told him to get on. So I wrote the song initially to keep it. I tried to flip it and write it from a male perspective. And what I realized is that this song does not work as well from a male perspective as it does from a female perspective. So once Beyoncé finally got her hands on it, that was all she wrote. The rest is history.”
Once again, he’s used real life to inspire his art. This time, he’s poking around in his own house. His new single “Don’t Love Me” off “Self Explanatory,” his first studio album since 2018, is an honest look at his own relationship with his wife, Crystal Renay Smith. He said they were struggling right before the pandemic and about to divorce, but they reunited in an over-the-top ceremony in April.
“It just kind of got to that place where we couldn’t talk no more. It’s like there’s clearly beef here, but I got to go. I was at a place where I didn’t know if I wasn’t capable of being the man that I felt like she deserved. And so that’s what the song is basically saying: ‘Don’t love me, walk away. You’d be better for it because I know that if I just let you stay. And if you stay, I’m probably wind up hurting you. So I want I want you to go’. And it took my highly intelligent wife to point out to me in the moment that basically she wasn’t gonna let me cop out. She said, ‘It’s not that you can’t be the man that I deserve is that you won’t.'”
He still has a few folks on his collaboration bucket list, but at the top is Drake. “Been a huge fan of Drake since the beginning. I’m really, really impressed with just his writing ability, his rap ability. Nothing the dude can’t do. I’d be anxious to see what a Ne-Yo-Drake song sounds like.” Ne-Yo had a hand in Rihanna’s early success; Jay-Z introduced the pair and he wrote her mid-2000s hits “Take a Bow” and “Unfaithful.”
“When I first met Jay, Rihanna is one of the first artists that he talked to me about. [Jay-Z said,] ‘So we got this young lady, she’s from Barbados, she has a really, really dope energy.’ So when I met her, she was young still … I met her when she was still a kid,” he said, adding that it makes him feel uncomfortable when friends comment on her sex appeal.
“She’s always been a workhorse. She’s the one that will get in the studio, stay in the studio until it’s done. I’m saying everybody’s asleep on a couch and she’s still hammering away at it. Like she’s that person. So I completely understand how she’s as successful as she is now because from a kid, she was like, ‘The work must be done.'”
The Vegas-reared artist is now based out of Atlanta and is part of that music scene developed by LA Reid and Babyface. The best part of recording in that city?
“Atlanta is its own animal … and that’s refreshing to me that you could come out here and kind of let your freak flag fly, so to speak. And not only is it accepted, but it’s embraced. The more individual you are here, the more love you get, as opposed to running around trying to be like or sound like somebody else.”
Morning Report delivers the latest news, videos, photos and more.
Please provide a valid email address.
By clicking above you agree to the 						Terms of Use
He talked about his own evolution with record labels who wanted to put him in one box that he didn’t see himself in. The now-seasoned veteran reminded people that you don’t necessarily need a record deal to get started. And he’s got some wisdom for aspiring entertainers.
“The music industry is full of people trying to be what they saw on TV or what they saw on TikTok. I’ll put it to you this way: If there’s a thing about you or a thing that you do that anyone has ever made fun of before, because it’s individually you, that’s your superpower. Figure that out and use that. Blow that up. Because I’m telling you, that’s the thing. That thing that separates you from everybody else,” he said.
Advice so good, you can write it down in the Ne-Yo red notebook.
Detroit native Jalen Rose is a member of the University of Michigan’s iconoclastic Fab Five, who shook up the college hoops world in the early ’90s. He played 13 seasons in the NBA, before transitioning into a media personality. Rose is currently an analyst for “NBA Countdown” and “Get Up,” and co-host of “Jalen & Jacoby.” He executive produced “The Fab Five” for ESPN’s “30 for 30” series, is the author of the best-selling book, “Got To Give the People What They Want,” a fashion tastemaker, and co-founded the Jalen Rose Leadership Academy, a public charter school in his hometown.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A couple brings out their best sailor and mermaid impression.
Two women gleam in flower embedded outfits.
One women carried a super umbrella sprawling with flowers.
A man cosplays as a rival to Aquaman on the Coney Island boardwalk.
Two women dressed as an entire gold plated castle strut through the parade.
Four women are decked out to be under the sea next to classic cars.
Two women pose with their fishy outfits.
Thousands of parade goers were excited to celebrate on Coney Island board walk after two years.
A humongous float caught people's attention on the Coney Island boardwalk.
The last Coney Island Mermaid Parade occurred in 2019.
The annual Coney Island Mermaid Parade returned to full glory after a two-year hiatus from the pandemic.
Performers decked out in all gold and gray wigs dance out.
Parade goers wearing skimpy outfits party in Coney Island.
A man kisses his beau's hand on the Coney Island boardwalk.
A woman can't get enough of blue in her sea-inspired attire.
ALEX KENT/AFP via Getty Images
A performer puts a finishing touch on a man's body painted in all green.
Three women wearing elaborate designs pose in front of the famous Cyclone roller coaster.
Two men and two women show off their aquaman attire.
Performers make their way to Coney Island on the subway.
One man showed off a glossy crab head.
Dick Zigun, the founder of the Coney Island Mermaid Parade, smiles while wearing a stash.
A woman donning purple, gray and yellow hair keeps herself cool with an umbrella.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Nas, New York City Mayor Eric Adams and Peter J. Scalettar attend the "Supreme Team" documentary premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 19, 2022.
Nas and Ari Melber attend the "Supreme Team" documentary premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 19, 2022
John Legend attends the "Loudmouth" documentary premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 18, 2022.
Al Sharpton attends the "Loudmouth" documentary premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 18, 2022.
Robert De Niro and Spike Lee attend the "Loudmouth" documentary premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 18, 2022 in New York City.
Isabella Farrell poses for a photo before attending the "Bridge And Tunnel" premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 18, 2022 in New York City.
Ron Adar / M10s / MEGA
From left to right -- Fredrika Newton, director A.K. Sandhu and Dana King of the film, For Love and Legacy line up for a photo on the red carpet at the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 18, 2022 in New York City.
Bill Nye shines in the spotlight for the premiere of 'The End Is Nye' at Tribeca Film Festival in New York City.
Jesse Williams is spotted at the "Loudmouth" documentary premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 18, 2022 in New York City.
Joslyn DeFreece and Laverne Cox attend NYC Pride Presents: Disclosure during 2022 Tribeca Festival at Spring Studios on June 17, 2022.
Actors Robert De Niro and Al Pacino attend the screening of a 4K version of the film "HEAT" during the 2022 Tribeca Festival at United Palace Theater on June 17, 2022.
(L-R) Jenn Pelly, Janette Beckman, Jessica Hopper, Nona Hendryx, and Carmen Elle speak onstage during EPIX's Women Who Rock Tribeca Film Festival premiere on June 16, 2022.
Slaven Vlasic/Getty Images for EPIX
Julia Fox speaks onstage with director Richie Shazam at the "Savitree" premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival on June 16, 2022.
Sigourney Weaver attends the premiere of "The Good House" at the Tribeca Film Festival on June 16, 2022.
Alonzo Bodden and W. Kamau Bell speak on stage during A&E's "Right to Offend: The Black Comedy Revolution" at Tribeca Film Festival on June 16, 2022.
Getty Images for A+E Networks
Common and Charles Blow speak during The Harry Belafonte Voices For Social Justice Award at the 2022 Tribeca Film on June 15, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
Mayor Eric Adams poses with Derrick Adams, Common and Charles Blow at The Harry Belafonte Voices For Social Justice Award during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 15, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
Robert De Niro speaks on stage during The Harry Belafonte Voices For Social Justice Award at the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 15, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
Emma Thompson attends the premiere of "Good Luck To You, Leo Grande" during the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 15, 2022.
Bryan Cranston is interviewed on the red carpet at the premiere of "Jerry & Marge Go Large" premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 15, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
Sterling Brown, Malcolm Brogdon, JaVale McGee, CJ McCollum, Tobias Harris and Pat Connaughton attend the "Game Change Game" Premiere Event at the Tribeca Film Festival on June 14, 2022.
Getty Images for This is Dope
Tobias Harris gives a toast with Prisoner Wine at the "Game Change Game" Premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival on June 14, 2022.
Getty Images for This is Dope
Antonio Banderas and Penelope Cruz attend the "Official Competition" premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 14, 2022.
Jessica Chastain attends the premiere of "The Forgiven" at the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 14, 2022.
Katie Holmes and Bobby Wooten III attend the premiere of "Alone Together" at the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 14, 2022.
Tyler Perry attends the "Director Series" during the Tribeca Festival on June 13, 2022.
Andrew Garfield attends the Chanel dinner at the Tribeca Film Festival on June 1213, 2022.
Jacques Morel and Steve Aoki attend Storytellers during the Tribeca Film Festival on June 13, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Mindy Kaling attends the premiere of "Vengeance" during the Tribeca Festival on June 12, 2022.
Dove Cameron, Ashton Kutcher and Issa Rae attend the premiere of "Vengeance" during the Tribeca Festival on June 12, 2022.
Lena Waithe and Giancarlo Esposito attend the after party for the premiere of Lena Waithe and Andrew Dosunmu's Netflix Film "Beauty" at The Tribeca Festival on June 11, 2022.
Lil Baby performs during "Untrapped: The Story of Lil Baby" premiere at the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
Actor Peter Dinklage attends the screening of "American Dreamer" during the 2022 Tribeca Festival at BMCC Tribeca PAC on June 11, 2022.
Big Time Tommy attends "Out Of Order" premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Festival at Brookfield Place on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
Amanda Seyfried attends "88" premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Festival at Village East Cinema on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Pharrell Williams attends "Storytellers" during the 2022 Tribeca Festival at BMCC Tribeca PAC on June 10, 2022 in New York City.
From left to right -- Daz, Xzibit, Kurupt, The DOC and DJ Quik address attendees during a performance during the 2022 Tribeca Festival at Beacon Theatre on June 10, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Ray Romano speaks during the "Somewhere In Queens" premiere at the 2022 Tribeca Festival at BMCC Tribeca PAC on June 10, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
Slick Rick performs while The DOC watches following the "The DOC" premiere at the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 10, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
From left to right -- Nick Prueher, Berndt Mader, Joe Pickett, Ben Steinbauer and Bobcat Goldthwait attend a premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Festival on June 10, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
Megan Fox and Machine Gun Kelly attend the "Taurus" premiere during the 2022 Tribeca Festival at Beacon Theater on June 9, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festiva
US actress Maddie Hasson (R) and Julian Brink attend the "Taurus" premiere during the Tribeca Festival at Beacon Theatre on June 9, 2022 in New York City
The Young Peoples' Chorus of NY performs during the Tribeca Festival Opening Night of Netflix's Halftime on June 8, 2022 in New York City.
Jennifer Lopez is surrounded by young performers at the "Halftime" premiere during the Tribeca Film Festival Opening Night on June and 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Dancers perform at the premiere of "Halftime" during the Tribeca Film Festival Opening Night on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Jennifer Lopez is presented with a bouquet at the premiere of "Halftime" during the Tribeca Film Festival Opening Night on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Jennifer Lopez arrives at the "Halftime" Premiere during the Tribeca Film Festival Opening Night on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Robert De Niro and Jane Rosenthal, the co-founders of the Tribeca Film Festival, speak onstage during  the "Halftime" Premiere on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Tayshia Adams attends the "Halftime" Premiere during the Tribeca Festival Opening Night on June 8, 2022.
Aubrey Paige Petcosky and Ryan Seacrest attend the "Halftime" Premiere during the Tribeca Festival Opening Night on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Lin-Manuel Miranda attends "Halftime" Premiere during the Tribeca Film Festival Opening Night on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
The Tribeca Film Festival's Jury Welcome Lunch was held at City Winery in Chelsea on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Whoopi Goldberg, LeVar Burton and Stephanie Cozart Burton pose for a photo at the Jury Welcome Lunch during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Rufus Wainwright performs onstage at the Jury Welcome Lunch during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival at City Winery on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe
Al Sharpton speaks to Robert De Niro at the Jury Welcome Lunch during the 2022 Tribeca Film Festival on June 8, 2022.
Getty Images for Tribeca Film Fe

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
This is what I get up to when @vin_cenz isn’t around 🤣😅 #fypシ #foryoupage #foryou #adayinmylife #housewife
♬ original sound – MONNYMOVES
A woman from the UK has revealed how she jetted off to New Jersey and became a stay-at-home wife.
The couple met online during the pandemic, and when the travel ban was lifted met up in real life.
The pair then got engaged and she then jetted off to join her husband in New Jersey – and her life has changed drastically.
In one TikTok video posted to her account, Monny Moves, she shared what a typical day in the life looks like as a New Jersey housewife.
She revealed she starts the day by making her and her husband a cup of espresso in the morning followed by a bowl of chia seed pudding for breakfast topped with fresh fruit.
After breakfast, it’s time to chill out from the hard work of being a housewife.
“And because being a housewife is obviously super stressful, I’m here by the pool drinking a flask of wine pretending I’m on vacation,” she explains.
After a busy morning of topping up her tan, the housewife gets herself glammed up for the rest of the day.
She said: “I do my hair and makeup so my husband doesn’t come home to a disheveled wife.”
Now she’s ready for the day, she explains it is time for more wine while she prepares dinner for when her husband gets home.
On the menu is pasta, but not just any old kind, it’s Dolce and Gabbana pasta because “New Jersey housewives are super boujie,” she jokes.
The housewife confirms she got the designer pasta as a bridal gift.
The video has gone viral racking up over 100k views, with the comments section inundated with women claiming she was living their dreams.
One wrote: “You are literally living my dream.”
“This is the dream,” another exclaimed.
A third penned: “How does it feel to live my dream?”
This story originally appeared on The Sun and was reproduced here with permission.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The Prince of Darkness is back releasing music barely two weeks after his “life-altering surgery.”
On Friday, fans were treated to his new song, “Patient Number 9,” and a music video directed by “The Amazing Spider Man” artist Todd McFarlane.
The video features Osbourne portraying a patient at a mental institution along with an illustrated version of him drawn by McFarlane. He fights demons in the two distinct styles.
“The song is about a mental institution,” Osbourne said of the title track in a statement to Loudwire. “Having someone like Jeff Beck play on my album is just incredible, a total honor. There’s no other guitar player that plays like him and his solo on ‘Patient Number 9’ is just jaw-dropping.”
The album is set to have an all-star lineup including Pearl Jam’s Mike McCready, Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Chad Smith, Zakk Wylde, Metallica’s Robert Trujillo, Duff McKagan, Eric Clapton and the late Taylor Hawkins. Even Osbourne’s former Black Sabbath bandmate, Tony Iommi, is making his first debut on one of his solo albums.
“Patient Number 9” comes out shortly after the singer underwent surgery to realign pins in his neck and back. This is in addition to suffering from Parkinson’s Disease.
The former Black Sabbath star had been suffering from neck injuries dating back to 2003 which stemmed from a quad biking accident. A fall in 2019 made the condition worse and 15 screws were inserted into his back.
Osbourne was discharged one day after the surgery, June 14, and is still on the road to recovery.
“I am definitely feeling the love and support from all my fans and send everyone a big thank you for their thoughts, prayers and well wishes during my recovery,” he said in an Instagram post.
His wife Sharon also mentioned that “he’s feeling good” in a social media post.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
PASADENA, Calif. — Mishael Morgan of “The Young and the Restless” won as lead drama actress, becoming the first Black actor to win in a lead category at the Daytime Emmys on Friday night.
Morgan was previously nominated in the supporting category. The 35-year-old from Trinidad and Tobago plays Amanda Sinclair on the CBS soap.
“I am being honored regardless of the color of my skin, regardless of my passport, for being the best at what I do,” Morgan said. “Now there are little girls all around the world and they’re seeing another step forward and they know that no matter their industry, no matter their vocation, no matter what, they can strive to be the best at what they do. Not only can they achieve it, but they will be celebrated.”
John McCook earned lead actor honors for his role as Eric Forrester on CBS’ “The Bold and the Beautiful.” It was the 78-year-old’s first win in four nominations.
“I am so glad to get this Emmy, any Emmy actually,” he said.
“General Hospital” won daytime drama honors, the ABC show’s 15th triumph in the category. It was the fifth trophy earned by the show Friday.
Morgan is in her second stint on “Y&R.” She first joined the soap in 2013 and stayed until 2018. She returned in 2019 as a different character.
“I am so immensely proud of our generation. We are breaking glass ceilings left, right and center, and I am so honored to be a vessel and experience this moment,” she said. “It’s because of everybody who is out there today who is proving to the world that we can and we will do this thing called equality and unity together.”
Three “General Hospital” stars won honors and the soap’s directing team won for the third consecutive year.
Kelly Thiebaud was chosen supporting actress for playing Dr. Britt Westbourne and Jeff Kober scored as supporting actor for his role as Cyrus Renault. Nicholas Chavez won as younger performer in the soap.
“Wow!” Chavez said. “Just a little over a year ago I was selling cars in a little beach town in Florida. I always had the love and support of my family, but none of us had ever dreamed I’d be up on this stage.”
A gleeful Thiebaud won on her first nomination.
“I cannot believe this. I am so shocked,” she said. “My brother, when I first started acting, he followed my work and he’s like, ’You’re not that good.’ So thank you for giving me something to rub in his face.”
Kober is known for his extensive film and primetime work on such shows as “Sons of Anarchy” and “The Walking Dead.”
“Wow, thank you for making me feel so welcome in daytime. What a trip,” he said. “I love what we get to do for a living, it’s play.”
NBC’s “Days of Our Lives” won for writing team.
Kelly Clarkson earned her third consecutive trophy as entertainment talk show host. Her eponymous show also won its second straight trophy for entertainment talk show. The singer is spending the summer with her children and didn’t attend.
Tamron Hall picked up her second straight trophy as informative talk show host.
Steve Harvey of “Family Feud” won as game show host.
“Jeopardy!” won game show honors.
“’Jeopardy!’ is a show about facts,” executive producer Michael Davies said. “Facts, with everything going on in the world, are more important than ever. ‘Jeopardy!’ is the last place where everyone agrees about facts.”
Daytime doyenne Susan Lucci, who starred on “All My Children” during the show’s entire 41-year network run, received a standing ovation. She introduced the In Memoriam segment, which included a photo of her husband, Helmet Huber, who died in March. Michael Bolton crooned his hit “How Am I Supposed to Live Without You.”
John Aniston of “Days of Our Lives” was honored with a lifetime achievement award for his 37-year role as Victor Kiriakis. The 88-year-old actor wasn’t present.
He was introduced via video by his daughter, Jennifer Aniston, who said, “His career is literally the definition of lifetime achievement.” She noted he began acting in 1962 in primetime and also appeared in such defunct soaps as “Love of Life” and “Search For Tomorrow” before joining “Days” in 1985.
After two years of pre-taped presentations because of the coronavirus pandemic, daytime returned to honoring its own at nighttime with an in-person ceremony. In 2020, the show went virtual for the first time and last year the audience was limited.
Still, the specter of COVID-19 was felt.
Two nominees from “The Young and the Restless” were forced to bow out. Lead actor nominee Jason Thompson, who plays Billy Abbott, and supporting actress nominee Melissa Ordway, who plays Abby Newman, both said on social media they had tested positive for COVID-19 and would miss the show.
Kevin Frazier and Nischelle Turner of “Entertainment Tonight” co-hosted the 49th annual awards held at the Pasadena Convention Center, where many of the nominees sat at socially distanced cocktail tables and others sat in rows next to each other.
Frazier and Turner found themselves accepting a Daytime Emmy when “ET” won for entertainment news series.
Turner opened the show with a reference to the Supreme Court overturning women’s constitutional protections for abortions earlier Friday. She emphatically told Frazier it was “her choice” to wear her blue gown. The crowd cheered and some women stood up.
Supporting actress nominee Nancy Lee Grahn of “General Hospital” walked the indoor red carpet wearing references to the day’s news. She had a temporary tattoo reading “reproductive freedom” on her chest, the word “choice” on her disc earrings and she carried a black purse with “ban off our bodies” spelled out in rhinestones.
“I dare not go through this process without speaking out about the devastation that I have for what happened today and what a dark day it is for women in this country,” the 66-year-old actor said. “We’re not going to allow this, we’re not going to stand for it.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
In the country that devours the most pornography on the planet, “Deep Throat” still got the shaft as it looked to return to theaters for its 50th anniversary this year.
Banned, protested and subjected to numerous obscenity trials after its 1972 debut, this week’s worldwide premiere for the 4K restoration of “the Golden Age of Porn’s” magnum opus initially had a hard time booking US theaters.
“Europe is much more receptive to us. We couldn’t find a venue that was comfortable showing the film, and we even had a couple cancel on us at the last minute. It was bulls–t,” Gerard Damiano Jr., son of writer and director Gerard Sr., told The Post.
It was history repeating itself for Robin Leonardi, daughter of porn star and industry activist Gloria Leonard: “Fifty years later, we’re still having this conversation about free speech and censorship — the very same issues that our parents fought for.”
The film stars Linda Lovelace as a sexually unfulfilled woman, who only wants “bombs going off” in bed. She visits an eccentric therapist played by Harry Reems, who discovers that her clitoris is actually in her throat.
“‘Deep Throat’ is very vanilla, it’s wholesome, almost, and naive compared to the deviant things you can find with two clicks on an iPhone under the covers at night,” said Leonard, who eventually found theaters open to showing it.
The Roxy Cinema in Tribeca will host a 16mm screening and sneak peek of the restoration on Friday, June 10. The 4K “Deep Throat” will have its world premiere at The Slipper Room on the Lower East Side on Sunday, June 12, with burlesque dancers, a Q&A and three shows, including a midnight screening that “harkens back to the grindhouse days of 42nd Street,” Damiano said. Additional dates in the US and Europe will be held in the fall.
“For the past 22 years, it has been our intention to grapple with the uptight, puritan nature of the American scene and allow artists a place where they can feel free to express their passions in whatever fashion best suits them,” Slipper Room Artistic Director James Habacker told The Post. “As such, we are proud to play a part in presenting to a new generation ‘Deep Throat,’ a film that did so much to push the boundaries of American taste towards a more open and free expression of our sexual natures.”
Despite “Deep Throat” debuting in the middle of a revolutionary and tumultuous time in US history, the country’s mindset remained very puritanical, especially in entertainment.
“Although you might have just been at a love-in in San Francisco, when you turned on the TV, Lucy and Ricky are still sleeping in separate beds. You couldn’t even show a couple in the same bed together,” Damiano recalled. But then came “Deep Throat,” and “suddenly media was beginning to catch up with people’s realities. You had hardcore sex in your life, so now you can see it in a movie.”
And see it America did, with celebs like Jackie Kennedy Onassis, Truman Capote and Frank Sinatra joining the “raincoat crowd” lining up to see the “porno chic” sensation made for just $25,000 over six days.
The Post’s film critic Archer Winsten, who wrote he was “forced” by “public curiosity” to see the film five months after it opened, opined that he was “frankly surprised at the people who watch it with an attention so rapt you’d think they were face to face with hooded cobras about to strike.”
“Deep Throat” was equally difficult for others to swallow, and conservative and feminist protests ensued, as did high-profile local and federal court cases.
Manhattan Judge Joel Tyler ruled that “Deep Throat” was obscene in 1973 and fined the company that owned the 49th Street theater where it still drew crowds since premiering there seven months earlier. Tyler, however, repeatedly admitted he was “learning something” over the course of the three-month trial, The Post reported in December 1972.
Lovelace (aka Boreman) later joined the anti-porn movement and renounced her adult roles, saying she was coerced into making them by her violent first husband, Chuck Traynor. In her 1980 memoir, “Ordeal,” she details his alleged abuse, which included beatings, spying, death threats and a gang rape.
“Everyone that watches ‘Deep Throat’ is watching me being raped,” she wrote.
Traynor later admitted to hitting Lovelace and while several costars and crew backed up her claims of his domestic violence and control, many cast doubt on her claims of being coerced into making adult films.
“Yes, she had an abusive husband, but she wasn’t forced into anything. She was really into what she was doing,” two-time costar Reems told The Post in 2005.
Despite its controversies, “Deep Throat” reportedly earned more than $600 million, making it one of the most profitable movies of all time.
“My father was always very proud to say that Nixon tried to take down ‘Deep Throat,’ but in the end, it was Deep Throat that took down Nixon.”
Its place in history was further solidified when the Washington Post adopted its title as the nickname for Mark Felt, who decades later would be identified as the Watergate informant whose tips led to the 1974 resignation of President Richard Nixon.
Ironically, Nixon’s own disgraced Vice President Spiro Agnew saw “Deep Throat” in theaters, according to Entertainment Weekly, but that didn’t stop the FBI under the administration — with Felt as the bureau’s second-in-command — from trying to choke the film’s release.
“My father fought against Nixon as his nemesis. Nixon vowed to bring him down,” Damiano Jr. said. “My father was always very proud to say that Nixon tried to take down ‘Deep Throat,’ but in the end, it was Deep Throat that took down Nixon.”
Gerard Damiano’s children, Gerard Jr. and Christar, were 7 and 8 when “Deep Throat” debuted, and both fondly recall the time they spent on sets with him, where the cast and crew were “family.”
“He never kept it a secret from us, and certainly, we were never exposed to hardcore pornography or force-fed sex at a young age,” Gerard Jr. said, with Christar adding, “We were taught that sex was a beautiful thing, the human body was a work of art, and it was something you shouldn’t be ashamed of.”
That lesson is front-and-center in “Deep Throat,” where “the woman was the star,” Christar said. “That’s why we think that it became such an overnight success because all of a sudden there’s a new language about the woman and what she desires.”
With their father a fast celebrity and the film making headlines and money, “people thought we were rich — but he got taken advantage of,” Gerard Jr. said. “He found out too late that his business partners in the film were connected to the mafia.”
The elder Domanio did not see any profits from the film and “was “lucky to get out with his life,” his son said.
Because those mob ties have long put an asterisk on “Deep Throat’s” box office returns, his children aim to set the record straight with a documentary “so people know the real story about what happened,” Christar said.
“There’s so many stories out there that aren’t true. We want to tell our story.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Hunter Schafer is stepping out of East Highland High School and entering Panem.
The 23-year-old actress has been cast as Tigris Snow, Coriolanus’ cousin and confidant, in the upcoming “Hunger Games” prequel, “The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes.”
She will appear opposite Tom Blyth and Rachel Zegler, who will play Lucy Gray, the girl tribute from impoverished District 12.
Jennifer Lawrence, 31, will also return to the franchise both in the film and as a producer.
The prequel’s logline from Lionsgate reads: “Years before he would become the tyrannical President of Panem, 18-year-old Coriolanus Snow is the last hope for his fading lineage, a once-proud family that has fallen from grace in a post-war Capitol. With the 10th annual Hunger Games fast approaching, the young Snow is alarmed when he is assigned to mentor Lucy Gray Baird, the girl tribute from impoverished District 12. But, after Lucy Gray commands all of Panem’s attention by defiantly singing during the reaping ceremony, Snow thinks he might be able to turn the odds in their favor. Uniting their instincts for showmanship and newfound political savvy, Snow and Lucy’s race against time to survive will ultimately reveal who is a songbird and a snake.”
Schafer made her acting debut as Jules Vaughn in HBO’s “Euphoria.” She has also co-written and co-produced an episode with creator Sam Levinson. The actress, who is transgender, worked with him on her character to reflect her real high school experience.
Prior to acting, Schafer’s main focus was modeling. She has worked with almost every big name out there, including Gucci, Thierry Mugler and Versus Versace.
“The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes” hits worldwide theaters on Nov. 17, 2023.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
With his brown, wrinkly skin and glowing index finger, we all thought E.T. had an aesthetic that was all his own.
Turns out he was actually a little bit Albert Einstein, a little bit Ernest Hemingway and a little bit Carl Sandburg.
When it came to creating the iconic extra-terrestrial, director Steven Spielberg advised special effects artist Carlo Rambaldi to look to the theoretical physicist, the esteemed novelist and the Pulitzer prize-winning poet.
“I remember saying to Carlo, ‘Here’s some pictures of Albert Einstein, Ernest Hemingway and Carl Sandburg. I love their eyes. Can we make E.T.’s eyes as frivolous and also wizened and as sad as those three icons?’ ” Spielberg says in the featurette, “The Making of ‘E.T. The Extra-Terrestrial.’ “
The unexpected inspirations proved effective. Rambaldi, who had previously worked with Spielberg on the aliens in “Close Encounters of the Third Kind,” won an Academy Award for his work on “E.T.” It was his third Oscar, following wins for his work on Ridley Scott’s “Alien” and John Guillermin’s 1976 remake of “King Kong.”
But “E.T.” was the Italy native’s crowning creation. Upon Rambaldi’s death in 2012 at age 86, Spielberg called him “E.T.’s Geppetto.”
This month marks the 40th anniversary of Spielberg’s childhood classic. The film ran in theaters for an unprecedented full year, until June 1983.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A teenager was clinging to life after he was stabbed in the groin outside a subway station in Sheepshead Bay Saturday night, cops said.
Another teen was in custody following the attack, which unfolded just after 9 p.m. at East 15th Street and Sheepshead Bay Road, according to the NYPD.
Charges were pending against a 16-year-old boy after he stabbed a 17-year-old boy following an argument, police said.
The victim was critically injured and taken to Lutheran Hospital, authorities said.
The teens’ identities were not released.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The charismatic leader of a cult that recruited Manhattan’s wealthy and powerful may have died last year, but her notorious movement is still thriving.
The Odyssey Study Group, also known as The Work and A Fourth Way School, has long been accused of sexual and child abuse as well as siphoning cash from its members to pay for its leaders’ extravagant lifestyles in Manhattan, Boston, the Hamptons and Mexico.
OSG, which was registered as a for-profit company in 2001, currently has more than 200 members on the East Coast, a cult expert and former member both told The Post.
“It’s a very bizarre kind of group because they are generally wealthy and highly educated Harvard, Yale and Wharton types,” said Rick Alan Ross, author of the 2014 book “Cults Inside out: How People Get in and Can Get Out” and executive director of Cult Education Institute, which has studied the group since 2001.
“When people say that people in New York City are much too smart to get involved in a cult, it just means that the cult is very sophisticated and slick,” Ross said, adding that OSG’s survival has a lot to do with its cash flow.
Under former leader Sharon Gans Horn — who died from COVID complications in January 2021 at the age of 85 — the group was generating more than $1.2 million a year, just in member dues paid in cash, said Ross.
The group, which meets twice weekly in an office building on West 38th Street and an Upper West Side Church, is now run by four alleged longtime members handpicked by Gans Horn, according to a recent class-action lawsuit.
Gans Horn, a one-time Hollywood actress who had a small part in the 1972 film version of “Slaughterhouse-Five,” also left the bulk of her $3.275 million estate to some members.
“According to the purported will and testamentary trusts … defendant Sharon Gans Horn bequeathed her interest in OSG to defendants Minerva Taylor, Lorraine Imlay, Greg Koch, and Ken Salaz,” according to the lawsuit.
The defendants have long been leaders of OSG, according to a source. Co-executor Michael Horn, 64, is Gans Horn’s stepson and is not a member of the cult, according to the source.
Taylor, 71, who has a five-bedroom home in East Hampton, founded a Manhattan recruiting firm — Taylor Hodson, Inc. — in December 1994, according to public records; Gans Horn is alleged to have been a silent partner in the business, according to the source. Taylor’s specialty is recruitment of new members, the source said, and her company employs many alleged members of the cult.
“I am surprised Greg Koch made the cut,” said a former cult member who last year posted his views about the group on Cult Revolt, a blog started by Schneider. “I remember him being brutally set upon by Alex Horn [Gans Horn’s husband] and the older students one night  … Greg was in tears and I felt sorry for him.”
Imlay, a ceramic artist, is a retired New York City teacher.  Now 74, she has lived in the same four-bedroom West Village co-op since 2003, public records show.  She met Gans Horn and Alex Horn in San Francisco in the 1980s, and was described as the leader’s “body person” or assistant.
Salaz is among the younger alleged leaders of the group. At 52, he is an artist and magician who lives in Croton-on-Hudson, according to public records. He was described as a protege of Alex Horn by the source.
A lawyer representing Taylor, Koch, Salaz, Imlay and Horn declined comment.
The class-action suit, filed in Manhattan State Supreme Court last year, was brought by Stephanie Rosenberg and Marjorie Hochman, who both fled OSG after spending years involved with the cult. They claim that they were used by the group as slave labor — cooking and cleaning for twice weekly meetings in Manhattan and laboring on renovations to luxury properties used by Gans Horn that often required them to do construction and painting into the wee hours.
“Through methods traditionally utilized to groom, intimidate, weaken, gaslight, and exploit their victims, OSG coerced and tricked its members into, among other things … paying it monthly fees and performing many hours of labor without compensation,” the lawsuit says.
“We filed a complaint alleging that these members were employees because they worked for the defendants’ for-profit company and never got paid,” said Mordy Yankovich, a partner in Lieb at Law, PC representing plaintiffs Rosenberg and Hochman.
“Vindictive” late leader Gans Horn “intentionally excluded” her own children from the 2015 will “for reasons that are known to them,” according to court papers.
“She was like a human wrecking ball,” said Ross, alleging that Gans Horn broke up the marriages of cult members, encouraged some to engage in affairs with each other, and organized adoptions of followers’ children. “She was incredibly vindictive.”
Gans Horn’s own offspring, Ilsa Lee Kaye and son David Kulko, were estranged from her, although Kaye’s children were not excluded from the will, court documents show.
The cult’s success had much to do with Gans Horn, who has been described as a narcissist, Ross said.
“The whole thing is a pyramid scheme and a hoax,” said Spencer Schneider,  a former OSG member who has written “Manhattan Cult Story:  My Unbelievable True Story of Sex, Crimes, Chaos and Survival,” a tell-all book out now about the cult. “It’s a long haul hoax and Sharon was a genius at going after vulnerable people with money.”
According to Schneider, who spent 23 years as part of the group, members paid $400 in cash in dues to Gans Horn, who would then direct them to help renovate her compounds in Manhattan, the Hamptons, upstate New York, Montana and even Mexico. She owned a luxurious home in San Miguel de Allende, bought in 2004. She later sold the property to Taylor, according to public records.
Taylor and her then-husband followed Gans Horn and Alex Horn from San Francisco to the East Coast in the early 1980s, according to a source and public documents.
In addition to the vacation home in Mexico, Taylor is listed as the “registered agent” on the LLC that bought Gans Horn’s sprawling $8.5 million Plaza Hotel residence where she died in January 2021. Taylor was also named as an investor in the property, along with Gans Horn and three others, including Manhattan hedge fund owner Joseph Stilwell, who signed the deed documents in 2008, public and court records show.
Gans and her playwright husband, who died in 2007, co-founded OSG in San Francisco in the 1970s. The group, known then as Theater of All Possibilities, was partly set up to put on plays by Horn. Its principles are based on the teachings of George Ivanovich Gurdieff, a Russian mystic and philosopher, who also inspired the Fellowship of Friends,  a California-based cult popular with Google employees.
Gans and Horn shuttered their San Francisco theater in December 1978 when they learned that police and social welfare investigators were interviewing their former students who alleged child neglect, sexual abuse and beatings, according to Ross.
The couple fled first to Montana, and then ended up in New York City in the 1980s when they established OSG and lived in a series of opulent homes, including an apartment in Greenwich Village where actress Marisa Tomei was their next-door neighbor.
Ross said that he believes the cult will continue although the loss of their “philosopher queen” Gans has likely hit them hard.
“It’s no different than Scientology,” said Schneider, an attorney. “That group continued even after the death of their founder.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
OREGON CITY, Ore. — A 13-year-old girl who went missing from Edmonton, Alberta, Canada for more than a week has been found in Oregon and the man accused of kidnapping is detained in jail, authorities said Monday.
FBI agents on Saturday helped arrest Noah Madrano, 41, on accusations of luring the girl from Canada to the U.S., according to an email from the media office of the FBI in Portland. The girl from the Canadian city of Edmonton was found in Oregon City, Oregon. Madrano was being held on state charges, the email said.
Madrano was at the Clackamas County Jail on accusations of rape, sexual abuse and kidnapping, according to jail records. The records did not indicate if he had a lawyer who could speak on his behalf.
Oregon City Police spokesman Matt Paschall said Madrano is being held on no bail and was scheduled to be arraigned on Tuesday.
The Edmonton Police Service said in a statement that the girl went missing on June 24. An investigation by Edmonton police, Alberta Law Enforcement Response Teams, U.S. Customs and Border Patrol, Oregon City Police and the FBI located the girl and the man on Saturday, the statement said.
The girl was taken to a local children’s hospital for a precautionary examination, the statement said. Her family was notified Saturday morning and arrangements were made to return her to her family, the statement said.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Britney Spears’ rocky road to love is paved with men who have used her for her fame and fortune.
Those who know the pop princess well hope that her marriage to long-time boyfriend, Sam Asghari, 28, will be her happily-ever-after following her 2021 release from conservatorship.
But one Hollywood source who worked closely with Spears, 40, told The Post: “I honestly just really hope that they’ve signed a prenup. This guy’s a wannabe actor, and I hope this is real.
“You just want her not to be taken advantage of.”
Although Spears’ brother Bryan was due to be at the wedding, her mom, Lynne, dad Jamie, younger sister Jamie Lynn were not invited. Her two boys, Sean, 16, and Jayden, 15, were not attending either, although a lawyer for their dad, Kevin Federline, said: “Although the boys will not be in attendance, Kevin and the boys are happy for Britney and wish her and Sam all the best going forward.”
“I think it’s a good thing, if everything goes well,” a former boyfriend of Spears told The Post Thursday of the marriage. “I do worry about the age difference, and I was around Hollywood enough to know that it’s hard to tell when someone loves you for you and when they’re after your money. But I don’t want to rain on Britney’s parade. I hope it’s a good thing.”
“We had a great time together, she’s a great girl, even if the people around her were a little sketchy. But I hope that’s behind her now.”
Here are the lovers Spears has left in her wake:
The former couple first met in the early ’90s while filming “The Mickey Mouse Club.”
“Like, we’ve gone through so much together and we’ve known each other since we were 12 years old,” Spears gushed to The Observer in 2001. We know each other inside and out.”
Timberlake, the former NSYNC heartthrob, told GQ magazine in 2006: “I was infatuated with her from the moment I saw her.”
The Hollywood source who worked with Spears told The Post: “The real love of her life was Justin, because it was true love in the beginning and they were on the same level. Britney was in fact a little bigger, because she was solo and Justin was in a boy band.
“Britney really loved Justin. They were best friends and they grew up in the same industry … until they grew out of each other.”
In 2002, the two broke up amid allegations that Spears had cheated on Timberlake with her choreographer Wade Robson.
Timberlake, now 41, released his hit heartbreak track “Cry Me a River” that same year, hiring a Britney lookalike as the cheating star of the video.
Now married to Jessica Biel, Timberlake has apologized to Spears for not speaking up for her in the past. When she spilled the agonizing details of her conservatorship in court in June 2021, Timberlake tweeted: “After what we saw today, we should all be supporting Britney at this time.”
Earlier this year, Spears blasted Timberlake for “using” her name to sell records of his debut album, “Justified,” back in 2002 — writing in a since-deleted Instagram post that Jesus had spoken to her about those who betrayed her: “Your ex did the same thing … with his first album using your name claiming you did him dirty!!!!”
Sources who know Spears confirmed to The Post that Robson and Spears hooked up behind Timberlake’s back, prompting the sweethearts’ split — and “Cry Me a River.”
Robson, 39 — who featured in HBO’s “Leaving Neverland” doc, in which he accused Michael Jackson of molesting him when he was 7 — was Spears’ choreographer and worked with NSYNC as well.
Legend has it that Timberlake uncovered the alleged affair when he found a note from Robson in Spears’ dressing room in February 2002, on the night that the couple were scheduled to appear on “Saturday Night Live.”
Robson, who now runs a health and wellness website, was unavailable for comment.
The Louisiana native, 40, is best known for his short-lived marriage to Spears. It lasted only 55 hours — but he continues to haunt her.
On Thursday, Alexander live-streamed himself on Instagram somehow getting inside Spears’ home — in an attempt to crash her wedding to Asghari — and being apprehended by police
They were childhood friends who decided to tie the knot in the early hours of Jan. 3, 2004, at The Little White Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas. The marriage was then annulled due to pressure from the pop star’s family.
Divorce attorney Mark Goldberg later said the pair had wanted to stay wed: “It was the mother interfering in and inserting herself into her daughter’s life.
“She came to Las Vegas, threw Jason out and got him a plane ticket home.
Despite this, a source who knows Spears told The Post: “It was not real with Jason.”
Alexander showed he still supports his ex-wife from a distance by participating in a #FreeBritney protest in August 2020 amid her 13-year conservatorship battle.
“She’s really been a prisoner,” he said on a podcast at the time, according to Newsweek.
Spears wed Federline, a backup dancer, in September of the same year her first marriage was annulled. The pair — who share matching dice tattoos on their wrists — got engaged just two months after meeting and surprised loved ones with a top-secret wedding three months after that.
“I think my mom was dumbfounded,” Spears said on the couple’s fever dream of a reality show “Britney & Kevin: Chaotic.”
The two were a constant source of public ridicule and practically fueled the tabloid industry and paparazzi machine during their relationship, with Federline’s look — Von Dutch hat, gravity-defying low-slung pants and a sleeveless undershirt — inspiring countless Halloween costumes.
They went on to welcome two sons, Sean Preston and Jayden James, but separated in November 2006, just before Spears’ tragic series of public meltdowns.
The source who knows Spears told The Post: “I think Britney did love Kevin for the moment. [He] was weirdly stable for her. It was a time of her life when she was grabbing on to something.
“I think the day they fell out of love was when she started losing it a little bit.”
Federline’s attorney added: “He wants her to be happy and believes this will be a positive step for her in a post-conservatorship era, building a healthy, happy future going forward.”
Ghalib was one of the Hollywood paparazzi who hounded Spears’ every move — until they ended up dating before her conservatorship was put into effect.
The relationship began in December 2007 just after her split with Federline, much to the dismay of those closest to Spears. Her cousin and former assistant Alli Sims told US Weekly she disapproved of British-born Ghalib.
“I only know who he is through him following us for the last eight months,” she said at the time. “I do not think Adnan is a good person; I think he only has bad intentions. He has always given me a weird feeling and creeped me out. I wish he would just go away.”
In January 2009, the star’s dad, Jamie Spears, filed for a restraining order against Ghalib and other associates; the photographer was eventually ordered to stay away from Spears and her family for three years.
Spears started dating the Hollywood agent, who worked at powerhouse agency WME and had once represented her, in April 2009. After they became engaged in 2011, a request was approved for Trawick to be in charge of the singer’s court-imposed conservatorship.
“Jamie’s thrilled,” Spears’ attorney, Geraldine Wyle, said at the time. “It’s all in the family.”
But less than a year later, Trawick resigned from the position on the same day that Spears changed talent agencies. The next day, the singer’s rep announced that the couple had ended their engagement, and TMZ reported that it was because Spears wanted more children and Trawick did not.
Last year Trawick shot down persistent rumors that they were secretly married back in 2012.
The pair began dating in 2013 and called it quits a year and a half later after rumors of his alleged infidelity, which he has adamantly denied.
Despite their rocky history, normal dude Lucado, who worked at a law firm, was a firm believer that Spears no longer needed people controlling her assets.
“If anyone knew the real Britney, they would know that she would rather be remembered for being the great mother she is rather than the artist she is,” he has said. “And if anyone could see her interactions with her kids, they would know that there is no need for a conservatorship over Britney’s personal life.”
Spears and Ebersol — the son of former NBC Sports chairman Dick Ebersol and actress Susan Saint James — reportedly shared a cozy domestic life together, with the radio producer cooking for her on their first date.
“For my birthday, we made waffles on the floor, with candles, and he bought me a real beautiful cake and a beautiful gift that I have on the wall,” she told People while they were together. “One of my favorite songs is ‘Thank U,’ by Alanis Morissette, and he put all the words to the song in a long frame. It was really thoughtful.”
The source who knows Spears told The Post: “I think Britney loved Charlie. I was shocked when they split.
“Out of all of her boyfriends, he was the most reliable.”
Asghari said it was love at first sight when he met Spears in October 2016 on the set of her “Slumber Party” music video. “I was excited that I [would] get to meet one of the biggest artists of all time,” the personal trainer told Men’s Health in July 2018. “I had butterflies.”
But when Asghari, who was born in Iran, tried to break the ice, he almost ruined his chances with the star.
“She said, ‘Hi, I’m Britney,’ and I said, ‘I’m sorry, what’s your name again?’” he told the magazine: “I tried to be funny. I don’t think anybody got it.”
Asghari has been with Spears throughout her battle to end her conservatorship.
After the release of the “Framing Britney Spears,” he bluntly stated his opinion of Jamie Spears: “Now it’s important for people to understand that I have zero respect for someone trying to control our relationship and constantly throwing obstacles our way,” he wrote in a post shared to his Instagram Stories. “In my opinion Jamie is a total dick.”
On Sept. 12, 2021, Spears broke the news on Instagram that Ashgari proposed to her with a four-carat Forever Diamonds ring engraed with the word “lioness,” his pet name for her.
The pair said they were expecting their first child in April, only to announce that Spears had miscarried in May.
Spears’ new husband runs Asghari Fitness, which offers members personalized training programs and customized meal plans. He also regularly updates his Instagram with photos of himself looking extremely buff.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
When I was 8 years old, my father put me on the crosstown bus to go to a birthday party without quite telling me where the party was. It was 1984 and I must have looked pitiful standing there in front of Jefferson Market Library in my party dress, holding a present, lost. I had a quarter (we downtown kids always had exactly one quarter, in case of emergency), so I tried calling home. No answer. I pushed the receiver down before the answering machine came on so I’d have another shot. By my own wits, I eventually made it to the party.
My new book comes out this month. It’s about my bohemian poet father and me and our shared love of the influential mid-century New York City poet Frank O’Hara. It wound up being a partial biography of O’Hara — and a full memoir of my complicated relationship with my dad, a great poet and genius art critic and loving-but-sort-of-all-over-the-place father.
When Father’s Day comes along, my social-media feeds fill with heartwarming images of fathers playing catch with their children. I didn’t grow up like that. My father never quite knew how to relate to me. The same year he taught me how to touch-type on his IBM Selectric, when I was 6, he showed me the unflinching Holocaust film “Judgment at Nuremberg.” From him, I learned how to keep a baseball box score and how to throw a punch, which he encouraged me to do if I was bothered by the older bully in the Washington Square Park playground. (When I did punch the bully, I cried from shame because I’d hit him in the stomach instead of in the nose, as instructed — I was tiny and couldn’t reach his nose. My father was still proud, because I’d made the boy cry.)
The freedom of a Village childhood was not all bad. Starting in fourth grade at P.S. 41, we were allowed to go out for lunch by ourselves. The summer I was 14, my best friend Asia Wong and I lived alone on St. Mark’s Place when my parents were in the Catskills. We drank and smoked and fooled around with boys. But we fed ourselves mostly buttered noodles at home or pierogi at the Ukrainian 24-hour diner Kiev at 2 a.m. and made it on time to our jobs (she at the mayor’s office, me at St. Mark’s Comics) and our summer classes (she at Parsons, me at Columbia). The first guitar riff of a song by Too Much Joy, whose “Cereal Killers” album we played on a loop in those months, returns me to a feeling of total freedom laced with a constant, not-unpleasant hangover.
And yet, the danger was real. I realize now how lucky I was to have escaped it for the most part even though I was followed, catcalled, groped on the subway, flashed. A kid I babysat for found a gun in the sandbox at Tompkins Square Park. Depending on the neighborhood, sidewalks might be scattered with heroin needles (you had to step lively in Union Square Park), crack vials, or used condoms. At the Ninth Street bus stop each morning, I’d play a scaled-down version of soccer with Whippets canisters.
My son, now fifteen, grew up in Brooklyn and goes to high school in Times Square. He and his friends get up to who-knows-what, just as all teens have forever, but they roam a much safer city. They Google Map their way around. They text each other and their parents throughout the day. And the coddling has come at a price. When their phone batteries die, they struggle. I realized the other day that my son didn’t quite know how to turn on the oven. In those moments, I am grateful that we ‘80s kids had to raise ourselves.
Well, the city raised us, too.
Ada Calhoun’s new book, “ALSO A POET: FRANK O’HARA, MY FATHER, AND ME” is out now.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
J. Cole performs on stage during Governors Ball 2022 at Citi Field on June 12, 2022.
Michelle Zauner of Japanese Breakfast performs on stage during Governors Ball 2022 at Citi Field on June 12, 2022.
Becky G performs during Governors Ball 202 at Citi Field on June 12, 2022.
Glass Animals performs onstage during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival on June 12, 2022.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Clairo performs onstage during 2022 Governors Ball Music on June 12, 2022.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Halsey takes the spotlight during her performance during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Shaquille O'Neal looks on during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Rob Laska of Valley performs on stage during Governors Ball 2022 at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Laurel takes the spotlight during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Festival-goers are spotted during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival Day 2 at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Denzel Curry looks into the crowd during his performs during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival - Day 2 at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Rapper YG performs  onstage during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival on Day 2 at Citi Field on June 11, 2022.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
MAY-A energizes the crowd during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival on Day 2 at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Peach Tree Rascals puts his arms out, as he flows with the crowd during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Tove Lo perfroms during 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival on Day 2 at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Thousands of Festival goers are spotted at 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
Jack Harlow looks on during his performance at the 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival at Citi Field on June 10, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Governors Ball
A$AP Ferg electrocutes the crowd and smiles away during Governors Ball Music Festival 2022 at Citi Field on June 10, 2022 in New York City.
Coi Leray performs on stage at Governors Ball 2022 at Citi Field on June 10, 2022 in New York City.
Blu DeTiger ignites the crown as she performs on stage at Governors Ball 2022 at Citi Field on June 10, 2022 in New York City.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Rep. Mondaire Jones’ new Brooklyn neighbors fumed Monday about the “carpetbagger” broadcasting that he will barnstorm the country if he wins his Democratic primary— a planned multi-state “mission” he revealed even before moving to the area he is seeking to represent.
Jones, whose current seat covers most of Rockland County and part of Westchester, relocated to Brooklyn in early June after deciding to take his chances running for the newly reconfigured 10th Congressional District, which now runs from Lower Manhattan to Park Slope, Carroll Gardens and other parts of brownstone Brooklyn.
But before hiring movers or renting a truck, the former White Plains resident revealed on a podcast he will leave town to spread word about the Democratic agenda after the Aug. 23 contest.
“If you’re going to be involved, you need to stay there and be present,” Carroll Gardens Jones neighbor Joaquin Soto, 47, told The Post. “If you really want to help a community, you cannot do that remotely. That is just appalling.”
Soto, who has lived on Union Street for 12 years, stressed that it’s imperative for representatives to spend time among those they’re tasked with representing — and a failure to do so would show the politician is “looking after their own agenda.”
“If you want to contribute to the community, you have to be present. It makes no sense,” said Soto, a former tech worker. “That is irresponsible, that is someone looking after their own agenda.”
“They don’t think about us — the regular people,” said Nelson Martinez, the owner of a store on Court Street near Carroll Park, upon hearing about Jones’ past and planned whereabouts.
Martinez, 63, said that legislators establishing and maintaining presence in the area is “the only way they will care about the neighborhood.”
The Post reported Sunday that, before even moving to the Big Apple, Jones had the Peach State on his mind. On May 31 — a week before the date his rep reportedly said he moved to Brooklyn — the freshman lawmaker proclaimed in an interview that he will use his self-appointed role as a “leader in American politics” to try and boost Democratic candidates in Georgia, Arizona and elsewhere after the primary.
“I view my job between now and November as, after my primary is over, going to states where voter suppression laws have been enacted, and educating people about how to navigate those new laws,” he told Preet Bharara in a podcast episode released June 2.
The interview was recorded seven days before June 6, when he moved to Brooklyn, according to a New York Times story that cited his rep.
The interview indicated that Jones was preparing to traverse the country before schlepping his belongings to a Carroll Gardens apartment building — where city Board of Elections records show he on June 13 registered to vote and The Post spotted him Monday.
Jones — a 35-year-old first-term House member who in May announced the swap from the suburbs to the five boroughs— explained to the former federal prosecutor that helping fellow Democrats in other states is a key component of his “project as a leader in American politics.”
“It’s not just to legislate, that’s not the way I view my job,” he said.
Defending the post-primary traveling, a campaign rep previously told The Post, “As Rep. Jones has shown by crisscrossing the district and all of New York City, he is on a mission to deliver progressive results for New Yorkers any way he can, and yes that includes helping protect the Democratic majorities in the House and Senate.”
But Brooklynites weren’t buying it.
“I’m not crazy about it,” said Charles Cole, a 65-year-old Park Slope resident.
“[Bill] de Blasio for all his faults — I’m not a big de Blasio fan — but I know he knows Park Slope,” he said of the ex-mayor, who represented the neighborhood in the City Council in the aughts. “He’s lived here forever.”
The 61-year-old de Blasio — who returned last month to Park Slope after staying at a hotel while his home underwent renovations — is one of more than a dozen candidates seeking to represent the lower Manhattan-Brooklyn House seat. Along with Jones and de Blasio, Assemblywoman Yuh-Line Niou and Councilwoman Carlina Rivera are competing for the Democratic nomination in the Aug. 23 primary election.
Cole, a stockbroker, told The Post that Jones “is not really on my radar” while he mulls over whom to vote for later this summer.
“He’s not someone I would be voting for anyway,” he said. “I’m not crazy for the idea of someone moving to an area for a position.”
“I need to go through the list of 15 or whatever candidates, but he isn’t even on my top five,” Cole added. “It should be someone who knows the area.”
A 5th Avenue resident in his thirties who declined to be named said living in the area for two months isn’t enough to be elected to represent it in the House of Representatives and cast doubt on Jones’ intentions.“I feel like he should be in the community,” he said. “He didn’t move to Brooklyn to live in Brooklyn. He moved to Brooklyn to run.”
“I wouldn’t vote for him knowing that,” the Park Slope resident added. “That seems very illogical and opportunistic.”
His partner, who also declined to be identified by name, lamented, “It sounds like he’s using New York [City] for the notoriety [and for] his career.”
“It doesn’t look good,” she added. “I wouldn’t vote for him.”
A 38-year-old woman enjoying her July 4 holiday in a small park explained, “New Yorkers should be the ones doing this job. They know what locals want.”
The 19-year Brooklyn resident who currently lives in Park Slope predicted that her politically plugged-in neighbors would not be inclined to back Jones next month.
“Park Slopers, the level of education here is like some college,” she quipped. “They are going to do their research.”
“Believe me, Park Slopers are quiet, but they will do their research.”
Some New Yorkers in Lower Manhattan were similarly skeptical.
Arnie Segarra, a political consultant who lives in West Village, expressed unequivocal opposition to Jones’ candidacy.
“He’s a carpetbagger. He’s smart but he won’t win. I think it’s unfortunate that he moved into a district where there are some highly, highly-qualified candidates,” he told The Post while sitting on a bench in Father Demo Square.
Segarra, who served as special assistant to Mayor David Dinkins, noted that he holds no negative feelings about the Nyack native who represents the Big Apple’s suburbs — but questioned the wisdom of competing in a race miles away from his current constituency.
“I like him. He’s a smart individual, and from what I understand, has a decent voting record,” said the 80-year-old. “To move from one district … to another where there are some highly-qualified candidates … that’s my issue here.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
At a time when there is so much rewriting of American history, Juneteenth proves why history should be kept intact.
Officially declared a national holiday by Congress last year in the wake of George Floyd’s 2020 murder, the day marks the emancipation of black slaves by President Abraham Lincoln in January 1863. As we prepare to celebrate it for the first time as a nation on Monday, it feels as important as the Fourth of July.
Right now there is a movement among much of the progressive left to “cancel” our history. Public school murals depicting early-American history have been painted over for presenting “degrading images” of blacks and Native Americans. Over 1,000 public squares, streets and spaces associated with slavery, Confederacy or racism are under pressure to be renamed. Major league sports franchises with offensive names have been given entirely new identities. And school curricula from elementary to university levels are being rewritten to prioritize the experiences of marginalized communities, while downplaying narratives centered around whites and men. Without a doubt, we should discuss and debate our history. But erasing the past to undo the ills of the present is a slippery slope that ultimately benefits no one.
In the face of all this erasure, Juneteenth actually embraces our ugly past and gives all Americans a reason to be proud. The Emancipation Proclamation declared freedom for 3.5 million slaves living in the secessionist South if they could escape their slave masters and the Confederacy (which most could not). Finally, in December 1865, following the North’s Civil War triumph over the South, slavery was declared unconstitutional and permanently eradicated.
What’s more, Juneteenth celebrates America at a time when celebrating being American has become a progressive minefield. Thanksgiving has been recast as a day of Native American mourning. Columbus Day has been derided as an event honoring mass genocide, with statues of Christopher Columbus himself defaced and even beheaded. Presidents George Washington and Thomas Jefferson — men who literally forged a nation — have been recast as little more than slave owners. Even slavery itself has been coopted and politicized by dubious scholarship to position it as the raison d’etre for America’s very establishment and existence. The American flag has also taken a beating, with some saying it has come to represent conservative politics more than our country as a whole.
While there is truth to some of these grievances, the left’s extreme positions leave no room for complexity, nuance and often historical fact. And this tide of anti-Americanism has been damaging to our nation: In 2001, 87% said they were very or extremely proud to be American; 69% say that now.
But Juneteenth, with its championing of American history rather than the simple cancellation of it, could help change this. It shows that, just as slavery is an indelible part of our nation’s past, so too is our commitment to reckoning with it. My children will grow up in a nation where Congress has codified the importance of African-American freedom.
Juneteenth is proof that America can make a right out of a historical wrong — even as there still remains work to do.
Much like our nation’s Independence Day, it signifies liberty and our ever continuing path toward creating “a more perfect Union,” just as the preamble to the US Constitution states. Nothing is more meaningful than that.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Los Angeles County District Attorney George Gascon said the gunman who shot and killed two El Monte police officers had “no history of violence” as he defended how his office handled a recent weapons case against the cop-killer.
Shooter William Flores was out on probation – though he could have been behind bars — following a 2021 plea deal connected to a drugs and weapons arrest when he shot and killed El Monte Cpl. Michael Paredes, 42, and Officer Joseph Santana, 31, on June 14.
Gascon, during Tuesday afternoon’s press conference, argued that Flores’ criminal history “did not contain any evidence of violence,” but instead he was someone who was addicted to drugs.
“The current case he’s arrested for possession of drugs, possession of a gun. He could have, even under my directives, he could have gone to jail. As a matter of fact, had the case been set to trial, then it was very possible he could still be waiting for a trial date. He was on bail, he was out on bail,” Gascon said.
Gascon also insisted the possession of a firearm is not considered a violent crime.
“He was arrested for possession of drugs and possession of a gun, not the use of a gun,” Gascon said. “Under the circumstances, I believe it was an appropriate outcome.”
Flores was out on probation for a gun charge at the time of the shooting a day after his probation officer requested he return to court later this month for a hearing, court records showed.
The plea to the gun charge, a felony, could have sent him back to prison for three years, but he got two years’ probation and 20 days in jail.
Flores served two terms in prison for vehicle theft and burglary and most recently was released in 2012, according to the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation.
Gascon said Flores was previously arrested for a variety of low-level offenses related to drugs over a period of time.
About 10 years ago, he was arrested for breaking into his grandparents’ home under the influence of drugs and stealing a television, Gascon said, which he also argued was not violent.
Flores then went through a “lengthy period of time without any contact with the criminal justice system,” Gascon claimed.
Flores killed himself when he was confronted by police at the motel where he shot the two cops.
The embattled Democratic district attorney is facing a potential recall after San Francisco voters ousted District Attorney Chesa Boudin earlier this month over soft-on-crime policies.
Santana’s mother, Olga Garcia, ripped into Gascon last week, accusing him of giving more rights to criminals than law enforcement.
A fierce critic of Gascon, LA County Senior Deputy District Attorney Jonathan Hatami, blasted Gascon following his remarks.
“The murderer of Officers Santana and Paredes was convicted in 2009 for a felony and went to prison. He was released then committed another felony and went back to prison. He was released and didn’t get off parole until 2016,” Hatami said in a statement. “He committed multiple misdemeanors between 2010 and 2022, he violated parole and probation repeatedly, and he committed domestic violence. That isn’t a person who has a ‘decade with no contact with the criminal justice system.’ That statement is just not true.”
Hatami also said that following Flores’ 2021 arrest, a prior strike against Flores was also alleged, but was removed due to Gascon’s blanket policy.
“The murderer was then given probation,” he said. “He should have at least been sentenced to 32 months in the state prison. George needs to own this. He’s running from it and making excuses. No leadership whatsoever.”
Gascon, during his press conference, said “when people are arrested for serious crimes, we work hard to ensure that there are serious consequences including lengthy periods of incarceration.”
He urged the public not to let one case dictate policy.
“I know this is frustrating to hear and it may not help heal the wounds for some,” he continued. “But we do not serve our community when we try to pretend that we can predict 100% of the time when these cases are going to occur.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Legendary singer Tony Bennett made a rare appearance in Central Park on Thursday, where he was seen for the first time using a wheelchair beside his wife, Susan Benedetto.
The 95-year-old “I Left My Heart in San Francisco” crooner, who has publicly battled Alzheimer’s disease since 2016, appeared to be relaxed and in good spirits, sporting a blue tracksuit and escorted by an aide near some of the park’s many horses and carriages.
No stranger in paradise, the Queens-born entertainer, who has lived in a sun-drenched, penthouse apartment overlooking Central Park for 25 years, was seen walking without a wheelchair in April with Benedetto, 55, on Easter Sunday, taking selfies with fans — who recognized the star even with a face mask on.
On Wednesday, the “Stranger in Paradise” singer proudly expressed his support for Alzheimer’s and Brain Awareness Month, smiling in a purple plaid shirt alongside Benedetto and holding up a sign that read #EndAlz in a post shared with his 170,000 fans on Twitter.
“Susan and I are going purple with the @alzassociation to raise awareness for a disease that is impacting our family and many of yours. We hope you join us and #GoPurple,” the musician shared.
Bennett retired from live performances in 2021, canceling rescheduled shows delayed in 2020 as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. He went out on a high note, closing the curtain on a seven-decade career with a series of performances alongside pop icon Lady Gaga. The duo performed their emotional last show together — billed as “One Last Time: An Evening With Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga” — last August at Radio City Music Hall, featuring mega-hits like “I Get a Kick Out of You.”
June is Alzheimer’s & Brain Awareness Month. Susan and I are going purple with the @alzassociation to raise awareness for a disease that is impacting our family and many of yours. We hope you join us and #GoPurple to #ENDALZ! pic.twitter.com/VIu3T8i5Pn
“This was a hard decision for us to make, as he is a capable performer. One, however, that was made by doctors’ orders,” his son Danny Bennett told Variety last August of his father’s final live show.
Bennett was first diagnosed with Alzheimer’s, the disease resulting in progressive memory loss and decreased mental function, in 2016. However, it wasn’t until 2018 that his family realized his battle with the mind-stealing disease was causing his health to decline, while he was recording the album “Love for Sale” — which includes iconic ballads like “I’ve Got You Under My Skin” and “You’re the Top” — with Lady Gaga over a two-year span, AARP reported.
A representative for Bennett did not immediately return The Post’s request for comment.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
TARRYTOWN, N.Y. — Now this hound has something to toot his horn about.
A bloodhound named Trumpet won the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show on Wednesday night.
Trumpet beat a French bulldog, a German shepherd, a Maltese, an English setter, a Samoyed and a Lakeland terrier to take the trophy.
“I am so excited for Trumpet,” said handler Heather Helmer, who co-owns and bred the 4-year-old.
Trumpet became the first bloodhound to win Westminster.
Winston, a French bulldog co-owned by NFL defensive lineman Morgan Fox, took second in the nation’s most prestigious dog show.
The competition drew more than 3,000 purebred dogs, ranging from affenpinschers to Yorkshire terriers. The goal is to crown the dog that most represents the ideal for its breed.
Usually held in winter at New York City’s Madison Square Garden, the show moved to the suburban Lyndhurst estate last year and this year because of the coronavirus pandemic.
Westminster is often described as the Super Bowl of U.S. dog shows, and Winston aimed to make it so for Fox, a defensive lineman who was just signed by the Los Angeles Chargers and has played for the Los Angeles Rams and the Carolina Panthers.
Before the finals, Fox said he was “ecstatic” when Winston made it there.
“He’s basically a superstar,” Fox said by phone Wednesday.
The dog came his way from his grandmother, Sandy Fox, who has bred and shown Frenchies for years. Morgan Fox grew up with one and says that as he watched Winston mature, he knew the dog was a winner in both appearance and character.
“He’s a joy to be around,” Fox said. “He always walks around with as much of a smile on his face as a dog can have.”
Winston, currently the top-ranked dog in the country, faces Striker, a Samoyed that also made the finals last year; River, a big-winning German shepherd, and Trumpet, a bloodhound descended from the 2014 winner of another major show, the Thanksgiving-season National Dog Show.
After topping the canine rankings last year, Striker has lately been hitting a few dog shows “to keep his head in the game,” said handler Laura King.
What makes the snow-white Samoyed shine in competition? “His heart,” said King, of Milan, Illinois.
“His charisma shows when he’s showing,” and he vocally complains when he’s not, she said.
While he was quiet in the ring, an Alaskan Malamute provided a yowling — cheering?— soundtrack for a semifinal round featuring the Samoyed and other breeds classified as working dogs.
Then there are MM the Lakeland terrier — terriers have won many a Westminster — and a Maltese that clearly is aiming for stardom: Her name is Hollywood.
But the belle of the ball could be an English setter. Belle made the finals after being squired around the ring by one of her breeders and owners, Amanda Ciaravino — a feat at an event where many top contenders are accompanied by full-time, career handlers.
“It’s amazing,” an emotional Ciaravino said. “I’m so proud of her.”
Monty, a giant schnauzer that made the semifinals Wednesday night but didn’t advance further, is a son of the dog that won Westminster’s runner-up prize in 2018. Classified as a working dog, Monty enjoys yard work — which, to him, means presenting a football to be thrown while handler and co-owner Katie Bernardin’s husband, Adam, is mowing the lawn, she said.
Another competitor, Ooma, was the only Chinook that showed up. The sled-pullers are the official dog of the state of New Hampshire, but they’re rare nationwide.
“I would love to see a couple more” in the Westminster ring, said Ooma’s breeder, owner and handler, Patti Richards of West Haven, Vermont. “Without people who will show and breed, we’re in danger of losing our breed.”
Bonnie the Brittany is owner-handler Dr. Jessica Sielawa’s first show dog, and the two didn’t come away with a ribbon on Wednesday. But their teamwork extends beyond the ring.
Bonnie accompanies Sielawa to work at her chiropractic practice in Syracuse, New York, where “she’s really helped people with their emotional stress,” Sielawa said.
She plans to get her show dog certified as a therapy dog, too.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Tom Cruise's breakout role came in 1983 when he starred in "Risky Business," a coming-of-age film about a teen left alone with his parents' house.
"Top Gun" was one of Cruise's first action roles in 1986. He starred as fighter pilot   Pete "Maverick" Mitchell alongside Kelly McGinnis, Val Kilmer, and Tom Skerrit.
In 1986, Tom Cruise also starred as pool hustler Vincent Lauria in Martin Scorsese's "The Color of Money," alongside Paul Newman.
In 1988, Tom Cruise starred in another memorable role as a bartender in "Cocktail." He is seen here alongside costar Elisabeth Shue.
Later in 1988, Cruise starred in "Rain Man" alongside Dustin Hoffman. The movie was commercial and critical success, winning four Oscars, including Best Picture.
United Artists/ Courtesy: Everett Collection.
One of Tom Cruise's greatest dramatic roles was as Navy lawyer Lt. Daniel Kaffee in Rob Reiner's "A Few Good Men" in 1992. He starred alongside Demi Moore (center), Kevin Pollack (right), Kevin Bacon, and Jack Nicholson.
"Mission: Impossible" saw Tom Cruise return to action films in 1996. Cruise later reprised the role in multiple sequels.
In "Jerry Maguire," Cruise starred as a sports agent alongside Cuba Gooding Jr. and Rene Zellweger. Cruise won a Golden Globe for Best Actor for his performance in 1996.
In 2002, Tom Cruise starred alongside Colin Farrell in Steven Spielberg's "Minority Report," an adaptation of a Philip K. Dick sci-fi story.
Tom Cruise finally took back to the skies and reprised his role as Maverick in 2022 for the sequel "Tope Gun: Maverick."

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Johnny Depp could make a comeback as “Pirates of the Caribbean” lead Jack Sparrow, according to one former Disney exec.
“I absolutely believe post-verdict that ‘Pirates’ is primed for rebooting with Johnny as Capt. Jack back on board,” an unnamed former Disney exec told People magazine. “There is just too much potential box-office treasure for a beloved character deeply embedded in the Disney culture.”
Depp hasn’t played the swashbuckling Jack Sparrow since 2017, when he starred in “Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales.” While the film grossed $794.8 million worldwide, it was well below the $1.04 billion that its 2011 predecessor, “On Stranger Tides,” had hauled in.
The five films in the “Pirates” franchise starring Depp have brought in more the $4.5 billion worldwide.
Depp’s lurid defamation lawsuit against ex-wife Amber Heard put his future into question, even as the actor, known for movies like “Edward Scissorhands” and “Donnie Brasco,” won the bombshell trial last week.
Depp sued the “Aquaman” actress for libel in Fairfax County Circuit Court after she wrote an op-ed in the Washington Post in 2018 referring to herself as a “public figure representing domestic abuse.”
Post-verdict, TheWrap spoke with several Hollywood insiders who said that while Depp may work again, he likely won’t be starring in studio blockbusters.
“No A-list movie is going to hire him the way they used to,” one top veteran studio executive said of Depp. “He was a pain in the ass before the trial, always. And what he’s proven is he’s still a pain in the ass.”
A top talent agent echoed that sentiment, adding that Depp would find work in the independently financed world, but not among the $20 million roles that made him rich like  the “Pirates of the Caribbean” franchise once did.
“Depp, yes,” he can work, the agent said. “More in the foreign sales model and maybe eventually as a sort of character actor later down the road on a studio film with an auteur director, who can cast whoever they want.”
“Pirates” producer Jerry Bruckheimer said last month that Depp’s future as Sparrow looked pretty dim. In a wide-ranging interview with the Sunday Times, the Hollywood producer said it is unlikely “at this point” that Depp would return to a potential sixth “Pirates of the Caribbean” movie.
“Not at this point,” he said when asked about Depp. “The future is yet to be decided.”
Bruckheimer said he’s trying to rebuild the nearly two-decade-old “Pirates” franchise around a new protagonist, ideally played by Margot Robbie.
“We’re developing two ‘Pirates’ scripts. One with her, one without,” he added.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Apparently, Lou Reed was the H&R Block of classic rockers: The man kept his receipts.
In fact, “Lou Reed: Caught Between the Twisted Stars” — an exhaustive exhibit that opens at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts on Thursday — displays just how diligent the “Walk on the Wild Side” icon was about retaining proof of his purchases. One of the showcased receipts is even for the studded dog collar he wears on the cover of his 1974 live album “Rock ’n’ Roll Animal,” which Reed — in true New Yorker fashion — bought from the West Village sex shop the Pleasure Chest.
“His father was an accountant and taught Lou to keep receipts, keep records and all that sort of thing,” said curator Jason Stern, who was Reed’s assistant in his final years and now works with his widow, Laurie Anderson. “So I think that probably made its mark.”
That Pleasure Chest receipt for $13.50 is among Reed’s personal artifacts that bring some of his downtown New York cool to Lincoln Center in the multimedia exhibit that runs until March. And it’s certainly striking how much Reed stored over the years.
At Anderson’s request, Stern and his co-curator, Don Fleming — an archivist who once played in the group Half Japanese with Reed’s former Velvet Underground bandmate Moe Tucker — began cataloging Reed’s vast array of artifacts shortly after his death, in 2013. And when it came time to put the exhibit together, they got some help from Anderson.
“Laurie was kind of like our barometer,” said Fleming. “We had a lot more stuff in it … maybe three times as much as is in there right now. And so she was like, ‘You’ve got to cut more than half of this.’ ”
Still, there is so much left to discover about Reed. One room showcases his poetry, including everything from his published works to a cassette tape of a poetry reading at St. Mark’s Church.
“We really wanted to show that, at the center of it, he wanted to be a writer and a poet,” said Fleming. “That’s why his work is so literary … That’s where his heart was.”
And there are musical discoveries too, with a host of demos and other unreleased material displaying an experimental genius’ creative process and evolution. “I have to say, the audio collection is just so rich. Really incredible material,” said Stern, noting a precursor to Reed’s 1975 album “Metal Machine Music.” “There’s this one tape called ‘The Electric Rock Symphony.’ It’s about 40 minutes long: The first 20 minutes are guitar feedback, and the second 20 minutes are very kind of pretty piano playing.”
The exhibit also shows the sweeter side of Reed’s relationship with Tucker, including Valentine’s Day cards they would send each other — calling each other “Honeybun,” no less — and photos of them tossing around a football. “I just couldn’t believe I’m seeing Lou even holding a football,” said Stern. “It was like the least expected thing we could have found in our collection.”
While Reed’s guitars might be more expected, there’s also his astrology chart, personal letters and a room dedicated to his vinyl record collection that reveals his predilection for doo-wop singles and bootlegs. And the exhibit captures the many different musical guises he had during his legendary career.
“I want people to take away that Lou was an artist who never stopped evolving,” said Stern. “The man contained multitudes.”
“Lou Reed: Caught Between the Stars” opens June 9th and will run through March 4, 2023 at The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza; 917-275-6975, NYPL.org/events/exhibitions/Lou-Reed.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
From TV chef to film star!
Guy Fieri is heading to the big screen for the Tom Brady film, “80 for Brady.”
The “Diners, Drive-ins and Dives” host, 54, will be making a cameo appearance.
The road-trip comedy will also star “Pose” alum Billy Porter and hails from Paramount Pictures, according to the Hollywood Reporter, but Porter’s role is still being kept under wraps.
The NFL player, 44, is at the helm of the movie, as he is starring in as well as producing the flick.
The project, which has finished filming, also features legendary actresses Lily Tomlin, Jane Fonda, Rita Moreno and Sally Field.
The plot is inspired by a true story and follows four besties and New England Patriots fans (played by Tomlin, Fonda, Moreno and Field), who take a trip to the 2017 Super Bowl to see their favorite quarterback.
The production is directed by Kyle Marvin, who co-wrote with Michael Covino the script that’s based on a draft by “Booksmart“ writers Emily Halpern and Sarah Haskins.
Brady announced the casting of Porter, 52, and Fieri on Thursday, hilariously tweeting, “Did someone say road trip?” and tagged both men.
The football star added a GIF of the restaurateur riding in a red convertible with: “So that’s it for this Flavortown road trip!”
Did someone say road trip? @GuyFieri @theebillyporter https://t.co/UKPKUw5sO2 pic.twitter.com/ScB55ChIQ6
Both the mayor of Flavortown and the Tony Award winner retweeted the fun news.
Other cast members attached to star in “80 for Brady” include Sara Gilbert, Sally Kirkland, Glynn Turman, Bob Balaban, Ron Funches, Jimmy O. Yang and Harry Hamlin.
A release date has yet to be set for the upcoming film.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Jazz icon Louis Daniel Armstrong, born in New Orleans on Aug. 4, 1901, was an American trumpeter and vocalist. Armstrong is one of the most influential figures in jazz. He died on July 6, 1971 in Corona, NY.
American jazz vocalist Billie Holiday ranks as one of the leading female jazz singers of all time. Holiday was born on April 7, 1915 in Philadelphia. Holiday is remembered for her sensational swing music singing and unconventional influence on jazz music from the from the 1930s to the '50s. She died on July 17, 1959, in New York, NY.
Soul icon Samuel Cooke was born on Jan. 22, 1931 in Clarksdale, Miss. One of the most recognzied soul singers and arguably the inventor of soul, Cooke was a major figure during his time. He died on Dec. 11, 1964 after he was shot three times.
Little Richard was born Richard Wayne Penniman on Dec. 5, 1932 in Macon, Georgia. Little Richard helped define the Rock 'n' Roll era in the 1950s with his distinguished dance moves and flamboyant sounds. Some of his greatest hits include "Tutti Frutti" and "Long Tall Sally". Little Richard died of bone cancer on May 9, 2020, in Tullahoma, Tenn.
James Brown, born on May 3, 1933, in Barnwell, SC, was recognizably the most influential voices of the 20th century. Known for his exuberant enregy, Brown mastered versatility within vocals. One of his best works was his "live and in concert" album Live at the Apollo (1963). Some of his biggest hits include "I Got You (I Feel Good)" , "Cold Sweat", and "Living in America". Brown died on Dec. 25, 2006 from of a heart attack at 73.
Aretha Franklin was born on March 25, 1942 in Memphis, Tenn. Franklin was referred to as the "Queen of Soul" and helped pave the way for many black soul artists. Some of her biggest hists inlude "Chain Of Fools", "Baby I love you", "I Say A Little Prayer", and "Respect". Frankllin died of pancreatic cancer in Detroit on Aug. 16, 2018.
Jimmy Hendrix was born on Nov. 27, 1942 in Seattle. Hendrix is one of the greatest guitarist of all-time and did things with the electric guitar that no one had ever seen before. Hendrix's versatility with the guitar helped his career shape him as the engine to kickstart a new musical sound in Rock-n-Roll. One of his most iconic moments was his Woodstock Music Festival performance of the National Anthem on  Aug. 18,1969. Some of Hendrix's biggest hits include  "Voodoo Child", "Little Wing", and "Machine Gun". Hendrix died on Sept. 18,1970 of asphyxia while intoxicated.
Diana Ross was born on March 26, 1944 in London. Ross rose to fame as the lead singer of the vocal group the Supremes when she joined the female vocal group in 1963, as she would end up becoming the lead singer. Some of the groups biggest hits were "Baby Love", "Where Did Our Love Go", and " Come See About Me". She was inducted Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988.
Bob Marley was born on Feb.6, 1945, in Nine Mile, Jamaica. The legendary reggae artist touched so many people with his music, as fans from all over the globe consider him as one of the pioneers of reggae music. Some of his greatest hits include "No Woman No Cry", "Redemption Song" and ""Get Up Stand Up". Marley was an advocate for marijuana, writing songs about the benefits of the plant and smoked it because of his Rastafarian religion. Marley was also an advocate for the rights of black people and spoke up against poverty. Marley died on May 11, 1981, at Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami from melanoma.
Stevie Wonder, born on May 13,1950 in Saginaw, Mich., made his mark on the music world at a very early age. He was born premature, as oxygen pumped in his incubator affected his blood vessels in the back of his eyes, causing him to go blind. His blindness never stopped him from becoming one of the most influenential artists of all time. The youngest solo artist ever welcomed into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, Wonder has won 25 grammies, a billboard Century Award, The Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and many others. He is also an activist for the black community.
Prince was born Prince Rogers Nelson on June 7, 1958, in Minneapolis. Prince had been making music way before he was recognized as one of the greatest R&B/Soul artists of all time, but it was the release of his 1982 ablum "1999" that gave him worldwide recognition. The seven-time Grammy winner had five of his singles top the charts and 14 other songs hit the Top 10. On April 21, 2016 in Paisley Park, Minnesota, Prince died of an accidental overdose of opioid fentanyl.
© 1984 Richard E. Aaron/MPTV.ne
Michael Jackson's impact on the music scene emerged at a very young age, as his unprecedented influence on the pop culture world from the early to mid-1980s. Before he took the world by storm as a solo artist, Jackson was already known from his Jackson 5 days (the sibling pop group that consisted of Jackson and his 4 brothers). With countless hits that have topped the billboards, some of the many greats hits include " Black Or White", " Beat It", "Thriller" and " Billie Jean". The King of Pop was born in Gary, Ind. on August 29, 1958. He died on June 25, 2009 in Los Angeles from a cardiac arrest after his doctor have him a fatal combination of drugs.
Whitney Houston was one of the best-selling female artist of all time. Born on Aug. 9, 1963 in Newark, Houston emerged as a star of the music industry from the mid-1980s to the late 1990s. Some of her biggest hits include "The Greatest Love of All", "I Will Always Love You", and "I Have Nothing". One of her greatest performances was her iconic national anthem at the 1991 Super Bowl. Houston has received two Emmy Awards, six Grammy Awards, 16 Billboard Music Awards,  2 Grammy Hall of Fame honors, and so much more. On Feb. 11, 2012, Houston was found dead in a bathtub at a Beverly Hills hotel from a drug overdose.
Soul vocalist Erykah Badu, born Erica Wright on Feb. 26, 1971 in Dallas, is hailed as the Queen of Neo-Soul. The four-time Grammy award winner released her debut single "On & On" in 1997 -- marking the start of the Neo Soul era.
Tupac Shakur is notably referred to as the embodiment of 1990s "gangsta-rap". Born in New York City on June 16, 1971, the California-raised artist is remembered for his versatile career that juggled his best work as an actor and rapper. His most recognzable albums "Me Against the World" and "All Eyez on Me" placed Tupac at the the top of the music industry. Some of his greatest hits include "Keep ya head up", "Temptations", and "God Bless the Dead". On Sept. 13, 1996, Tupac died after an unknown gunman shot him in a white Cadillac.
Snoop Dogg was born Calvin Broadus Jr. on Oct. 20, 1971. Snoop Dogg is one of the most notable figures in the 1990s era of West Coast gangsta rap. Discovered by fellow rapper Dr. Dre in the early 1990s, Snoop Dog ascended to the top of the industry with his distinctive West Coast flow, smooth punchlines, and clever rhymes. Dropping his hit song "Drop It Like It's Hot", Snoop Dogg's hit became the Hot 100 hit in 2004. While still making rap music into the 21st century, Snoop has been in various films, TV shows, and has his own marijuana brand called "Leafs By Snoop".
Ron Galella Collection via Getty
East Coast rap legend Notorious B.I.G. is praised as the root of New York City's "gangsta-rap" scene. Born Christopher Wallace on May 21, 1972, in Brooklyn, Biggie grew to become one of the faces of hip-hop across the world. His standout studio album "Ready To Die" put him at the forefront of East Coast rap in 1994. Some of his greatest hits off the album include "Juicy", "Gimme The Loot", "Machine Gun Funk", and "4. Big Poppa". On March 9, 1997, Biggie was shot and killed in a drive by shooting in Los Angeles.
Lauryn Noelle Hill is known as one of the most versatile female vocalists of all time. Hill only had one solo album called "The Miseducation Of Lauryn Hill", as she didn't feel supported by her label to make another album after she dropped her sole project. Some of her greatest hits from the album include "Lost ones" and "Doo Wop" The singer, rapper, songwriter and actress was born in Newark on May 26, 1975.
Rapper 50 Cent was born Curtis Jackson on July 6, 1975 in Queens. The "Get Rich or Die Tryin" rapper is admired by the rap world for his rags-to-riches lifestyle that helped him achieve his music success. The gangsta-rapper has put out various hits, most notably to the lists of songs like "In Da Club", "Candy Shop", and "I Get Money". The artist has transitioned into a realm of acting, as the rapper starred in movies like Get Rich or Die Tryin', "Streets of Blood", "All things fall apart". 50 Cent has also written various movies and TV-Series -- most notably the films "Before I Self Destruct" and "Gun."
Singer Beyoncé was born on Sept. 4, 1981 in Houston. The multi-Grammy award winner first arrived on the music scene as the lead singer of the R&B group Destiny's Child in 1990. After leaving the group to become a solo artist, Beyoncé reached bigger heights by releasing hers solo projects like Dangerously in Love (2003), B'Day (2006), and Lemonade (2016). A few songs  Beyoncé has won a Grammy for were most notably hits "Crazy In Love," and  "The Closer I Get To You."
Rapper Kendrick Lamar Duckworth was born on  June 17, 1987 in Compton, Calif. Kendrick is cited as one the most influential rappers of his time. All of his projects rank amongst the greatest rap albums in history. These albums are DAMN, To Pimp a Butterfly, good kid, m.A.A.d city, and his recent project Mr. Morale & the Big Steppers.
Rihanna was born in Barbados on Feb. 20, 1988. The singer, businesswoman, and fashion designer was discovered by New York-based songwriter and record producer American Evan Rogers. Just a few of her most major acheviements are her nine Grammy Awards, 12 Billboard Music Awards, and 13 American Music Awards. Among her greatest bodies of work, her standout albums are "Anti" which includes hit songs "work" and "Needed Me"; her fellow big hit project was her other studio album "Loud."
Lizzo was born Melissa Jefferson on  April 27, 1988 in Detroit. The Hip-Hop, R&B infused artist is known for her hits hit songs "Good as Hell," "Truth Hurts" and "Juice." Lizzo has won three Grammy Awards, a Billboard Music Award, a BET Award, and two Soul Train Music Awards.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
In 2013, Hollywood producer Hopwood Depree was winding down after work with some wine and casual Internet scrolling. Scanning ancestry websites, he discovered a massive English estate bearing his unusual name: Hopwood Hall. His grandfather had always talked vaguely of a “Hopwood Castle” in the family past, and apparently it wasn’t just talk. Depree learned the abandoned 600-year-old, 60-room manor on 5,000 acres in Middleton was, in fact, his family’s long-forgotten ancestral home.
With middle-age looming, the 40-something Depree felt an immediate connection and would soon leave LA for England with a new purpose: To restore his family estate to its former glory. He gave up his Hollywood career, including pitching shows for the McDonald’s TV channel.
“As much as I loved their McNuggets, I was now off to England to fulfill my destiny,” he writes in “Downton Shabby: One American’s Ultimate DIY Adventure Restoring His Family’s English Castle” (William Morrow), out now.
Hopwood Hall had been empty since both male heirs were killed during WWI, and was owned by the town council when Depree found it. The estate — which is located near Manchester, a few hundred miles north of London — was collapsing. Despite being surrounded by a 13-foot, razor-topped fence nicknamed the “scrotum shredder,” vandals had already broken many of the 812 windows and pulled priceless wood carvings off walls. Trees grew from the 35 chimneys, the roof was peppered with holes, and water sluiced through walls. Rotted floors collapsed. Much of the mansion was too decrepit to enter, with experts predicting its demise within a decade or a $10 million price tag to restore its former glory. The people of Middleton felt an affinity for the Hall and no one wanted to lose it, but as it sat empty, both time and Mother Nature showed no mercy.
But Hopwood Hall’s history was impressive. From the 1400s until WWI, it housed the Hopwood family (Depree’s branch of the family tree left for America in the late 1700s), through the Crusades, Black Plague, and War of the Roses. Its 60 rooms included a massive reception hall and a “morning room,” whose wall of windows faced the daily sunrise. Elaborate sculptures were carved into walls and intricate paintings covered ceilings. Manicured gardens surrounded the house.
The Hall’s former guests included Lord Byron (who wrote the four part narrative poem “Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage” while staying there) and Frederic Chopin, who performed in the drawing room. In 1992, Queen Elizabeth visited to attend a college opening ceremony. Ozzy Osborne once performed on-site at that college’s “disco,” famously being pelted on-stage with a beer thrown by his future wife, Sharon Osborne.
After discovering his ancestral past in 2013, for the next three years Hopwood Depree made numerous trips to Middletown to visit the manor. By 2017 he’d moved there, intending to “save Hopwood Hall from ruin.”
Depree was an unlikely choice to lead the renovation: He wasn’t handy, writing his last visit to a home-improvement store ended “in tears in a Home Depot parking lot.” That’s why Middleton natives would later joke that DIY didn’t mean do-it-yourself for Hopwood, but “dim inexperienced Yank.”
While the locals were enthused about Depree’s efforts to revive Hopwood Hall — many of their ancestors had worked there as cooks and servants, gardeners and chauffeurs — they weren’t sure the newcomer was the man for the job.
Most initially saw him as a “blond fool from California who had his head in the clouds, bleached teeth, and bronzer on his face,” Hopwood writes. Which isn’t to say Middleton didn’t welcome Depree. With no Hopwoods living in the area for generations, the villagers were thrilled with the American’s presence. When he visited the local pub, the Hopwood Arms, a cheer would invariably break out.
“Hopwood’s in the Hopwood!” they’d roar.
With the funding Depree mustered up from organizations like Historic England and the UK’s Department of Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, construction crews and heritage experts have been working on Hopwood Hall since 2017. There have been stops and starts, for reasons that range from a global pandemic to a 500-year-old feud still simmering in the hearts of the Hopwoods’ nearest neighbors. The town council gave him the house as long as he could prove he was taking care of it responsibly. (This was a legal agreement between the council and Hopwood, and it was so serious that his lawyer explained Hopwood would literally be subject to prison if found in violation of the agreement.)
So far the manor’s foundation has been shored up and its roof replaced, the entire building made wind- and water-proof.  When possible the villagers pitched in to help, sweeping up dusty rooms or picking up debris. One local electrician offered his services gratis to make his aged mum proud.
“I was beginning to get a taste of how the village mentality worked,” Depree writes.
The reno was a sort of scavenger hunt, too, with a gas mask found under one set of floorboards (likely a leftover from a World War) and a pair of cloth shoes under another (probably placed in the Middle Ages to “ward off witches”). Behind one wall was a “priest hole” (where preachers hid from religious persecution), and inside that an antique chest worth thousands of English pounds.
While raising funds and managing the project were Depree’s forte as a producer, no one ever asked him to pick up a hammer. Instead the locals teased, “Hopwood, why don’t you make yourself useful and go film a toothpaste commercial!”
By 2018, the restoration efforts Hopwood Depree led allowed Hopwood Hall to host its first Christmas party since WWI (in a part of the mansion safe enough for guests). Now, the job continues, with as many as 30 workers on-site daily. This summer, Depree will take visitors on tours through the manor’s original medieval doors and into the courtyard, highlighting the Guards Room, Reception Hall, and Family Chapel.
As for when this labor of love might be finally “done,” Depree can only laugh. “My magic words for that answer is ‘three years.’ But I also said that three years ago!”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A lost pooch was found by Hilary Swank while she was filming in Albany Monday — and the actress hand-delivered the animal back to its owner of 15 years in a touching moment that was captured on camera.
The happy ending capped off the stressful ordeal for Chelsea Blackwell, who hopped into her car and frantically drove around town after noticing her elder dachshund Blue had gone missing.
Blackwell asked anyone and everyone if they might have seen a small brown dog and ended up downtown at a Greyhound bus station where she noticed a lot of commotion, she told the Albany Times Union.
There were eight police cars and people with cameras at the station in what turned out to be a film set, she said.
Blackwell asked one of the people if anyone had spotted a little dog and to her relief, one said yes.
The camera crew told her a celebrity had found her dog and made a call to the “Million Dollar Baby” actress’s reps.
About an hour later, a gray car pulled up and Blackwell saw Blue sitting comfortably on Swank’s lap.
She said she couldn’t believe it.
“I was like, ‘No way,'” Blackwell told the Times Union. “As soon as she got out of the car, I kissed Blue and said, ‘Thank you so much.’ “
She asked for an autograph, but Swank suggested the three of them — Blackwell, herself and little Blue — take a photo together instead, Blackwell said.
She posted the photo to Facebook and it soon garnered hundreds of likes and shares.
“Id stopped and asked if someone seen a little brown dog? A man walked over to my car and said, yes, this woman picked him up. I said who? He replied, a celebrity,” Blackwell wrote in the post.
“He called the person who had him. And they said she’s on her way back.. You’ll never guess who had him?? Hillary [sic] Swank.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Rapper Wiz Khalifa, whose hits over the years have included “Black and Yellow” and “See You Again,” wants to part ways with his Los Angeles home to a tune of $4.49 million, its listing reps told The Post.
Located in Encino, in the San Fernando Valley, the Grammy-nominated Khalifa purchased this 5,875-square-foot residence for $3.4 million in early 2019, according to the Los Angeles Times. This listing also comes a month after Khalifa — real name Cameron Thomaz — spent $7.62 million for a slightly larger home located a few miles away.
Described in its listing as transitional modern architecture, the home’s design elements include smooth stucco, wood and walls of glass.
A foyer with high ceilings marks the entry point of the home — and beyond it, there’s a formal living area next to a home theater, the latter of which has space for a couple rows of plush seats. The listing also notes a roomy formal dining room — accented with three oversize windows — opens to the main family room with built-ins, a fireplace, floor-to-ceiling glass doors that open to the outside and a 100-bottle wine bar.
Meanwhile, the kitchen includes a breakfast nook and built-in Miele appliances. Upstairs, the primary suite includes a bar and a fridge, a custom fireplace, a spa-like bathroom and a balcony. In sum, the home has six bedrooms, five bathrooms and a powder room.
What’s more: Head outside, and the new owner will have a pool and spa, a concrete barbecue and a small basketball court to shoot hoops. The current pool cabana can even be converted into a gym or a studio.
Alan Taylor of Compass and Brian Capossela of Cap Equity have the listing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The Harlem rapper who hosted a weekend bash where an innocent college basketball star was fatally gunned down broke his silence Tuesday, saying he was praying for the victim’s shattered kin.
“My condolences to the family,” Troy Rhymer, who performs under the name The Rich Rhymer, said in an Instagram post under a photo of tragic slain baller Darius Lee holding an award on a basketball court.
“Keeping y’all in my prayers,” Rhymer wrote.
“Forever D Lee,” the post added, with white-dove and blue-heart emojis.
Lee was among nine people shot at the party early Monday morning when revelers were peppered with gunfire at East 139th Street and Fifth Avenue, cops said.
Rhymer had initially planned the party elsewhere, but the scheduled bash at that address had been nixed by cops before it even started, the rapper said in an Instagram post Sunday.
“They’re trying to really shut us down. They out here going crazy,” Rhymer can be heard saying in the video. “Look man, nothing going to stop it. nothing’s stopping. They ain’t stopping nothing. [Direct message] me. DM me for the new location.
“Everybody, I repeat, DM me, new location, secret location,” he says. “They ain’t letting us grill, they ain’t letting us play no music. They ain’t letting us do s–t.”
Hours later, the shooting broke out at the rapper’s apparent new party location.
Several of the wounded were taken to Harlem Hospital with non-life-threatening injuries.
Lee, a 21-year-old standout guard at Houston Baptist University, was rushed to Lincoln Medical Center, where he was later pronounced dead.
The 6-foot-6 guard had played for St. Raymond High School for Boys in The Bronx before signing up to play at SUNY Sullivan Community College upstate. He transferred to the Houston school after his freshman year.
“I’m completely heartbroken,” Jorge Lopez, his former coach at St. Raymond, said outside the Lee family home on Monday. “He had everything going for him — a great career, a great family.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A five-acre Long Island equestrian estate where over 100 racehorses have been bred has listed for $10 million.
Located just 25 minutes from Belmont Park, where The 154th Belmont Stakes are set to take place over the weekend as the last leg of the Triple Crown, the estate is often used to breed thoroughbred racehorses.
The mansion itself spans 15,000 square feet, and features paddocks, a riding ring, a 10-stall stable with an apartment and tack room, and an entertainment complex that comes with an in-ground heated, saltwater pool, water, spa, and a raised-bed cook’s garden and equestrian trails.
But the extravagant property, referred to as the “Gold Coast,” isn’t just home to past horse racing champions, it has a bit of Hollywood history as well.
Several movies and TV series have filmed at the house, including “The Loudest Voice” starring Russell Crowe, Seth McFarlane, Sienna Miller and Naomi Watts and “The Wolf of Wall Street,” starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Margot Robbie.
Built in 2010, the main residence is made up of six bedrooms and nine bathrooms with an expansive gourmet kitchen, a guest suite, six fireplaces, an office, an elevator and a walk-out basement with a hot tub room. Other amenities include a wet bar and cabana bath.
The main residence is made up of three levels and has several terraces and balconies that overlook paddocks.
It is just also 45 minutes to the Hamptons and 50 minutes to Manhattan.
Regina Rogers of Douglas Elliman holds the listing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The von Trapp children are back together again after almost 60 years apart.
The child stars who played the characters in the 1965 musical “The Sound of Music” reunited to honor friend and star Julie Andrews at the 48th AFI Life Achievement Award Gala Tribute on Thursday.
Andrews, 86, appeared at the event in Los Angeles to receive her lifetime award.
Nicholas Hammond, who played Friedrich in the musical, as well as Duane Chase (Kurt), Angela Cartwright (Brigitta), Debbie Turner (Marta) and Kym Karath (Gretl) all strolled the red carpet together at the Dolby Theatre to support Andrews (who portrayed Maria von Trapp).
The group even belted out “Do-Re-Mi” and took photos with the “Princess Diaries” alum.
The movie’s other stars, Charmian Carr and Heather Menzies-Urich, who portrayed Liesl and Louisa von Trapp in the movie, passed away in 2016 and 2017.
Christopher Plummer — the legendary Captain von Trapp — died in February 2021 at the age of 91.
Many of the iconic British actress’ old pals and co-stars such as “Princess Diaries” star Héctor Elizondo also appeared throughout the evening. Princess Mia Thermopolis herself, Anne Hathaway, sent in a lovely recorded message to pay tribute to Andrews.
Her “Mary Poppins” co-star Dick Van Dyke also relayed a message via video.
Other iconic stars who made appearances included Jane Seymour, Steve Carell, Fran Drescher, Blake Shelton and Gwen Stefani.
Andrews was presented with the prestigious award by comedian Carol Burnett.
“This night reminds me with great clarity how many people are involved with making movies,” Andrews said in her acceptance speech.
“What a huge collaborative effort it takes to bring film to the screen. My husband Blake [Edwards] never liked when people referred to filmmaking as the business or an industry. He insisted that film was an art form and should always be called that. And I know that is exactly the way the AFI feels also,” Andrews added.
Cynthia Erivo performed a musical tribute to the “Victor/Victoria” actress — singing the song “Edelweiss” from “The Sound of Music.” Broadway alums like Ariana DeBose, Hugh Jackman, Kristin Chenoweth and Lin-Manuel Miranda also sent recorded messages to honor Andrews.
Fans will be able to watch the AFI Life Achievement Award Tribute special on TNT June 16 at 10:00 p.m. EST.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A lesser-known royal is stepping into the spotlight.
Pauline Ducruet — the granddaughter of actress Grace Kelly and Rainier III, Prince of Monaco — has secured a doc about her life, already titled “Forming.”
The daughter of Princess Stephanie has teamed up with Calabasas Films & Media to produce the film about her aristocratic upbringing, Variety reported on Wednesday.
Fans of the late Hollywood icon will also get a “never-before-seen look at her wardrobe archive as well as examining Ducruet’s relationship with her mother, Princess Stephanie,” the outlet revealed.
The movie will look at Ducruet’s sustainable and gender-neutral fashion brand, Alter, as well as her Olympic diving career, and what it’s like to be 16th in line to Monaco’s throne.
Ducruet studied at the Istituto Marangoni in Paris and Union Square’s famed Parsons School of Design. She then also interned at Vogue magazine, and luxury brand Louis Vuitton during her styling career. And in 2019 she designed a royal wedding gown for her sister-in-law Marie Chevallier’s wedding.
Producer Sandy Climan called the 16th in line to Monaco’s throne “the model of a ‘working royal.’ ”
Another one of the film’s producers, Paul Beahan, said in a statement, “I have been a follower of the princely family of Monaco since I was a kid in the 1980s. The mystique of Princess Stephanie and the breathtaking glamor of Princess Grace Kelly is tattooed on my creative mind.”
“Their heir apparent, Pauline Ducruet of Monaco, is the perfect blend of both,” Beahan continued. “She is the real deal in her creative endeavors with her fashion line Alter and her commitment towards sustainability.”
The producer added, “ ’Forming’ showcases the invaluable role and responsibility of a famed young woman coming forward to advocate for the future of fashion.”
“She is the consummate creator and entrepreneur,” Climan added.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
When veteran actor Zahn McClarnon was approached by “Game of Thrones” author George R.R. Martin and Robert Redford to star in the AMC series “Dark Winds” it was an offer he couldn’t refuse.
“They’re wonderful human beings. I spent the weekend with Robert, and it was a dream come true to sit and have conversations with him,” McClarnon, 55, told The Post of Redford, who executive-produces the series with Martin.
“He was a personal hero of mine growing up. In ‘Little Fauss and Big Halsy,’ that 1970 movie that Robert Redford was in, he was kind of a ladies’ man and he used to carry around a toothbrush in his mouth. And my parents couldn’t get that toothbrush out of my mouth when I was 5 years old. He was a huge inspiration to me growing up.”
McClarnon, one of Hollywood’s most prolific Native American actors (“Fargo,” “Westworld,” “Hawkeye”) stars in “Dark Winds,” premiering Sunday, June 12 (9 p.m.) Based on a book series by Tony Hillerman, the drama is set in 1971 in a remote outpost of the Navajo Nation near Monument Valley. The plot follows Lieutenant Joe Leaphorn (McClarnon) of the Tribal Police, who is joined by his new deputy, Jim Chee (Kiowa Gordon, “Twilight”), as they investigate a series of crimes that initially seem unrelated — but end up connecting to Leaphorn’s past. Chee, who left the reservation to attend college and has recently returned, is an eager colleague but also has his own agenda.
Leaphorn is savvy and competent in the field, but his personal life is in shambles after the death of his son. Together with Chee, he investigates a double murder and navigates the interfering presence of the FBI, led by smarmy Agent Whitover (Noah Emmerich), who are also interested in the case because of a high-profile bank robbery that occurred nearby — and exposing how law enforcement behaves differently when the victims are Indigenous.
“Like every character that I play, I bring my own life experiences [to Leaphorn],” said McClarnon, who is Lakota. “After all, yes, I’m playing the character, but it’s still Zahn, and I have to draw from my own personal tragedies and dysfunctional relationship. I grew up on and off the reservation. I spent a lot of time with my grandparents in Montana at the Blackfeet Reservation when I was a kid — and also in my teen– and I spent a lot of time on the Rosebud and the Oglala Pine Ridge Reservation as well. So, I drew from people I knew, tribal cops I knew … I drew from uncles that I grew up around as well, and from the tragedies that have happened to me in the past – my pain and loss of family members.”
Many of the production personnel on “Dark Winds” are Native American, both in front of the camera and behind it. McClarnon said that he’s seen a lot of change in how the entertainment industry tells Native American stories onscreen.
“It’s changed slowly over the past few decades, but I stand on the shoulders of my predecessors such as Will Sampson, Jay Silverheels, Chief Dan George … I think that we’re finally getting to have a little more control over our stories and our narrative,” he said. “It’s a unique time in Native representation in TV and film. I’m excited to be part of it, and I’m glad my career has lasted this long to see what’s going on with more representation in the media — shows like ‘Dark Winds,’ ‘Reservation Dogs,’ ‘Rutherford Falls,’ and soon to be more.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Chilling video captures the moment a Los-Angeles-based drill rapper was shot dead inside a Bronx pharmacy in broad daylight by a group of four men trying to steal his gold chain.
The disturbing footage — obtained by The Post Friday — shows the crew mercilessly attacking Avanti Frowner, 27, inside Amazing Pharmacy on East Tremont Avenue near Arthur Avenue around 3:45 p.m. Thursday before one of the men shot and killed him.
“They don’t need to be on the streets no more – ever!” Avanti’s dad, Roger Frowner, 56, told The Post. “If they kill somebody in broad daylight, inside of a store, they are treacherous.”
“They made a mistake,” Frowner continued. “They did the dumbest thing they could ever do in life. And I hope God will make them pay for it all.”
Frowner, whose stage name is Money Gang Vontae, is a drill rapper from Los Angeles who previously lived in Chicago. He was in town for a show, according to police sources and his dad.
Roger Frowner said that he had no idea Avanti was visiting the Big Apple until “his brother called me.”
“My son is gone,” Roger Frowner said. “He’s in another state, and I can’t do nothing. So you know, a big-ass hole is in my heart.”
The footage of the shooting shows one of the suspects, wearing a white T-shirt and white du-rag apparently struggling to grab something from Frowner before three more suspects rush in through the door.
A worker can be seen crouching down behind the counter.
The suspects are shown knocking Frowner to the ground, pushing him past a swinging door to enter the area behind the counter, where one of the men strikes him with a long umbrella.
The worker who was behind the counter disappears just before the du-rag-wearing man fires off at least four shots – leaving the helpless victim sprawled out behind the counter with a blood-soaked shirt.
The suspects made off with the victim’s chain and money, sources said.
The grieving dad said his son “likes everything that money could buy,” and added that he “worked hard” for the jewelry he wears.
“That’s all he did with his money. Clothes, cars and jewelry.”
He described his son as “popular, well-known, and into music.”
“He was a good son, he did what he was supposed to do,” the grieving dad continued. “Then he went out on his journey.”
“All I wanna say is I’ll be glad when this is all over, because the memory will always be there,” the rapper’s father added. “You know I want justice for my son. I’m just hurt right now.”
The last photo posted to the official Money Gang Vontae Instagram account shows him standing in front of a Bronx bodega.
“I Got Use To Counting So Much Money I Got Paper Cuts!!” he wrote.
Frowner’s mother, Andrea Banks, posted about her son’s death on Facebook late Thursday afternoon.
“They killed my Son MoneyGang Avanti Frowner Wolfpack I’m so heartbroken,” she wrote, using the name that Frowner had on his Facebook account.
A 2020 press release on the Renegade Promotions Entertainment and Distribution website described Money Gang Vontae as “a lyrical artist that raps and speaks about things he has really been through.”
He started rapping as a high school freshman, and was heavily influenced by Lil Wayne, as well as his older brother and cousin, according to the release.
Stunned fans reacted to his death in Instagram comments.
“#MoneyGang4Life rest up young king!,” one wrote.
The assailants also robbed a second person, whose connection to the victim is unclear, police sources said.
The owner of Amazing Pharmacy, who did not give his name, told The Post Friday that there were no other customers in the store at the time of the slaying and all of the workers were in the back.
“We were all hiding, we were not in a position to hear anything,” he said, when asked if the victim had any last words. “When we came out they had already moved the body, I did not want to see him.”
“[Shootings are] an everyday thing now, it’s a common thing,” said another worker, who also did not give his name. “The Bronx is getting dangerous. A lot of people get a hold of a gun, you don’t know ….. you say the wrong thing to the wrong person, anything could happen.”
No arrests had been made by Friday afternoon.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Caterpillar employee was killed in an accident at the company’s foundry in Mapleton, Illinois, last week, the company has confirmed.
“We are deeply saddened by the death of an employee who was involved in a serious incident at our Mapleton, Illinois, facility on June 2,” Lisa Miller, a Caterpillar spokeswoman, said in an email to the Peoria Journal Star. “Our thoughts are with this employee’s family, friends and colleagues. The safety of our employees, contractors and visitors is our top priority.”
The Journal Star reported that the deceased was Steven Dierkes, 39, who died after falling into a crucible.
Coroner Jamie Harwood told the outlet Dierkes was killed instantly, and that no foul play is suspected in the tragic incident. Harwood said that the local sheriff’s office and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) are both investigating.
In late December 2021, a 50-year-old man fell to his death at the Caterpillar facility. He was working on-site for a local contractor, according to the Peoria County Sheriff’s Office.
The foundry in Mapleton is one of the largest in the U.S. and “can melt up to 1,000 tons of iron each day,” according to Caterpillar’s website.
Caterpillar Inc. did not respond to FOX Business’ request for comment.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Just days after Johnny Depp won his defamation case against ex-wife Amber Heard, a Los Angeles apartment where the pair spent much of their 15 months of married life is coincidentally set to hit the market, The Post has exclusively learned.
The penthouse unit is one of five which Depp, 58, once owned atop downtown LA’s iconic Eastern Columbia Building. Following his and the now 36-year-old Heard’s 2016 divorce, the actor listed and sold all five penthouses for a combined $12.78 million. The units, interconnected when the couple lived there, were subsequently disconnected. The one coming up for sale Friday will list for $1.76 million and is configured as a one-bedroom, two-bathroom.
Public records show that it last sold for $1.42 million in 2017, and has also listed as a $5,500-a-month rental since Depp moved out.
“It’s just coincidental timing,” agent Ernie Carswell, who holds the listing with fellow Douglas Elliman agent Rick Tyberg, told The Post of the unit hitting the market almost immediately following the defamation trial’s closure.
Since the “Pirates of the Caribbean” actor left, the apartment has not only been detached from the adjacent ones but also “streamlined.” Depp’s “unmistakable, bohemian style”  was also significantly renovated out of the space.
“It really was a mansion in the sky when Johnny lived there, ‘cause it was all open,” said Carswell. Carswell couldn’t confirm if this portion is where Heard’s sister admitted to living or where Heard allegedly punched Depp, but he does know that this unit, with its “very large bedroom with views looking east,” comprised “one of [Depp and Heard’s] favorite spaces,” where they “spent a good amount of their time.”
Even without the other adjacent penthouses, this one — PH4 — has “incredible volume and height, and you step out to the building’s rooftop swimming pool, which is about as dramatic as it gets in Los Angeles.”
The colorful and architecturally stunning building has served as the set of many movies. Centrally located on downtown’s Broadway, it boasts in-building amenities including a spa, a gym, a Zen garden, a 24-hour concierge service and, of course, the rooftop pool.
“Very few people in the building used the pool, but I know [Depp] and Amber enjoyed it,” Carswell added.
Additionally the blue terracotta-tiled tower is historically protected and recognized under the Mills Act, offering significant tax incentives to its owners.
“It’s definitely not a typical Los Angeles residence at all, which makes it so special,” said Carswell.
Additional reporting by Mary K. Jacob

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Disturbing footage captured the moment a hit-and-run driver who is wanted by police slammed into a 12-year-old girl while speeding down a street in the Bronx.
The scary scene unfolded as the preteen was attempting to cross the street in front of 1711 Boone Avenue around 4:25 p.m. on Sunday, the NYPD said.
Video provided by the department shows the moment the girl runs between two cars into the road and is hit head on by the BMW, first sending what appears to be one of her shoes and cell phone flying into the air.
The girl then rolls up onto the hood and roof of the car before she flips over and is violently thrown to the ground while the vehicle is still in motion, video shows.
The driver of the car stops for a moment as the girl lies in the street, before driving off.
The girl suffered lacerations and bruising throughout her body and was transported by EMS to St. Barnabas Hospital in stable condition, police said.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The uncle of Robert “Bobby” Crimo III — the person of interest in Highland Park’s 4th of July parade mass shooting — said there were no signals that his 21-year-old nephew would carry out such carnage.
“There were no signs that I saw that would make him do this,” Paul Crimo told CNN in a Monday night interview after his nephew was taken into custody in connection to the shooting.
Robert Crimo was described as a recluse by his uncle and others who knew him, including neighbors and former classmates.
Police said at a press conference announcing the arrest it is believed Robert Crimo was responsible for the hail of bullets that rang out during the annual 4th of July parade.
But Paul Crimo said he’s never seen his nephew act violent or exhibit concerning behavior, according to CNN.
“I have nothing bad to say about him,” he told the outlet.
But he noted, “He’s a quiet kid. He’s usually on his own. He’s a lonely, quiet person. He keeps everything to himself.
He said he spends a lot of time on YouTube and didn’t think he had a job.
“I associate with him, but I don’t really like to engage with him. I say hi and then when I leave I say bye. That’s it,” he told CNN.
The uncle, who is the brother of his father, Robert Crimo Jr., was interviewed by authorities Monday and told CNN his brother allowed police to search his home.
“We are good people here, and to have this is devastating,” Paul Crimo said. “I’m so heartbroken for all the families who lost their lives.”
A former classmate of Robert Crimo, Mark Heymann, 22, told NBC he couldn’t describe much about the suspected shooter except he was a rapper who released music while they were in school together at Highland Park High.
“He always seemed a little off, but I can’t describe it much beyond that,” Heymann said.
Crimo went by the moniker “Awake the Rapper” and posted numerous songs on Spotify. He also had a disturbing social media history, according to multiple reports.
A neighbor who spoke to the Daily Beast said Crimo would play loud heavy metal riding around with an electric bike, she said.
“We don’t really know him, but we see him riding around the neighborhood,” she told the outlet. “We never had any interaction with him, other than we just see him driving around.”
Both the uncle and neighbor said Crimo’s family had deep roots in the community. Robert Crimo Jr. unsuccessfully ran for Highland Park mayor in 2019.
In nearby Highwood, where Crimo was thought to possibly live by authorities, another neighbor said he didn’t know Crimo but would see him ride an electric scooter most days, according to the Chicago Tribune.
“He was quiet,” Gio Montenegro, whose brother went to school with Crimo, told the newspaper. “Never said nothing. Just minded his business, put his loud music on his scooter.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The idea of listening to some off-key chords may not seem ideal. But, contrary to popular belief, most parents actually want their kids to learn a musical instrument.
A new study conducted by OnePoll on behalf of Guitar Center surveyed 2,000 Americans about their musical choices for their children –with some surprising results.
The survey found that 82% of parents think it’s important that their child learn to play an instrument — although the recorder was not their No. 1 pick.
The instrument 18% of parents most want to hear being practiced in their home is the piano.
However, the surprising No. 2 pick, according to 17% of respondents, is — drumroll, please — the dulcet tones of the drum, followed closely by the violin (16%).
That’s right: one in six parents want their children to learn to play drums.
As far as what the children themselves want, it’s a potentially bombastic choice: The top instrument is the electric guitar, according to 22% of the parents polled.
More than half — 1,200 — of the parents surveyed said they have played at least one instrument in their lifetime.
The survey revealed one of every four Americans can play an instrument — with 17% picking up old musical habits during the coronavirus pandemic and 37% saying they’d learned an instrument in the past but don’t currently play anything.
A quarter of respondents said they have never learned an instrument and only 9% of parents said their children hadn’t yet expressed any interest in learning an instrument.
In addition, 26% believe that music education should be encouraged in schools, and 29% think it should be required or prioritized at school.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
It looks like Amber Heard is pinching pennies now that she owes ex-husband Johnny Depp $8.4 million in damages.
The “Aquaman” star was spotted shopping at discount department store TJ Maxx in the Hamptons on Thursday.
Sources told The Post in early June that the 36-year-old actress is “broke” due to hefty legal fees associated with her and Depp’s bombshell trial — and that was before she was ordered her to pay millions for defamatory statements.
When asked if the actress had the means to cover the judgment handed down by the jury, her lawyer Elaine Bredehoft said “Oh no, absolutely not.”
Still, Heard was shopping at the TJ Maxx in Bridgehampton, NY — where the average home goes for around $3.8 million according to Zillow — so she probably isn’t maxing out her credit cards at the big box chain.
Pictures taken by a sneaky shopper show Heard wearing jeans and an oversized white button-down T-shirt while looking at clothes.
She was accompanied by her sister, Whitney Henriquez, who has been by her side throughout the trial and testified on her behalf.
It’s not clear what, if anything, Heard bought at TJ Maxx.
Multiple sources have told the Post that Heard was relying on her homeowner’s insurance policy to cover the cost of her attorneys.
Depp sued Heard for $50 million after she wrote that she became a “public figure representing domestic abuse” in a 2018 Washington Post op-ed and won all three of his defamation claims against her. Heard, meanwhile, won only one of three defamation claims she made against the “Pirates of the Caribbean” in a $100 million countersuit.
Her net worth has been estimated at between $1.5 million and $2.5 million, according to the Celebrity Net Worth site and other outlets — a far cry from what she owes Depp.
Court testimony revealed that Heard was paid $1 million for 2018’s “Aquaman” and another $2 million for the sequel, which will premiere next year. Her role in that movie has been significantly reduced.
Heard also never made good on her promise to donate the $7 million she received from Depp in their 2016 divorce settlement to the American Civil Liberties Union and the Children’s Hospital of Los Angeles.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Distressing new video has been released showing a Dallas woman dying in an ambulance on the way to the hospital after being restrained by the police.
LaDamonyon Dewayne Hall, a 47-year-old transgender woman, died on May 26 after being detained by cops over a disturbance at a business on Garland Avenue, police said Wednesday.
The footage released shows Hall’s interactions with the officers responding to a 911 call from an employee at a car lot about a woman causing a disturbance.
The caller reported that the woman, later identified as Hall, appeared by be either drunk or high on drugs.
Two cops who arrived at the scene — Jon Leach and Alan Hovis — found Hall in an apparent “altered mental state,” police said.
In the bodycam video, a dazed-looking Hall refuses to answer most of the officers’ questions and then collapses face down while talking to paramedics.
Hall then stands up, pulls off her wig, yells something incoherent at first responders and starts taking off her dress.
The officers tried to arrest Hall, but she resisted and was “taken to the ground and handcuffed,” Deputy Chief Terrence Rhodes said in the video’s introduction.
Once on the ground, Hall proceeded to “trash about and scream,” according to Rhodes.
The footage shows the 47-year-old screaming: “Stop it! You’re hurting me, motherf***ers!”
Hall continues hurling obscenities at first responders, and at one point exclaims, “Hey mom. Hey, dad.”
Hall was later placed on a stretcher and loaded into an ambulance while still screaming.
On the ride over to Baylor Hospital, a spit hood was placed over Hall’s head, which she tried in vain to throw off.
The video shows a paramedic smiling as Hall thrashes about and screams.
About 15 minutes into the trip, Hall falls silent. The paramedic leans over to check on the patient.
“Sir, can you talk to me?” Leach asks, addressing Hall as a man. “I’d rather have screaming that that.”
Hall appears non-responsive, and the paramedic begins to rub her chest. He then proceeds to perform chest compressions before the ambulance arrives at the hospital and Hall is wheeled inside.
Hall was pronounced dead at 2:05 p.m. An autopsy was performed, but her toxicology reports are still pending.
The police department’s Special Investigations Unit is investigating the in-custody death, Rhodes said.
Hall’s family member released a statement Friday demanding that police officers and medical personnel be held accountable for the woman’s death on their watch.
“Dee deserves justice,” Monika Hall wrote on Facebook, using Hall’s nickname. “The video shows that this could have been prevented… Again with a heavy heart DPD must be stopped DPD must follow proper protocol and We are here to make sure that this never happens to anyone else.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
President Joe Biden is scheduled to appear on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!” Wednesday.
The visit would be Biden’s first in-studio appearance on a late-night show since taking office in January 2021 and will be taped at the El Capitan Entertainment Centre on Hollywood Boulevard in Los Angeles.
Kimmel made the announcement during “Jimmy Kimmel Live: NBA Finals Game Night” on ABC as part of the network’s airing of the NBA Finals between the Boston Celtics and Golden State Warriors.
In a tweet Sunday evening, Kimmel wrote “Our very elected President @JoeBiden visits @JimmyKimmelLive Wednesday night. No malarkey.”
Biden last came on Kimmel’s show in 2019 when he was fighting for the Democratic nomination.
While this is Biden’s first time in-studio interview as commander in chief, he was a virtual guest on NBC’s “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon” in December 2021.
Kimmel’s show is on ABC starting at 11:35 p.m.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Prince Louis’ recent impish display has royal disciples comparing him to the Devil incarnate.
The youngest heir to the British throne stole the show at Queen Elizabeth II’s Platinum Jubilee over the weekend while sporting a series of animated facial expressions, during events celebrating the monarch’s 70-year reign.
The 4-year-old’s antics have already inspired dozens of viral memes. Now, “Will & Grace” producer Gary Janetti has commented on the high-class clown — by creating a hilarious parody trailer that compares the pint-sized prince to devilish Damien Thorn from the 1976 horror flick “The Omen.”
Janetti, who is known for his popular posts poking fun at the royal family, shared his comic creation to Instagram on Monday, where it quickly garnered thousands of likes.
A post shared by Gary Janetti (@garyjanetti)
The video riffs on “The Omen,” a film which revolves around the mysterious events and violent deaths that afflict the wealthy Thorn family after young Damien enters childhood. The clan later comes to realize that the youngster is actually the Antichrist.
Janetti’s parody trailer begins with archival footage of Prince William and Kate Middleton, overdubbed with narration from the original trailer by director Richard Donner.
“For generations, the Thorns have been a family of tremendous wealth, position and power. The perfect marriage of Ambassador Robert Thorn and his wife Katherine was fulfilled by the birth of their son, Damien,” the narrator forebodingly states.
The clip then cuts to a 2018 vision of the elated Duke and Duchess showing off Louis on the steps of a London hospital just days after he was born. Ominously, the spoof narrator continued, “But when the child was 5 years old, something terrible happened.”
Janetti included footage of Louis, captured on Sunday, which appeared to show the high-class clown throwing a temper tantrum in front of mom Middleton, during one of the Jubilee’s several parade events.
The “Family Guy” writer also added a clip from last Thursday’s Trooping the Colour military flyover, showing the youngster screaming on the Buckingham Palace balcony.
Viewers immediately praised Janetti’s mashup “perfection.”
“This is without a doubt your best work,” one viewed gushed. “I was waiting for your take,” another added. “You never disappoint!”
Janetti previously served as an executive producer on “Will & Grace,” and created the British sitcom “Vicious,” before becoming a bona fide social media sensation with his posts about the royal family.
The comedian, who boasts close to a million followers on Instagram, parlayed his popular account into an HBO Max parody cartoon series in 2021, titled “The Prince.” It was cancelled after one season.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Authorities in California have refused to release any footage showing the DUI arrest of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s husband, saying it could “jeopardize” the investigation.
The California Highway Patrol (CHP) on Thursday denied a public records request seeking the release of body and dashboard camera video documenting Paul Pelosi’s arrest last month on suspicion of drunk driving.
CHP informed Fox News Digital in a letter that it has the footage in question, “however, the Napa County District Attorney’s Office has advised the release of records would jeopardize an ongoing investigation.”
In a separate press release Thursday, the DA’s Office said that it has not decided yet what, if any, charges, will be filed against the 82-year-old businessman.
“This is standard protocol in any DUI case that is referred by a law enforcement agency in Napa County,” the agency stated. “No decision has been made at this time. Any speculation to the contrary is incorrect.”
The statement was in response to a flurry of posts falsely claiming that all DUI charges against Pelosi were dropped, which spread widely on social media this week.
“Paul Pelosi’s DUI charges have been dropped,” GOP Rep. Lauren Boebert wrote in a tweet Wednesday that was shared over 11,000 times. “Is anyone really surprised?”
Paul Pelosi was arrested after driving a 2021 Porsche into an intersection near Yountville, California, shortly before 11 p.m. on May 28.
He was returning to his and Nancy’s vineyard, River Run, from a dinner party when a 48-year-old man driving a 2014 Jeep crashed into his luxury car. No injuries were reported and the other driver was not arrested.
Paul was released from jail on May 29 on $5,000 bail. He could face misdemeanor charges such as driving under the influence and driving with a blood alcohol content level of 0.08 or higher.
Paul agreed to a court date of Aug. 3 in Napa County Superior Court, prosecutors said. If charges are filed, he will be arraigned then.
Paul and Nancy Pelosi have been married since 1963. The couple have five children and split their time between San Francisco and Washington, DC.
The House Speaker’s husband is a successful venture capitalist, and the pair amassed an estimated personal fortune of more than $110 million by 2018, according to Open Secrets, a non-profit that tracks money in politics.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Want a smart idea for summer?
Samsung has a few in store, with their Discover Samsung Summer event going on now. They are offering tons of deals on Smart TV bundles and other devices for the home, including laptops, appliances and more.
Now through June 26, save big with stand-alone deals, like $100 off the Samsung Jet 75 Cordless Stick Vacuum and up to $1,000 off the 75″ Class Q70A QLED 4K Smart TV to name a few.
You can also get in on bundled savings, with buy more, save more style sales across the site on smartwatches, TV’s and more.
Speaking of those, if you’ve been looking to turn your home into an art gallery that doubles as a theatre, the coveted Samsung Frame TV is on sale with a buy more, save more style promotion. Those who buy two or more select Frame models can take 10% off their purchase.
There is plenty more to shop that we haven’t listed yet, like the Galaxy S22 and Freestyle Projector to name a few hot devices for summer. We advise you to take a look for yourself before June 26 to shop the full sale, stocking up for a belated Father’s Day gift, projectors and sound bars for a Fourth of July party and maybe even a back-to-school laptop for the fall.
Check out New York Post Shopping for more content.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
This sharp-clawed hero’s unit is all smooth edges.
Australian “The Wolverine” star Hugh Jackman, 53, put his three-story Manhattan condo on the market this week. The 11,000-square-foot apartment is listed for a cool $38.9 million.
The two-time Tony Award-winning actor — who is currently performing in a revival of “The Music Man” on Broadway — bought the five-bedroom, seven-bathroom property for $21 million in 2008. It is located at 176 Perry St., which was designed by the Pritzker Prize-winning architect Richard Meier, known for projects including the Getty Center in Los Angeles.
Meier didn’t only design the building’s exterior — he also had a hand in designing the interior of Jackman’s unit.
“He had done the interior of the apartment for the previous owner,” Deborah Grubman, who shares the listing with fellow Corcoran brokers David Adler and Paul Albano, told The Post.
The unit has been updated over the years, but Meier’s touch undoubtedly still makes it “a little more unique and special,” plus the views are “staggering,” Grubman added.
Through its wall-to-wall windows, the apartment looks down upon the Hudson River and out onto the New York skyline. “I’m particularly partial to that western view, where you can see the sunsets, Statue of Liberty and the river and boats moving. It’s a view that’s ever-changing,” said Grubman.
The unit spans the building’s eighth, ninth and 10th floors.
On the eighth, there’s an enormous recreation room and four bedrooms, all with ensuite baths, as well as a guest bedroom with a half bath. On the ninth, there’s the double-height great room, as well as a home office with a gas fireplace, the kitchen and a dining area. The 10th floor is dedicated to the primary bedroom and its spa-like bath, dressing rooms and a sauna, as well as an exercise area. Every floor has a terrace and they are all connected by a spiral staircase.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The man accused of slashing his girlfriend’s face in a Lower Manhattan subway station has done two stints in state prison, is on lifetime parole and is out on bail in a pending gun case, The Post has learned.
Billy Hernandez, 50 — who was busted in Tuesday’s subway assault while in “Apple Jacks” underwear —  was charged with attempted murder in the attack on his 49-year-old gal pal at the Fulton Street station around 9:30 a.m., authorities said.
He was held on $500,000 bail in the case at his Wednesday night arraignment.
Hernandez is already facing reckless-endangerment and weapons-possession charges stemming from a gun battle with another man in Manhattan in February, according to records and officials.
Manhattan prosecutors asked that he be held on $150,000 bail in that case, but the judge ordered him held on $50,000 — which he posted earlier this month.
Hernandez also served a 16-year prison sentence stemming from a 1995 assault conviction and later did another three and a half years behind bars in a separate 2015 assault case.
Because he was sentenced to nine years to life in the 1995 case, he is required to remain on parole for the rest of his life, the records show.
In all, he has been arrested 16 times since 1988, with five of the cases later sealed. The charges against him included first-degree robbery, assault, criminal mischief and drug possession.
In Hernandez’s latest bust, police said he got into an argument with his girlfriend on the mezzanine level of the Nos. 4/5 train station on Fulton Street.
Hernandez allegedly slashed the woman on the right side of her face and upper back — leaving a bloody mess at the station.
She was taken to Bellevue Hospital in stable condition, police said.
Hernandez fled the scene but was picked up by cops around 4 p.m. Tuesday near South Street and was awaiting arraignment late Wednesday afternoon.
Photos obtained by The Post show Hernandez in handcuffs wearing a red “New York” T-shirt and a pair of green underwear with the Kellogg’s Apple Jacks cereal logo.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Georgia teen was charged with 23 counts of making terroristic threats after allegedly threatening to kill the Fulton County Sheriff for rapper Young Thug’s arrest as well as several arrests of members of the YSL organization.
Quartavius Mender, 18, was arrested on May 26 after allegedly making death threats on the Instagram posts of Fulton County Sheriff Pat Labat, according to FOX 5.
The threats were made after Atlanta rapper Young Thug, Gunna, as well as 26 associates were arrested and charged with racketeering.
Officials said that Mender wrote that he was going to kill Labat, his wife, and Atlanta Public Schools Police Chief Ronald Applin if one of the defendants wasn’t released from custody.
“We take these kinds of brazen threats seriously,” Sheriff Labat said. “Social media cyberbullying, and hiding behind a keyboard will not protect someone from criminal prosecution. Our investigators are diligent in seeking individuals who mean to do harm to anybody, and I am grateful to them for ensuring the safety of myself, my wife, and all citizens of Fulton County.”
The charges filed against Mender are felonies.
Young Thug is accused of conspiracy to violate Georgia’s RICO Act as well as participation in a criminal street gang.
He was denied bond, as Fulton County Judge Ural Glanville said that he has concerns of the rapper being a danger to the community.
The rapper, who’s real name is Jeffery Lamar Williams, is alleged by prosecutors to belong to a violent street gang called Young Slime Life.
Prosecutors say that the gang has committed crimes including murders, shootings, and carjackings.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Chris Russo does just fine financially.
The Mad Dog had an appearance with Howard Stern on SiriusXM Wednesday morning, and revealed that his deal to debate Stephen A. Smith on Wednesdays on “First Take” is for $10,000 an episode — and 40 dates.
Consider that this is Russo’s third job. He also hosts afternoon drive on SiriusXM’s Mad Dog Radio, the station that was built for him when he left Mike Francesa and WFAN in 2008, and hosts “High Heat” on MLB Network.
And yet, one could argue that Russo should be in line for a big raise from ESPN when this deal expires.
Mad Dog’s hump-day appearances give a shot in the arm to Smith and “First Take” — when last weekend’s buffet of live sports has been picked to the bone and it’s still a little early to preview next weekend — and they generate buzz that percolates from ESPN’s airwaves onto the internet.
Hardly a week goes by where there is not headlines about Mad Dog barking at Smith over something inconsequential to the world at-large — but vital to Russo’s serious evaluations of the sports universe.
And yet, Stern pled ignorance when it came to Russo’s appearances on ESPN.
“Have you been paying attention to this ‘First Take’ stuff on ESPN”? Russo asked Stern.
“Listen, I don’t know anything about sports,” Stern said.
Howard Stern just broke Chris “Mad Dog” Russo’s heart into a million pieces. pic.twitter.com/V2vKXm5vd7
“It’s a sports show, I’m on there once a week. 10-12! It’s fun! We laugh! We fool around. We talk sports. We talk all these topics. You’re not following that?” Russo said.
Stern continued to have no idea what Russo was talking about.
“No, I’m not, I didn’t know you were on TV, but good for you — maybe that will help you get into the Radio Hall of Fame.”
Stern continued to say that he doesn’t know what the show is: “I don’t know ‘First Take,’ Second Take, Third Take …”.
There are way too many gems to mention in this phenomenal clip of Howard Stern interviewing @MadDogUnleashed about First Take and @stephenasmith. pic.twitter.com/NLWtoRY7O1
Not only that, Stern did not seem to even know who Stephen A. Smith was, and required an explanation about him from a producer. Stern then wanted to know why Russo would go on with another screamer: “Isn’t that too much screaming?”
Russo then pointed out that he was at a recent graduation party and approached by two college athletes in their twenties — a pitcher at Fordham, and a lacrosse player at Penn — who told him they watch his appearances weekly.
Russo has been going on with Howard Stern for a very long time, but clearly Stern has just been following the Mad Dog’s radio exploits.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
New York, New York is still top of the mozzarella heap.
Nine of the 50 pizzerias ranked in the 50 Top Pizza USA 2022 list are located in Manhattan and Brooklyn. That’s 18 percent of the best pizza joints in the country.
“New York City has a long and rich history of pizza making that we take deep pride in, where we use great technique, high-quality products and tradition,” Andrew Rigie, executive director of the NYC Hospitality Alliance told The Post.
The poll salutes the mostly Italian immigrants — including many from Naples, home of the pizza — who moved to America and brought their love of the finest dough, tomatoes and mozzarella with them.
“This list is particularly heavy in the Neapolitan category,” Scott Wiener, of Scott Pizza Tours, explained. “The style took off here before it did so in any other American city.”
Rosario Procino, a native of Naples, moved to New York in 1999, and operates Ribalta on East 12th Street, which ranked third in the top 50 survey of American pizzerias. “Pizza for Napoli is a religion.  Even if we go to Rome, we don’t consider that pizza,” he explained.
Despite the Big Apple’s enormous appetite for pizza, it ranks only second in the world for the most pizza places. The pizza capital is actually São Paulo in Brazil, noted Albert Sapere, one of the 50 Top curators.
“Pizza is in the DNA of New Yorkers. They love, desire, and consume it. In addition to the classic slices and historical addresses, a new generation of pizza chefs has emerged, using fresh ingredients,” he said.
Una Pizza Napoletana on Orchard Street was placed first on the 50 Top Pizza list.
Owner Anthony Mangieri — a Jersey Shore native whose family originated from Salerno, a province just south of Naples — said part of the secret to his success is a hands-on approach to doughmaking.
“No one makes the dough in the restaurant, 25 years later, except for me,” he said. “Every single pizza that people eat, I still make the dough in the morning myself.”
Other New York pizzerias that made the list are Song’ E Napule, Kestè Fulton, San Matteo and Pasquale Jones in Manhattan; and Brooklyn’s Ops, Roberta’s and Forcella.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Manhattan bodega worker charged with murder tried to avoid the confrontation that led to him being thrown behind bars after he fatally stabbed a customer, new video shows.
“Papa, I don’t want a problem, papa,” Jose Alba, 61, calmly tells an angry Austin Simon as the man walks behind the Hamilton Heights deli counter, the footage reveals.
The video obtained by The Post reveals for the first time the words exchanged between Alba and Simon before the fatal encounter that set off a public outcry about whether the clerk, who is facing murder charges, was trying to defend himself.
Simon, 35, stormed into the Blue Moon convenience store on July 1, five minutes after his girlfriend tried to buy a bag of chips for her daughter and her electronic benefits card was declined. The woman contended Alba snatched the snack from the girl.
“Did you put food?” the girlfriend can be heard on video asking Alba about how he rang up the sale.
“OK, mama, let me do it another time. My God,” Alba says.
“There’s money on there,” she insists.
The footage, which was edited, then cuts to other customers, and the woman yells from off camera, “You can’t touch my daughter. Don’t snatch that out of my daughter, you f–king piece of shit!”
Alba is not seen in the footage taking away the chips.
The woman goes on to say “I’m gonna bring my n– down here and he gonna f–k you up. My n— is gonna come down here right now and f–k you up!”
Alba says “That’s not my fault, it’s not working.” He continues to ring up sales, telling one customer of the girlfriend, “She don’t have money.”
Another woman asked, “Did they take something from you?”
Alba replied, “No, I take it back.”
Then Simon can be seen walking in and going immediately behind the counter.
“What’s up with you? N—-r what is wrong with you?” he demands.
Alba, 51, who was in the middle of ringing up a woman, holds out his left arm as Simon approaches him. The female customer reaches across the counter as if she’s trying to get Simon’s attention.
The fatal stabbing was edited from the tape obtained by The Post. But previously released video showed Simon push Alba into a chair before the two men start tussling and Simon was stabbed.
The video shows a bloody Simon laying on the bodega floor and his girlfriend crying out, “That was over $3. Three f–king dollars. He snatched something out of my daughter…please help him.”
NYPD officers arrive and led Alba away.
Alba, who suffered stab wounds in the attack allegedly inflicted by Simon’s girlfriend, was released from Rikers Island late Thursday after prosecutors agreed to lower his $250,000 bond.
“Sorry, I’m not talking to anybody. Talk to my lawyer,” Alba said Saturday through his door.
Francisco Marte, the founder of the Bodega and Small Business Group, said Alba was “very sorry for what happened.”
“He knew that his life was threatened. He was protecting himself…or we would be looking to bury him today,” Marte said.
Osamah Aldhabyani, 35, who owns the bodega said Alba did not want to risk going back to work.
Aldhabyani said he was haunted by what happened and frightened about possible retaliation from Simon’s friends after, he claims, he saw two of them in a car outside the store.
“I’m scared for my life,” he said.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A North Carolina man has been sentenced to death for the brutal rape and murder of his teenage daughter.
A Union County jury sentenced Joshua Lee Burgess, 35, to death Friday after he was convicted of murder and other charges for killing his 15-year-old daughter, Zaria, in 2019, according to the Union County District Attorney’s Office.
Burgess slit Zaria’s throat on Aug. 18, 2019, after sexually and psychologically torturing her for 22 hours at his home in Monroe.
“This was truly an especially heinous, atrocious, and cruel killing of an innocent child,” the Union County District Attorney’s Office said in a statement. “This case was emotionally taxing for everyone involved. We continue to grieve with and pray for Zaria’s mother.”
The girl lived with her biological mother but was visiting her father for the weekend at the time of her killing, according to WBTV.
Burgess walked into the police station and confessed to killing her the same day he committed the unthinkable act. He told investigators his address, where they found Zaria’s body.
“It’s just evil,” Union County Sheriff Tony Underwood said. “I mean murder is murder, but to kill your own flesh and blood like this, there’s just no way to explain it other than it’s just an evil crime.”
Burgess was convicted of one count of first-degree murder, one count of statutory rape, three counts of statutory sex offense and one count of first-degree sexual exploitation of a minor.
The jury in the case sentenced Burgess to death on the murder charge and an additional minimum of nearly 76 years in prison for the other charges after about three hours of deliberation.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A television advertisement for a male body spray has been taken off the air in India after attracting backlash from celebrities and the public for appearing to make a reference to gang rape.
Bollywood celebrities including Priyanka Chopra, Richa Chadha and Farhan Khan were among those who criticised the ad for fragrance brand Layer‘r Shot, labelling it “shameful,” ”disgusting” and ”incredibly tasteless”.
Its controversial advert shows four men appearing to stalk a frightened-looking woman in a store before cutting to one of the men saying: “We‘re four, there’s one, who takes the shot?”
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting described the videos as “detrimental to the portrayal of women in the interest of decency and morality” and said it violated the media ethics code.
“This advertisement is clearly promoting sexual violence against women and girls and promoting a rapist mentality among men. The advertisement is cringe-worthy and should not be allowed to be played on mass media,” chairwoman of the Delhi Commission for Women Swati Maliwal wrote in a letter to the ministry.
“Creatives, script, agency, client, casting … does everyone think rape is a joke?” actress Richa Chadha tweeted, labelling the ad “filth”.
Bollywood filmmaker Farhan Khan, who is also a United Nations Women‘s Goodwill Ambassador, also weighed in on the controversy.
“What incredibly tasteless and twisted minds it must take to think up, approve and create these stinking body spray ‘gang rape’ innuendo ads. Shameful,” Khan tweeted.
Bollywood star Priyanka Chopra added: “Shameful and disgusting. How many levels of clearances did it take for this commercial to be green lit. How many people thought this was ok?
“I’m so glad that it was called out and now the ministry has taken it down. Appalling!”
Layer‘r Shot apologised for the offensive advertisements, claiming it “never intended to hurt anyone’s sentiments or feelings or outrage any woman’s modesty or promote any sort of culture, as wrongly perceived by some”.
India has been plagued by sexual violence in recent years, with up to 90 rapes reported a day.
India recently brought in new laws increasing the punishment for rape to up to years in prison. The death penalty has been introduced for child rapists.
The gang rape and murder of a student on a bus in New Delhi in 2012 led to widespread protests against the treatment of women.
Just last week, a 17-year-old girl in Hyderabad was allegedly raped by five men.
This story originally appeared on news.com.au and was reproduced here with permission.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Former Mr Universe Calum von Moger has revealed his injuries from a mystery window plunge that left him fighting for his life.
The 31-year-old was placed in an induced coma after the near-fatal fall at his home in Melbourne, Australia, last month.
Posting on Instagram for the first time in five weeks on Sunday, he said: “It’s nice to be alive.”
Von Moger also shared a 30-second video from his hospital bed showing his 3.3million followers showing dozens of stitches on his arms, hands and even his face.
He also posted pictures on his stories revealing more cuts to his legs and feet.
The bodybuilder had shared an emotional message with his fans on Instagram before he plunged from the window, admitting he “messed up bad many times”.
Speaking to The Sun last month, one of his pals confirmed he was “awake and recovering” after waking up from the coma.
Moger, who is best known for his portrayal of Arnold Schwarzenegger in the 2018 film Bigger, seriously injured his spine in the fall on May 6 and underwent a major operation.
Fellow bodybuilder and Youtuber Nick Trigilli claimed the three-time Mr Universe winner was under the influence of drugs at the time of the incident after battling a meth addiction.
He said: “The reason they were keeping him in a coma for so long is [that] he had a lot of trauma to his head and his brain.
“There was a lot of fluid built up and obviously damage to his head.
“They were afraid to take him out of the coma because – god forbid -there was extensive damage then he could have permanent damage, they didn’t want that.
“They had to wait until the swelling had gone down.
“So far all I can tell you is that he did have surgery on his spine, now he is definitely not paralyzed as far as I know.”
Disturbing photographs emerged of the damage at von Moger’s home in Geelong, a city southwest of Melbourne, showing boarded-up windows and shattered glass on the ground.
He was awaiting a court date on May 26 after being charged with criminal affray and drug possession and was on bail living with his brother.
He appeared in court via video link with his arm in a sling and pleaded guilty to possessing drugs including testosterone and Viagra.
The court heard the three-time Mr Universe winner spent a total of 11 days in hospital after the window fall.
Von Moger’s lawyer Bernard Campigli told the court his client was struggling with depression.
He said von Moger would take part in a rehabilitation programme.
Von Moger was ordered to pay $500 to the court fund.\
This story originally appeared on The Sun and was reproduced here with permission.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Carolines comedy club on Broadway has spawned Seinfeld, Shandling, Leno, Chris Rock, Billy Crystal, Larry David, Jim Gaffigan, Bill Maher.
Says owner Caroline Hirsch: “COVID’s first year we were mandated to close. We thought maybe a month. It was 16 months.
“Staff left, we gave our food away, checked that systems were shut, gas wasn’t leaking. It’s a lot to shut down a restaurant. But bills — telephone, Wi-Fi, electricity — didn’t end. It was a horror show.
“Now we’ve reopened but things changed. People laugh through masks. Some places lock guests’ cellphones in a case. When they leave we unlock it. Comedians don’t like their shows taped. Who knows how people don’t have nervous breakdowns with all the stuff happening? Jerry Seinfeld won’t play colleges anymore. He goes, ‘Screw that. This cancel culture gets offended at everything.’
“We’re running at 70% capacity. Out-of-towners are starting to come. But all our expenses have gone up — which we now have to pass on to the customer. You have to borrow money. You put in disinfectants. Air purifiers. You can’t find help.
“And, listen, I grew up in New York. Our city’s crime is terrifying. Scary. Like we’re back in 1970. I’m not going anywhere — but I notice nobody sees this police commissioner. She must be in hiding.”
Set in England, nominated for five Tonys, including Best Play, comedy “Hangmen” is hanging on till the 18th. Producer Jean Doumanian: “I saw this in London and loved it. It was to open here 2020 before things shut down. But even during difficult days when we had COVID casualties, if the theater is only half full, it was important to produce this. Why? Because this is New York. What do out-of-towners come to New York to see? The Statue of Liberty and Broadway.”
Rancid Pelousy. Once you couldn’t discuss how she hornswoggled her hairdresser. Now you can’t ask how her husband flunked driving. And never can you mention that her Vesuvius mouth is swallowing the country . . . Also Ethan Hawke, who usually plays nice guys, now plays a killer in “The Black Phone.” Dead children call it. He says: “It’s dark, sinister, but sometimes scary’s fun.” Opens the 24th so we’ll see if audiences hang up on this or it scares away business.
I read a story saying “Selling oligarchs’ assets may take years and Biden wants to speed up the process.”
Really? How about speeding up his mumbling from the cue cards? Or speeding up the gas price problem, immigration problem, inflation problem, son Hunter problem, health care, global challenges, economy, pandemic, climate change situation, unemployment, financial crisis, discrimination, economy disaster, social issues, poverty, hunger, nuclear threat? And our nightmare gun problem.
If a handler fluffed his pillows he could maybe mouth it all from his crib in Delaware. And, listen, I’m not even mentioning how bad’s Kamala or the Tony Awards.
Here’s Biography magazine’s partial list of groups supported by Prince Charles the almost king: Goon Show Preservation Society, Atlantic Salmon Trust, Museum of Garden History and the Specialist Cheesemakers Association.
Medical doctor: “Nobody makes house calls anymore, except plumbers, TV repairmen and burglars.”
Only in America, kids, only in America.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Add Joe Rogan to the list of people eager to see Johnny Depp date his lawyer who successfully represented him in his defamation lawsuit, Camille Vasquez.
On his most recent episode of the Spotify podcast “The Joe Rogan Experience,” Rogan complimented Vasquez as “being hot and natural, and really smart.”
He added: “Really smart and not taking any bull sh-t. And, we all want her to fall in love with Johnny secretly, right?”
The subject came up during Rogan’s podcast, which included guests Ari Shaffir, Shane Gillis, and Mark Normand.
Normand, a comedian, remarked that he had a crush on Vasquez, prompting Rogan to respond: “She’s very hot.”
“I think they’ve got a thing,” Normand said.
Vasquez has gained celebrity status thanks to her performance in court during Depp’s defamation case against his ex-wife, Amber Heard.
Depp sued Heard after she published an op-ed in The Washington Post in which she referred to herself as someone who “spoke up against sexual violence” and as a “public figure representing domestic abuse.”
Earlier this month, a Virginia jury found that Heard defamed Depp, who was awarded $5 million in punitive damages and $10 million in compensatory damages.
Heard, who countersued, was awarded $2 million in compensatory damages, but no punitive damages.
The 37-year-old Vasquez was recently elevated to partner at the California-based law firm of Brown Rudnick.
Since her victory in court, she has made appearances on national television, including NBC’s “TODAY Show” and ABC’s “Good Morning America.”
The Post has also reported that Vasquez has received numerous job offers from top Hollywood law firms in the weeks since the trial ended.
Depp gained the sympathy of most trial watchers and his army of adoring fans on social media began speculating as to whether the “Pirates of the Caribbean” star and Vasquez were dating.
The speculation intensified when Depp and Vasquez were seen embracing in court.
Videos of the two hugging each other in the courtrooms went viral on TikTok, racking up millions of views.
Vasquez has, however, been dating England-based WeWork executive Edward Owen, 38, since November, according to Daily Mail.
The two were greeted like A-List actors themselves as interviewers and photographers rushed them as they left the Ritz-Carlton hotel in Virginia after the trial and headed to the airport earlier this month.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Former NBC Sports reporter Michele Tafoya said she got “absolutely ambushed” in a recent podcast interview.
Though Tafoya did not mention which podcast, she was a guest on “The Dan Le Batard Show” last week and things appeared contentious between her and the hosts while discussing critical race theory and Florida’s The Parental Rights in Education Act, also known as the “Don’t Say Gay” bill.
“The second I got on — bam. I was ambushed with ‘You’re anti-CRT. You’re a racist. You can’t read the Florida law without it being homophobic,’” Tafoya said on an appearance on the Fox News show, “Gutfeld!” this week.
Tafoya said she agreed to do the Miami-based podcast because it was “someone I knew from my past.”
Just days prior to her Fox appearance, “The Dan Le Batard Show” aired an episode in which Tafoya was a guest in the second hour. The conversation seemed tense and argumentative at times over differing political views.
Le Batard, who left ESPN for Meadowlark Media, introduced Tafoya to the show, saying “I have had nothing but cordial experiences with her, but I have read recently that you have been on the dark side, secretly on the dark side.”
At one point, Le Batard said “I think I’m in the middle and you think you are in the middle and I’m looked at as far left and you’re looked at as far right? When all I look at is — man, our leadership everywhere stinks. The Republicans seem ruthless to me and the Democrats seem weak and none of them represent me.”
Tafoya responded, “Well that’s — then I wouldn’t say that you are on the far left. And I wouldn’t — I don’t know who sees me on the far right. I mean, I’m a pro-choice libertarian. I don’t know how that makes me far right.
“All I am is a fiscal conservative who really wants America to come together and for people to be able to realize their potential and not be told that they’re oppressed or that they are an oppressor. That kind of boils it down for me. I’d like to see some law and order so people don’t get hurt.”
Tafoya worked at NBC Sports, from 2011-22, primarily as a sideline reporter for “Sunday Night Football.”
NBC Sports announced in January that Super Bowl 56 in February would be Tafoya’s final broadcast of her career — which includes four Emmy Awards for Outstanding Sports Personality-Sports Reporter.
At the time, Tafoya foreshadowed pursuing other opportunities outside sports.
“Some may consider me crazy to walk away from one of the more coveted roles in sports television, and I do not doubt that I will miss many aspects of the job,” she said. “But for some time, I have been considering other areas I would like to explore both personally and professionally. I couldn’t ignore that little voice anymore after what we have all endured over the last few years.”
Michele Tafoya felt "ambushed" by the Dan Le Batard Show pic.twitter.com/XdRGKZlKW5
Tafoya’s first job after leaving NBC was co-chairing Republican Kendall Qualls’ campaign for governor in Minnesota. She currently hosts the “Sideline Sanity” podcast, in which she interviews guests, including politicians and sports figures, to discuss world topics.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
#Being black in American is a crime
♬ original sound – Bab9
A Miami cop is under investigation by his department after telling a black motorist “this is how you guys get killed” during a traffic stop, officials said.
Gerardson Nicolas was driving in North Miami Beach last week when he was pulled over for not wearing a seatbelt, he told local outlets.
He began filming the encounter at some point and appears to have a tense discussion with the unnamed officer while retrieving his documents.
“I’m going to work,” Nicolas can be heard telling the officer in video posted to social media.
“Give me your driver’s license, registration and insurance,” directs the officer after opening the driver’s door. “If not, you will be not be going to work today.”
As Nicolas goes through his wallet, the officer continues.
“Simple thing, man,” he says. “This is how you guys get killed out here, man.”
“What?’ Nicholas responds after handing over the license. “Say that again.”
“My God,” the officer states. “Registration and insurance.”
The cop then attempts to close the door as Nicolas tries to keep it from closing.
“What do we get killed for?” Nicolas asks him before telling the camera that the officer would soon become “famous.”
The video shows the driver standing just outside his vehicle with the motorcycle cop in the background.
“Got nothing on me, pulls me over and threatening to shoot me,” he says. “Threatening to kill me. We’re going to court, man.”
Nicolas told NBC 6 that he wasn’t sure where some of the requested documents were located because he was driving his mother’s car.
“I was scared, I was scared. I didn’t think my life was going to make it,” he told the outlet Monday.
The Miami-Dade Police Department said it had launched an internal investigation into the incident and would be reviewing roughly 30 minutes of body camera footage.
“Rest assured we are committed to transparency and community trust and will address all matters of public concern equitably, fairly, and in accordance with applicable laws,” the department said in a statement.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The body of Florida man who ventured into an alligator-infested lake in search of flying discs was missing three limbs when recovered by authorities, according to a report.
Sean Thomas McGuinness, 47, was found dismembered on May 31 at Taylor Lake in Largo, where he frequently waded into water to retrieve wayward flying discs from a nearby disc golf course to resell, cops told Spectrum Bay News 9.
“When Sean McGuinness was recovered last week, he was observed to be missing three limbs,” Largo police spokeswoman Megan Santo told the outlet.
A final medical examiner’s report is expected sometime in late July, she said.
“That was the last disc he ever tried to get,” Derek Erskin, 37, who regularly visited Taylor Lake, told the station. “Hopefully he’s at peace now with the lord and that’s the best we can wish for.”
Two weeks before he died, McGuiness, of Largo, was wading chest-deep in the lake inhabited by alligators and realized the risk he was taking, Erskin said.
“He was fully aware,” Erskin continued. “He seemed to be pretty comfortable with what he was doing.”
A park ranger had previously tried to get McGuinness trespassed from the lake, but was unable to find him when they responded on April 11 and April 19, according to public records obtained by the station.
McGuiness had no family in Florida, where he was living with his best friend, Ryan McKinley, 47, for the past eight years, Spectrum Bay News 9 reported.
But McGuiness made a living off reselling the flying discs and Frisbees he recovered from the gator-filled lake where he ultimately died, McKinley said.
“He didn’t ask for handouts – he worked,” McKinley told the station. “He made his living no matter what he had to do and I respected him for that.”
McGuiness also had health issues, including a tumor on his pituitary gland, that forced McKinley to ask him to leave his home in January.
“It started causing problems with my family and that’s why I had to ask him to leave,” McKinley said. “It still kills me to this day, because I do blame myself a little bit.”
Florida Fish and Wildlife trappers caught and euthanized two large alligators in the lake following McGuiness’ death, but necropsies later showed they weren’t involved in the gruesome incident.
That realization would’ve likely angered McGuiness, whom McKinley believes wasn’t scared of the inherent risks associated with fetching flying discs from a lake known with alligators due to his failing health.
“He would’ve been upset that they’re killing the gators,” McKinley said of his late friend. “He doesn’t want that.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Ukraine is closing the book on scores of Russian authors and turning a deaf ear to its foe’s music, too.
The Ukrainian parliament Sunday approved a law that stops the printing of books by Russian citizens unless they give up their Russian passport and become Ukraine citizens. The ban only applies to those authors who held Russian citizenship after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union.
Books printed in Russia, its ally Belarus and occupied Ukrainian territory also can no longer be imported, and special permission is required for the importation of books in Russian from any other countries.
Another law passed Sunday puts the brakes on music by post-1991 Russian citizens played by media outlets and on public transportation. It also forces television and radio broadcasts to play more Ukrainian-language speech and music content.
“The laws are designed to help Ukrainian authors share quality content with the widest possible audience, which after the Russian invasion do not accept any Russian creative product on a physical level,” Ukraine Culture Minister Oleksandr Tkachenko said.
The laws will go into effect once Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky signs them as expected.
The new mandates are the latest push by Ukraine to rid itself of Russia’s influence over the country in a process dubbed “derussification.”
Ukraine argues that the moves are necessary to undo centuries of Russian policies meant to erase Ukraine culture, while Russia has said such measures only oppress the large number of Russian speakers in Ukraine.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
California TikTok star Cooper Noriega, who boasted nearly 2 million followers, reportedly died Thursday, mere hours after uploading an eerie TikTok video about dying young. He was 19 years old.
The tragic news broke after a Samaritan called emergency services after finding the influencer unconscious in the parking lot of a mall near Los Angeles, according to TMZ. Despite arriving on the scene shortly thereafter, paramedics were unable to resuscitate Noriega.
The star’s cause of death remains unclear, as he was not in a vehicle and didn’t display any signs of physical trauma, and officers do not suspect any foul play. The body is slated for an autopsy so authorities can glean more details surrounding his mysterious death, TMZ reported.
The heartbreaking news broke just hours after Noriega posted a video of himself lying in bed with the caption, “who else b thinking they gon d!€ young af.”
Ahead of his passing, the young star announced on Instagram on June 4 that he was starting a Discord page “for mental health strictly.”
“I’ve been struggling with addiction since I was 9 years old, you may think that’s crazy but that’s the life I’ve been dealt,” he wrote in the emotional post. “I would like to use the influence I’ve been given to create a space built on spreading awareness and normalizing talking about mental illness.”
At the time of his death, the social media sensation boasted 1.7 million TikTok followers and 95.7 million likes, as well as over 427,000 followers on Instagram. He was best known for posting lip-sync videos and short sketches.
In his last video before he died, which boasted over 1.2 million views, the entertainer showed snippets from his recent June 1 appearance on the Barstool Sports podcast “BFFs” with Dave Portnoy, Josh Richards and Bri Chickenfry.
Needless to say, social media was devastated over losing Noriega.
“I’m heartbroken and can’t imagine how his family and friends are feeling,” wrote one crestfallen commenter, while another said, “Plz someone tell me it’s not true he’s not actually gone.”
Another commented on the “dying young” video: “The fact that he posted this couple of hours ago and now his dead?? This really breaks my heart … RIP angel.”
Fellow TikTok star Max Dressler also paid tribute to the fallen star, writing, “coop man :(.”
Meanwhile, “BFFs” mourned the star’s passing on Twitter. “Devastating news. RIP Cooper Noriega,” they wrote. “Life is fragile. Enjoy every minute.”
Noriega’s passing marks the latest in a string of TikTok star deaths this year. In January, 36-year-old TikToker Candice Murley mysteriously died several days after claiming that the “voices in her head had gone silent.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The majority of US citizens are putting pride before prejudice.
A recent survey by OnePoll found that over 80 percent of US citizens agree that LGBTQ people shouldn’t be subjected to hate during pride events.
“I think all groups should be able to meet peacefully without being harassed,” said one respondent to the survey. “We are not supposed to judge other people.”
The anti-prejudice poll was conducted in honor of pride month, which honors “the anniversary of the 1969 Stonewall uprisings with marches, parties, memorials and continued civil rights activism in support of LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer) Americans,” according to Talker.
Of the 1,000 people that participated in the survey, a whopping 81 percent believed that the LGBTQ community should be able to enjoy pride festivities without being subjected to verbal harassment.
Meanwhile, although well over half of participants (61 percent) didn’t openly identify as allies or LGBTQ peeps, 64 percent have participated in at least one activity or event related to LGBTQ culture.
Twenty percent have attended a past pride event, and 41 percent have watched TV shows related to LGBTQ culture, such as “RuPaul’s Drag Race” or “Queer Eye.”
“No one will become gay from going to a drag show,” another respondent said about attending pride events. “I’ve been to many and I’m still very straight.”
One in three (34 percent) also feel likely to attend pride — but a similar percentage of respondents (33 percent) are highly concerned that events in their area will be disrupted by anti-LGBTQ rhetoric.
The fear comes after five men that were reportedly associated with the Proud Boys allegedly yelled slurs at guests in attendance at a Drag Queen Story Hour event in Oakland on June 12.
That same day, in Idaho, police stopped a U-Haul carrying 31 masked members of a white nationalist hate organization who were suspected would crash a Pride in the Park event in Coeur d’Alene. All of that transpires during a surge when both politicians and political platforms take aim at LGBTQ people while legislation targets transgender people across the country.
However, 40 percent of pride-bound respondents say hateful instances aren’t enough to keep them away from attending festivities.  In fact, 39 percent said it makes them want to attend the events even more.
“I have the right to go to these events and live proudly,” one respondent noted. “I will keep doing this as long as it takes for change. “

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
It’s a detail many fans of “The Simpsons” have taken for granted.
Ever wonder why Maggie gets scanned on a grocery store conveyer during the intro sequence?
When the iconic cartoon debuted in 1989, the youngest Simpson rang up at $847.63.
According to UberFacts on Twitter, the seemingly arbitrary number actually represents the estimated cost of raising a baby for one month that year, more than three decades ago.
Throughout the show’s historic 33 seasons, writers have had fun with the opening credits.
During a satirical trivia bit before a commercial break in season 7 episode 10, a narrator begins to explain Maggie’s price tag, but zags to claim that the register actually reads “NRA4EVER,” sarcastically implying that the show’s notably liberal creator Matt Groening supports the National Rifle Association.
And in the Treehouse of Horror XXIV episode, Maggie’s price tag gets a satanic twist as it reads “666.”
In 2009, the sitcom updated its opening sequence and tweaked the scanner joke. In its current iteration, the register reads $243.26 until Maggie is scanned, at which point the ticker doubles to $486.52.
Groening has never answered for this, but it suggests that having a kid can double your living expenses.
“The Simpsons” returns to Fox for Season 34 on September 25 at 8 p.m. EST. It has already been renewed for Season 35, bringing the show into 2023. And who knows what Maggie might cost then.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A woman and her two dogs were fatally struck by lightning Wednesday morning while walking in the Los Angeles area, authorities said.
The woman and the pets had been walking along the San Gabriel River during a thunderstorm when they were struck, the Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department said.
They were found laying in the pathway at about 8:50 a.m. Paramedics responded and attempted CPR, but officials believe they died instantly when hit by the bolt.
The sheriff’s office didn’t release the woman’s identity — pending family notification. However the department said she was a Pico Rivera resident in her 50s.
A summer storm brought rain, thunder and lightning to much of southern California overnight into the morning amid an ongoing heat wave, according to KTLA.
The odds of being struck by lightning in a given year are less than one in a million and only about 10% of all lightning strike victims do not survive, according to the CDC.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Broadway’s biggest night is set to light up NYC’s Radio City Music Hall on Sunday.
The Tony Awards, which were last held in the fall at the Winter Garden Theatre and broadcast in a two-part ceremony, will officially return to their usual summer date.
After a season of several cancellations and COVID-19 outbreaks, the Broadway League announced in March that the award show was able to go on with business as usual — with a few safety precautions in place to keep guests, nominees and performers safe.
So silence your cellphones, and read everything you need to know about this year’s Tony Awards and all the red carpet glam here.
The 75th Tony Awards are set to take the stage at Radio City Music Hall in Midtown on June 12.
Just like last year, the show will be broadcast in two parts, with a pre-show starting at 7 p.m. ET and the actual awards ceremony that will air on CBS starting at 8 p.m. ET.
Prior to the actual awards ceremony, there will be an hourlong event called “The Tony Awards: Act One” that will feature special performers as well as several honorary awards, streaming exclusively on Paramount+.
As for a red carpet, there are a few options to see all of the glam. NY1 will be live on the red carpet beginning at 6 p.m. EST (check your local listing for channel) while BroadwayWorld will begin red carpet coverage at 4:30 p.m. EST.
The three-hour ceremony will air live on CBS and stream on Paramount+ for subscribers only beginning at 8 p.m. Playbill reported this year’s ceremony is the first in Tony Awards history to be available live nationwide.
Nominees and celebrity guests who are sitting in the orchestra section will be required to submit a negative COVID-19 PCR test result before they are allowed either onstage or to perform and have the option to wear a mask while seated, according to the Hollywood Reporter.
“As a significant portion of the orchestra are Tony Award nominees and either going to be on stage and/or performing, it felt necessary to do the same for all of those in the orchestra,” a statement from the Tony Award producers reads.
“Requirements to be on stage include the PCR testing and verification.”
Audience members who are in the mezzanine will be required to wear masks but will not be required to submit a negative COVID-19 test result.
The testing requirement clashes with the current rules of the Broadway League that state masks must be worn at all times while in the theater through June 30, 2022, even though patrons no longer have to show proof of vaccination.
Academy Award winner and Tony nominee Ariana DeBose was selected to host the 75th Tonys. She was nominated for playing the title character in the 2018’s “Summer: The Donna Summer Musical.”
Darren Criss and Emmy-winner Julianne Hough will host the pre-award show “The Tony Awards: Act One.”
The nominations for the 2022 Tony Awards were announced on May 9, by “Waitress” alum Joshua Henry and “Tina” star Adrienne Warren. You can check out the full list of nominations from the 2021 to 2022 Broadway season here.
This season, Broadway has seen several changes to the Tony Awards eligibility rules due to several shows being postponed or canceled due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This year saw six Best Musical nominations, which are “Girl From the North Country,” ” A Strange Loop,” “Six: The Musical,” “MJ: The Musical,” “Paradise Square” and Billy Crystal’s “Mr. Saturday Night.”
In addition to those musical nominations, this season saw the revival of Meredith Willson’s “The Music Man,” starring Hugh Jackman and Sutton Foster, as well as Stephen Sondheim’s “Company,” with Patti LuPone and Katrina Lenk.
It was announced in May that five-time Tony winner Angela Lansbury will receive the  2022 Special Tony Award for Lifetime Achievement in the Theater.
A star-studded list of presenters announced by the Tony Award producers includes Andrew Garfield, Lin Manuel-Miranda, Nathan Lane and both Paris and Prince Jackson.
The full list includes icons from both stage and screen such as Bowen Yang, Skylar Astin, Danny Burstein, RuPaul, Jennifer Hudson, Billy Porter, Sarah Paulson, Sarah Silverman, Bernadette Peters and several other stars.
You should expect to see performances from nominees “The Music Man,” “Girl From the North Country,” “A Strange Loop,” “Six,” “Company,” “MJ: The Musical,” “Paradise Square” and “Mr. Saturday Night.” The original cast members of the Best Musical Tony winner “Spring Awakening” (2007) will also perform along with the New York City Gay Men’s Chorus.
Officials for the Tony Awards announced several Broadway legends including Phillipa Soo, Cynthia Erivo, Bebe Neuwirth, Kelli O’Hara, Chita Rivera and several others will perform during the live broadcast of the Tonys and the pre-show.
Billy Porter and Bernadette Peters, both previous Tony winners, will also perform during the telecast.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
She doesn’t need this kind of exposure.
Supermodel Emily Ratajkowski is being sued by a photographer for copyright infringement after she allegedly posted two paparazzi photos of herself on her Instagram account without the shutterbug’s permission, a complaint says.
Queens photographer Edward Opinaldo said he took the snaps of the 31-year-old stunner — dressed in a stylish Adeam fuchsia pantsuit — leaving a Big Apple building on June 17, 2019. The “Love Somebody” video star posted two of the shots to her Instagram page that same day and garnered 288,000 likes, the Manhattan federal court filing says.
Opinaldo had his shots copyrighted in July 2019. He first noticed the snaps on Ratajkowski’s Instagram story in September 2019, according to the seven-page filing.
Opinaldo’s original photo and a screengrab of the same photo from the model’s Instagram are listed as exhibits in the federal court filing.
The suit seeks unspecified damages.
Ratajkowski, a mega-influencer who currently has 29.4 million Instagram followers, was sued for copyright infringement by a different photographer in October 2019.
Manhattan lensman Robert O’Neil alleged the 5-foot-7 London-born model/actress — whose net worth is $8 million — shared his picture of her walking down a New York City street with a bouquet of flowers, PageSix reported.
The case was settled out of court in April.
Said Ratajkowski attorney Ellie Heisler of the latest litigation: “Emily was sued for copyright infringement previously and the plaintiff conceded that Emily did not infringe any copyright. … We are confident that Emily will have similar success in defending this lawsuit as well.”
The model-actress added author to her resume last November with the release of a book of essays, “My Body” in which, Ratajkowski writes about the price of beauty and how adults sexualized her at a young age.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Far-left Rep. Ilhan Omar was met by a chorus of boos and calls to “get the f–k out” when she appeared onstage at a music festival in Minneapolis over the weekend.
Video from Saturday night’s event featuring Somali singer Suldaan Seeraar showed Omar (D-Minn.), the first Somali American elected to Congress, walk onto the stage with her husband, Tim Mynett.
The crowd at the Target Center promptly unleashed a torrent of boos that lasted for more than a minute.
Others in the mostly Somali audience shouted “Get out” and some yelled “Get the f–k out of here.”
Omar, a member of the progressive “Squad” that includes Bronx and Queens Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY), tried to calm the unruly gathering.
“OK, OK, OK, OK, OK, we don’t have all night,” Omar said as she made a “tamp it down” gesture with her hands, the video shows.
Video on Omar’s Twitter account shows her taking the stage, but the clip is cut off 14 seconds in, when the booing begins.
It’s unclear what sparked the outburst against Omar, but the Republican challenging the two-term incumbent suggested her comments on LGBTQ issues and opposition to the Supreme Court’s recent decision to overturn Roe v. Wade played a role.
”Ilhan Omar’s BOOOD by nearly 10K SOMALIS at a sold out, highly anticipated Somali music concert at Target Center in Minneapolis!,” Shukri Abdirahman posted on Twitter, linking to the video.
“This’s what she gets for trading her Godly, Conservative values for the sinful LGBTQIA’s & the promiscuous abortionists.”
The jeers may also have been a response to comments Omar made during a town hall event last week — during which she said she experienced more violence in her adopted home state than in a Kenyan refugee camp.
“For four years [in the camp] I did not witness that kind of violence … My first year in Minnesota I both saw a person shot at Peavey Park, dead on the floor, three weeks after my father and I arrived in Minneapolis,” the congresswoman said June 30. “Six months later I watched the Minneapolis police put 38 bullets into the body of a mentally disabled Somali immigrant who didn’t speak English.
“So [for] six years I had the privilege of not seeing any violence until I moved to Minnesota.”
Omar, who also has a history of anti-Semitic comments, is heavily favored to win a third term representing her district, which covers all of the city of Minneapolis.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Netflix released a statement Monday on the fatal auto crash that killed two actors near the Mexico set of “The Chosen One.”
“We are deeply saddened by the tragic accident that took the lives of Ray Garduño and Juan Francisco González,” a Netflix spokesperson told Entertainment Weekly. “Our thoughts are with their loved ones and with those injured during this unfortunate accident.”
The accident happened on the Baja California Sur peninsula on June 16. According to the Baja California Department of Culture, six other crew members were injured in the crash, in which their van flipped after running off a desert road.
Based on the comic book series “Chosen” by Mark Millar and Peter Gross, the show follows a 12-year-old boy coming to the realization that he is the second coming of Christ and is destined to save humanity.
The in-production series is not to be confused with 2019’s “The Chosen One” already streaming on Netflix, which follows three doctors attempting to bring the Zika vaccine to the remote Pantanal in South America.
Production for the Garduño and González series began in April 2022, according to casting calls.
“The development for ‘American Jesus’ is coming along beautifully in the talented and capable hands of Everardo Gout and Leopoldo Gout,” author Millar said of the project last month.
“I’m blown away by the creative choices that Netflix has allowed us, and particularly since this series will feature Spanish and English dialogue.”
A release date had yet to be announced.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
This crib comes with some serious bragging rights.
A rare home in California built by one of America’s most well-known architects — and a home that has had only two owners — is now available for sale, asking $8 million.
“Designed by the world-renowned architect, Frank Lloyd Wright, this all-original Usonian style home sits tucked away on a quiet Atherton street,” the listing says of the single-family house, which is located in the tony town of Atherton, in San Mateo County. The area consistently ranks among America’s priciest ZIP codes and has a population last recorded as less than 10,000.
“Traditional of Wright’s designs, the brick structure has a diamond shape layout with two parallel wings that are connected at an angle by the kitchen and dining area,” the listing continues of the 1,940-square-foot, three-bedroom, two-bathroom property.
Inside, details include Philippine mahogany walls, original built-in shelving, and a dining and living area defined by a large brick fireplace. Walls of glass overlook the terrace and the landscaped, private grounds full of “mature whimsical oak trees.”
The property — one of just 1,000 Wright produced in his lifetime — was completed 70 years ago, in 1952, and named for its first owner, Arthur Mathews, Dirt reported. The “living piece of history,” as the listing describes it, has only sold once since Mathews inhabited it. In 1969, the husband and wife Dr. Harold Sox and Betty Porter Sox purchased it for $75,000, or about $616,000 in today’s figures.
While certainly not as big a name as Wright, Betty was an innovator in her own right. After graduating summa cum laude from Stanford University in 1946, she went on to work at Hewlett-Packard for 47 years — and is credited with first developing a corporate payroll system, according to Dirt. She passed away earlier this year.
The home comes with not one, but two legacies — although it’s missing one of Wright’s trademark features: the custom furniture he was known to design to pair with some of his higher-end commissioned houses. The Atherton does, however, include its vintage Danish modern furniture in the sale.
Monique Anton, of Modern Homes Realty, has the listing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
On May 3, 1972, at age 21, University of Chicago student Sheila Smith found herself and six female friends in the back of a police paddy wagon, eating a stack of three-by-five index cards, each one inked with the name and number of a woman seeking an illegal abortion.
“My first day of learning how to assist was the day I got arrested,” Smith, now 71, told The Post.
But Smith was more concerned about protecting the identities of the women she helped end unwanted pregnancies than facing 110 years in jail on 11 counts of abortion and conspiracy to commit abortion.
“We didn’t want the names and telephone numbers of [our clients] to be given to the police,” explained Smith, a Queens native. “So we ripped the cards into pieces and ate all the parts that were relevant.”
Smith had joined an underground abortion network called Jane, whose members went by the alias “the Janes.” They covertly terminated more than 11,000 unwanted pregnancies in four years — all while under the threat of retribution from the cops, the mob and the Catholic Church — before getting caught. Now, 40 years later, their story is being told in the HBO documentary “The Janes,” to be released Wednesday.
“These were very principled people that came out of the Civil Rights movement, the anti-[Vietnam] war movement, the student movement,” Tia Lessin, who directed the film with Emma Pildes, told The Post.
“They were mothers, grandmothers, aunts and students,” added Lessin, the Oscar-nominated creative behind 2008’s “Trouble the Water,” about Hurricane Katrina. “But they were all united by their belief that women should be able to make this choice.”
The duo conducted 11 on-camera interviews with the surviving members of Jane — including Heather Booth, who founded the underground abortion ring in 1968.
In the mid 1960s, a friend had asked Booth, then a University of Chicago undergrad, to help his “nearly suicidal” sister end an unplanned pregnancy. She tapped her sources in the medical arm of the Civil Rights Movement — connections forged when she’d previously protested for voter registration rights in Mississippi alongside the leaders of the fight in the early ’60s — and got Dr. T. R. M. Howard, a Civil Rights activist and surgeon, to agree to perform the abortion. Shortly thereafter, Howard was arrested for unlawfully terminating pregnancies, leaving women in need without a reliable and safe recourse. Women seeking an abortion in Chicago had to either solicit gangsters in the mob — who conducted the excisions in seedy motels and charged between $500 to $1000 for the procedure, for which they used code names like the “Cadillac,” “Chevrolet” or “Rolls Royce” — or attempt to end the pregnancy themselves.
“I called the morgue every week that I was on that ward because somebody had died,” OB/GYN Allen Weiland says in the film. He recalls at least 15 to 20 injured women being wheeled in to the septic abortion ward of Chicago’s Cook County Hospital each day. Many patients didn’t survive the internal trauma.
During the formative years, the Janes — none of whom had any professional medical training — enlisted the help of a guy named “Mike,” who stepped in as the organization’s principal abortionist because no real doctor was willing to answer the call.
“When I first learned [how to do an abortion], I was helping this surgeon from Detroit,” Mike says in a slurred, gruff baritone in the documentary. “For years, I watched him. I stood behind him, I handed him the tools. And then he said, ‘Come here, you do it.’”
Mike had a gentle bedside manner with the women seeking his help, but he didn’t work for free.
“When I first met [the Janes], the lady said, ‘We’re going to have customers who have the money [for an abortion]. We’re also going to have customers who don’t have the money… and we’re going to do those for nothing,'” Mike recalls in the film. “I said, ‘For nothing? Are you crazy? I’m not goin to do it for nothing!'”
His greed eventually became a point of contention with the Janes, and some of the women went on to learn to perform abortions themselves.
Surprisingly, religious folk were some of the Janes’ greatest allies. The doc details how the Clergy Consultation Service, comprising members of the priesthood, worked with the Janes.
“It’s not a theological argument,” Revered Dr. Donna Schaper says in the film: “I’ve had two abortions and I felt that God was with me, at my side, in all of these choices. It was a God-given decision.” .”
After their arrest in May ’72, the ladies spent the night in lockup at Chicago’s police headquarters at 11th and State Streets before a lawyer friend bailed them out.
The following year, Roe v. Wade rendered anti-abortion laws unconstitutional. The ruling not only allowed would-be mothers to freely end unplanned pregnancies, it also gave the Janes’ shrewd attorney, Jo-Anne F. Wolfson, the firepower she needed to get all charges against them dropped. Wolfson, who died in 2018, also worked to successfully get each of the Janes’ criminal records expunged.
Now, as Roe v. Wade is in danger over being overturned this month, Smith fears risky illegal and self-conducted abortions will leave desperate women in deadly predicaments.
“I’m really worried about the future,” she says.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Bill Gates attends the 2022 Time100 Gala with his daughter, Phoebe Gates.
Eileen Gu arrives for the Time 100 Gala. Gu was honored for her accomplishments at the 2022 Winter Olympics, as well as
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky addresses the 2022 TIME100 Gala. Zelensky was honored for his leadership and resilience.
Zendaya attends the 2022 TIME100 Gala. Zendaya was honored as an "innovator," for her numerous acting roles and emerging identity as a cultural icon.
Miranda Lambert performs the 2022 TIME100 Gala. Lambert was honored as an innovator for her contributions to country music and inspiring a new generation of female songwriters.
NBA legend Dwyane Wade and Questlove arrive for the Time 100 Gala. Questlove was honored for his long career as the drummer of the Roots.
Reggaeton star J Balvin and former Miss Argentina Valentina Ferrer attend the 2022 Time100 Gala.
Taika Waititi poses on the red carpet at the 2022 TIME100 Gala. Waititi was honored for his now legendary career as a film and television director.
Chris Smalls poses on the red carpet for the 2022 Time 100 Gala. Smalls was honored for founding and leading the Amazon Labor Union, which won a historic victory at the company's Staten Island facility.
Mary J. Blige attends the 2022 TIME100 Gala. Blige was honored for her contributions to hip hop and R&B, as well as her performance at the 2022 Super Bowl.
Former congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords arrives for the Time 100 Gala. Giffords was honored in 2013 for surviving a shooting and becoming an advocate for gun control.
Aly Raisman arrives for the Time 100 Gala. Raisman was honored in 2019 for her Olympic career on the US women's gymnastic team.
Jeremy Strong arrives on the red carpet at the 2022 TIME100 Gala. Strong was honored for his incredible performance as Kendall Roy in 'Succession.'

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The lights of broadway shone brightly during the 2022 Tony Awards on Sunday as members of the Broadway community gathered at Radio City Music Hall to celebrate Broadway’s return after the COVID-19 pandemic.
Hosted by Academy Award winner and Tony nominee Ariana DeBose, the night was full of performances by the musicals that made up the night’s best musical category.
Viewers were also treated to a reunion of the 2007 cast of Duncan Sheik’s “Spring Awakening” as well as a moving tribute to the late Stephen Sondheim, who died in November at 91.
DeBose, 31, opened the show with a mash-up of some of Broadway’s greatest hits including the likes of “Cabaret,” “Bye Bye Birdie,” “Evita,” “The Wiz,” “Chicago,” “Hamilton,” — which included a shoutout to Lin-Manuel Miranda — “Rent” and “Hairspray.”
Now THAT is how you kick off the #TonyAwards! 👏 We give our round of applause right back to @ArianaDeBose. pic.twitter.com/fybuEJ0agQ
Billy Crystal, 74, did an energetic rendition of “Mr. Saturday Night,” which included a cameo with Samuel L. Jackson doing a skat in Yiddish.
We’re going to stick around the #TonyAwards for more Yiddish scat performed by @MrSatNightBway's @BillyCrystal! pic.twitter.com/LuqEsY9C9i
This moment will forever live rent free in our head. These two! 😂 @BillyCrystal @SamuelLJackson #TonyAwards pic.twitter.com/RLyKUyxxjz
The cast of “MJ: The Musical” fronted by Myles Frost, who later won for Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Musical, had the audience grooving with a medley of the late King of Pop’s greatest hits.
Tonys, are you OK after that performance from @MJtheMusical? Because we're going to need a minute. #TonyAwards pic.twitter.com/IemTtavRCv
Hugh Jackman, 53, and 47-year-old Sutton Foster, stars of “The Music Man,” tap-danced gleefully in their stage moment.
Attention, please! Attention, please! @RealHughJackman, Sutton Foster and the cast of @MusicManBway took our breath away with this #TonyAwards performance. 🎶🤩 pic.twitter.com/F5GFGkqE18
The cast of “Company,” including Best Featured Actress in a Musical winner Patti LuPone, 73, sang a lively rendition of the hit Stephen Sondheim stage play.
#TonyAwards, door chimes, in comes @CompanyBway! pic.twitter.com/HeShhejeL7
Jeannette Bayardelle and cast members from “Girl from the North Country” sang some of Bob Dylan’s greatest hits.
We’re pressing on to watch this @JBayardelle performance from @NorthCountryBwy at the #TonyAwards again and again! pic.twitter.com/gVZsttRsTX
Bernadette Peters, 74, had the audience in tears during her moving tribute to Sondheim while Billy Porter, 52, gave everyone the feels during the In Memoriam portion of the show.
Not a dry eye in the house after @OfficialBPeters’ tribute to Stephen Sondheim at the #TonyAwards. 😭😭😭 pic.twitter.com/PNWke2jExz
.@theebillyporter shares a touching tribute to those Broadway talents we lost this past year. #TonyAwards #InMemoriam pic.twitter.com/zDk3B2M0e3
The cast of Best Musical winner “A Strange Loop” charmed everyone, just moments after Michael R. Jackson scored the award for Best Book of a Musical.
Let’s usher in this @StrangeLoopBway performance today and every day! #TonyAwards pic.twitter.com/B4D2JcOGaQ
Fans of the musical “Spring Awakening” were treated to a special reunion performance of “Touch Me” featuring “Hamilton” star Jonathan Groff, Gideon Glick and Skylar Astin, who is currently starring in the off-Broadway revival of “Little Shop of Horrors.”
As if no time has passed, this #SpringAwakening reunion was truly like heaven.♡ #TonyAwards pic.twitter.com/EOHX9FCW1u
Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Musical winner Joaquina Kalukango brought down the house with a powerful song from “Paradise Square,” bringing the crowd to their feet for an enthusiastic standing ovation.
We now feel a fire burning in our hearts thanks to this jaw-dropping @ParadiseSquare performance at the #TonyAwards. ❤️‍🔥 pic.twitter.com/qJAcBMbdeC
The cast of “Six,” including one understudy, had the crowd dancing in the night’s final performance.
We could give you six (thousand) reasons why we’re obsessed with @sixthemusical. 👑💜 #TonyAwards pic.twitter.com/aF0IjpMpCK

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
He was given an offer that he refused.
Actor Gianni Russo, who played Carlo Rizzi in “The Godfather,” said that once filming on the classic film wrapped, he had no contact with James Caan — until the late actor wanted a part in one of his movies.
When the Little Italy native helped produce the 1999 football drama “Any Given Sunday,” he said he got a call from Caan’s agent while they were casting.
“He said, ‘You know, Jimmy would be great in this movie. He’s a great sports buff,’” Russo, 78, told The Post of the Al Pacino-led flick, in which he had a supporting role.
“I said, ‘Do you think I would hire James Caan? I wouldn’t give Jimmy Caan a part in anything.’ He was so rude to me,” the Upper East Sider explained.
Russo claims that Caan, who played Sonny Corleone, the brother-in-law of Russo’s character, was not friendly to him from the first “Godfather” rehearsal at Patsy’s restaurant on West 119th Street.
“The biggest thorn in his side was, ‘Who’s Gianni Russo?’ This guy, he studied with Stella Adler, you name it. He was never nice to me from day one. But I’m thinking he was in character cause he’s a thespian,” he said.
Stay up on the very latest with Evening Update.
Please provide a valid email address.
By clicking above you agree to the 						Terms of Use
Russo said he quickly discovered that he was wrong, because Caan, who grew up in Sunnyside, Queens, really did have beef with his castmate.
And it didn’t help that Russo, who was 27 when he was cast, had ties with real-life mobsters such as Frank Costello, Joe Colombo and Carlo Gambino.
“Cause he’s hanging around with mob guys, like Carmine Persico, and mob guys all know me already. I came from Mulberry Street, how do you live on Mulberry Street and not know mob guys?” he said.
He said that Caan “fell in love with mobsters,” through his experience on the 1972 set. “’Til the day he died, he thought he was a mobster. He thought he was Sonny Corleone,” he said.
Russo also claims that Caan went too far in an infamous “Godfather” fight scene where Sonny pummels Carlo for hitting his sister.
Although Russo said that a stunt double was used, particularly when Carlo was thrown over a railing, he also was in the scene and was injured by Caan.
“That’s me. He’s biting my hand; he’s banging my elbow with that steel garbage pail. He chipped my elbow,” he said. “When I crawled out and he lifted me in the air, he broke two of my ribs, which was not in the rehearsal. That was me laying there.”
Caan never admitted to hurting his co-star, saying that he worked with a stunt double that day.
“He discredits me even doing the scene. Unfortunately, we’re talking about a guy that’s dead, and to his dying day, that’s his story,” he said. “He took it to his grave as we would say.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Thousands of people gathered along Williamsburg's waterfront.
People gathered to watch from across the river in Queens.
As many as 48,000 shells were blasted off during the display.
Macy's celebrated its annual Fourth of July fireworks display Monday.
Spectators were mesmerized by the show.
The fireworks were launched from barges along the East River in Manhattan.
The lights from the fireworks lit up much of New York City.
The display lasted for approximately 25 minutes.
People waited in line for hours to get prime seating.
Many people came together to enjoy the show.
NYPD heightened security to keep the event safe.
This is the 46th year that Macy's has lit up New York City on July 4th.
July 4, 2022 celebrates 246 years since the US's independence.
There were 17 different patterns displayed in the show.
Macy's 4th of July firework show is America's largest fireworks show.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Queens man was hacked to death by his machete-wielding uncle in an ongoing feud over the family’s house, cops and neighbors told The Post on Sunday.
Suspect Mahadeo Suhnandan, 50, is now awaiting arraignment for allegedly killing his 29-year-old nephew, Neraz Roberts, inside the home.
Roberts was pronounced dead at 88-27 187 Place in Jamaica around 5 a.m. with gashes to his back and hand, cops said.
Neighbor Ryan Basdeo, 24, said problems in the family began about 2 1/2 years ago when the owner of the house died, leaving her son, her daughter and Suhnandan, the daughter’s husband, to sort out the ownership of the two-story brick home, Badeo said.
Both the son and his family, including his own offspring Roberts, and the daughter and her husband lived at the property.
“Since the mother died, they’ve been fighting,” he said. “Always cops coming here.”
Suhnandan allegedly had his brother-in-law kicked out, but Roberts still lived in a basement apartment there.
On Sunday, the feud turned bloody, with police saying Suhnandan used a machete to attack his nephew during the most recent fight.
“The son is the one in the basement who got stabbed,” Basdeo said. “He argues a little, but it’s really been [his] father and the uncle most of the time.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Julee Cruise, a singer best known for her work on David Lynch’s iconic series “Twin Peaks,” has died at 65.
Cruise’s husband Edward Grinnan confirmed the icon’s death in a touching Facebook tribute.
“She left this realm on her own terms,” the vocalist’s bereaved soul mate wrote. “No regrets. She is at peace … I played her [B-52’s song] ‘Roam’ during her transition. Now she will roam forever. Rest in peace, my love.”
Cruise’s cause of death was not given, the Guardian reported. However, in 2018, the singer announced on Facebook that she was battling systemic lupus, which left her in chronic pain.
“I can hardly walk,” she wrote in the heartbreaking post. “And now it’s difficult to stand. My spine is crumbling and pinching on nerves.”
“I don’t take opiates, but the pain is so bad I cry and snap at people,” the singer added. “I’ve had a glorious time… but I must leave here. Someone wise told me I must go, and so being a recluse, it’s law and boredom for me. Thanks so much for everything… That’s my final curtsy.”
Born Dec. 1, 1956, in Creston, Iowa, the songwriter is perhaps best known for her musical collaborations with director David Lynch. The auteur notably used the instrumental version of her 1989 hit “Falling,” written by Angelo Badalamenti, as the theme song to his iconic TV series “Twin Peaks.”
Along with her musical contributions, Cruise also played the part of a singer in both the ABC mystery show and its 1992 movie spin-off “Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me.” She would reprise the part in the 2017 Showtime revival “Twin Peaks: The Return.”
Cruise also collaborated with Lynch on the 1986 crime drama “Blue Velvet,” which features her Badalamenti collaboration “Mysteries of Love.”
The singer-actress had previously described her working relationship with Lynch in 2018, the Guardian reported. “It’s like I’m his little sister: You don’t like your older brother telling you what to do,” she said. “David’s foppish. He can have these tantrums sometimes.”
She continued, “And have you ever seen his temper? Anybody can look funny when they get mad. But I love him.”
Aside from her collaborations with the “Twin Peaks” visionary, Cruise is also known in the music sphere for touring as a member of the B-52s throughout the 1990s. She also released several albums, including “The Voice of Love” in 1993 — which featured three songs from “Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me” — as well as “The Art of Being a Girl” in 2002 and “My Secret Life” in 2011. And, in yet another epic director-songstress collaboration, Cruise covered Elvis Presley’s “Summer Kisses, Winter Tears” for the soundtrack to Wim Wenders’ “Until the End of the World.”
Describing her musical style in 1990, Cruise said: “Technically this music is so delicate that it’s a challenge just to sing it. But at the same time, it allows me to be more dramatic, more psychotic than if I were just singing ‘Oh, baby, baby’ into the microphone.”
“Certain things you can’t overact while you’re singing,” she added. “This, I can overact and get away with it. I can stylize it.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Riding high after a resounding victory in his defamation trial, Johnny Depp seems to be plotting his return, joining TikTok on Monday as he continues to tour with musician Jeff Beck.
Eagle-eyed fans noticed within minutes on Monday afternoon that Depp, 58, joined the social media app with a verified profile. His bio reads “occasional thespian” and he had around a quarter-million followers as of Monday evening.
A source close to Depp told The Post that the movie star certainly wants to return to the silver screen, and hopes his acting career will be revived in the future.
For the time being, the source said Depp is focusing on himself and his music, and reveling in the weight off his shoulders brought by the trial win against ex-wife Amber Heard.
Depp has been staying in the United Kingdom to join musician friend and collaborator Beck on his tour. He has appeared onstage at several of the guitarist’s shows, including one at London’s Royal Albert Hall late last month.
His name also seems to be a money-maker again. Dior, which stood by the star prior to the verdict, has reportedly seen a jump in sales for “Sauvage,” the cologne Depp promotes.
Fans have been buying the cologne, which retails at $155 for a 6.8-ounce bottle, to show their support for the actor, the Wall Street Journal reported last week.
Dior doesn’t release its sales numbers, but the Journal reported that Depp’s scent is the top-selling men’s cologne on the online shops of Sephora and Ulta. WWD reported it is the second-most popular fragrance in the world.
“He knows that Dior, in particular, has been steadfast and unwavering in its support and he will always be grateful to them and to all those who have supported him through the sales on his behalf,” Depp’s spokesperson told the Journal. On TikTok, videos with the hashtag #diorsauvage have been viewed nearly 350 million times.
It’s no surprise that the teenage heartthrob has found a friendly audience on TikTok, which was flooded with pro-Depp content throughout his six-week trial against Heard in Fairfax, Virginia.
The hashtag #JohnnyDepp has 33.5 billion views on the platform, more than four times the total global population. #JusticeforJohnnyDepp has a stunning 20.2 billion views. A derisive hashtag used to mock Heard, #AmberTurd, has 4.3 billion views, while #JusticeforAmberHeard has just 85.9 million views.
Depp’s arrival to the platform, however, comes as some TikTok users appear to be turning on the actor and coming around to Heard’s side.
Still, a former Disney executive recently suggested to People magazine that Depp could make a comeback as Jack Sparrow with a sixth “Pirates of the Caribbean” movie if he wanted to.
In his statement after the jury returned its verdict last week, Depp hinted at possibly mounting a return to the main stage.
“The best is yet to come and a new chapter has finally begun,” he said.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A laugh comes for free, but living in the Los Angeles home of the late funnyman Bob Saget will cost you more.
Saget’s Crestwood Hills residence, where he lived for nearly 20 years, has listed for $7.76 million.
Saget, who unexpectedly passed away on January 9 at age 65, purchased the six-bedroom, 6.5-bathroom estate in 2003 for $2.9 million, according to the Wall Street Journal. The “Full House” dad resided in the home until his death.
One particular feature of the home includes Elan smart home technology — super-premium home automation that controls nearly every use.
“Bob was very into tech. Over the years he put in smart house controls and automation throughout the home,” his nephew, Adam Saget, and the real estate agent representing the listing with Compass, told The Post in a statement.
Spanning roughly 6,600 square feet, the gated architectural home was designed by the renowned Douglas Busch Design.
The beloved standup comic and sitcom star lived in the home with his widow Kelly Rizzo, whom Saget married in 2018. She was stepmother to his three adult daughters — Lara, Aubrey and Jennie — with ex-wife Sherri Kramer.
“It’s like, he’s still my husband,” Rizzo, 42, recently revealed. “It’s not like, ‘Oh, he’s my former husband.’ It’s like … the relationship is different now. It’s just — it is what it is.”
She recently moved into a new property — but she’s still in touch with his offspring.
“His girls came to stay with me for you know, the first time since I moved into the new house just this last week, and they walked in and I was like, ‘So it’s kind of like a museum to your dad, so don’t freak out but yes, he’s everywhere,’” Rizzo told People earlier this month. “And then they’ll catch me like talking to a picture every once in a while, and they’re like ‘Stepmommy Kelly, are you OK?’”
Moving on: Amenities in their once-shared home include a grand motor court, a three car garage, a pool, a spa and a barbecue entertainment area.
The primary suite features high vaulted ceilings, an abundance of natural light, a fireplace, a private patio, a spa-like bathroom with a tub, a steam shower and a large walk-in closet, per the listing.
Three guest rooms and a large terrace complete the upper level.
The main level features a warm foyer with stone and hardwood flooring throughout. The living room is a dramatic sky-lit two-story space with an adjacent dining room.
There is also a media and family room with an additional guest room. The eat-in kitchen has updated stainless-steel appliances, a fireplace, a breakfast counter and a walk-in pantry.
There’s even a separate guest house with a full bath, which can be transformed into an office or gym.
Most of all, adds Compass’ Adam Saget, the property was a space for family.
“Personally, I’m going to miss our family gatherings and holiday celebrations we shared together in the home,” he added. “So many great stories, lots of laughs and memories to cherish for years to come.”
The listing comes right ahead of Netflix’s “A Tribute To Bob Saget” — a celebration of Saget’s life in comedy with his friends and family — set to be released on June 10.
Saget was found unresponsive in his hotel room at the Ritz-Carlton Orlando, in Florida, that January afternoon. Family members were worried when they had be unable to reach him and he had missed his checkout time.
Emergency responders pronounced Saget dead at the scene.
An autopsy later revealed he suffered blunt head trauma from an accidental blow to the back of his head, likely from a fall, and subsequently died from the injuries in his sleep.
Saget was best known for playing Danny Tanner on “Full House” from 1987 to 1995, and for hosting “America’s Funniest Home Videos” from 1989 to 1997.
In the last years of his life, he hosted the podcast “Bob Saget’s Here For You.”
At the time of his death, Saget was on his “I Don’t Do Negative Comedy Tour.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Terrifying photos show the bone-chilling view you’ll be met with if you’re ever unfortunate enough to be eaten by a shark.
Photographer Euan Rannachan took the photos about 130 miles off the coast of Baja California and says he wasn’t fazed by the sea creatures.
“Never once have I felt scared in the cage,” he said.
“Once you are in the water with these animals, it’s easy to show just how peaceful it is, and not scary at all.”
Rannachan snaps the photos from a shark cage, allowing him to get up close and personal with the animals.
The 1975 film “Jaws” made great white sharks the fear of most people who dared to venture out into the water and Rannachan’s photos make those fears a reality.
One haunting pic shows a shark’s open mouth, sharp teeth in full view, as it prepares to devour a much smaller fish.
The predators can grow as long as 20 feet and weigh up to 6,600 pounds.
For Rannachan, they are the perfect models for his unconventional photos.
“A large male white shark had been interested in the bait and made a couple of half-heart attempts to catch it,” he said of his method to lure the sharks in for a pic.
“When those failed, it went full apex predator on the line right in front of me.”
Rannachan says the creatures are curious and aren’t as aggressive toward humans as movies make them appear to be.
Sharks only bite about five to 10 humans per year and usually take a “sample bite” out of curiosity before swimming away.
The sharks use their noses to detect prey in the water, feeling electrical signals to “hear” the heartbeat of others around them.
Their sense of smell is so strong, they can sniff out a colony of seals from two miles away.
“White sharks have little jelly-filled sacks, predominantly in their noses, called Ampullae de Lorenzini,” said Rannachan.
“They use these little holes filled with jelly to feel electrical impulses in the water, such as an animal in distress.
“They also can use these sensors to feel your heartbeat in the cage,” he said.
This story originally appeared on The Sun and has been reproduced here with permission.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
As the first night of major performances began at Glastonbury Festival, some of the biggest female acts in music addressed the Supreme Court’s overturning of Roe v. Wade, which eliminated the federal right to abortions in the U.S.
Popstar Billie Eilish, the youngest headliner in Glastonbury history, introduced her song “Your Power” as she took the stage with her brother and fellow artist Finneas.
“Today is a really dark day for women in the U.S,” Eilish told the audience at Worthy Farm. “I’m just gonna say that because I can’t bear to think about it any longer in this moment. This song is dedicated to that I guess…”
The “Ocean Eyes” singer debuted her song ‘’TV’’ earlier this month which criticizes the internet’s obsession with celebrity drama and ignorance of reproductive rights.
“The internet’s gone wild watching movie stars on trial / While they’re overturning Roe v. Wade,” read a lyric in the song referencing the defamation trial between Johnny Depp and Amber Heard.
Indie-rock artist Phoebe Bridgers, who took the stage earlier, was also among the artists at Glastonbury condemning the Supreme Court’s decision. The “Motion Sickness” singer wore an all-black suit on stage as she spoke out about the court’s ruling.
“In all honesty, [the festival] is like super surreal and fun. But I’m having like the shittiest day ever,” Bridgers admitted to the packed crowd.
“Are there any Americans here? Who wants to say f— the Supreme Court on three?”
The audience roared back as the Grammy-nominated artist led the chant: “One, two three… F– the Supreme Court! F– that shit. F– America… F– you.”
“All these old, irrelevant motherf—kers trying to tell us what to do with our bodies,” Bridgers continued as she strummed her guitar.
Bridgers previously spoke out about abortion rights leading up to Friday’s events. She revealed to fans on Twitter that she had an abortion last October and “everyone deserves that access” following the leak of the Supreme Court’s drafts.
I had an abortion in October of last year while I was on tour. I went to planned parenthood where they gave me the abortion pill. It was easy. Everyone deserves that kind of access. Here’s a big list of places you can donate to right now. https://t.co/jT0sk6CeNX
Female artists weren’t the only ones at Glastonbury who were outspoken on the ruling.
Joe Talbot, lead singer of British rock band Idles, spoke out as he introduced his song ‘Mother.’
“They just reversed the laws back to the middle ages in America where they’re just deciding whether it should be illegal to have an abortion or not.”
As the Glastonbury Festival continues throughout the weekend, with performances from Paul McCartney, Lorde, and Kendrick Lamar to come, more comments about the landmark ruling can be expected.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Hollywood was founded by, and for generations run by, pure showmen who were fanatically devoted to giving the audience what it wanted. Today Hollywood’s message is, “Let us entertain you! But first, a brief lecture on what’s wrong with you, the audience …”
Artists and entertainment corporations have always been desperate to be taken seriously, hence their need to manufacture respectability via awards given out by high-falutin’, august-sounding institutions such as the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. (Sciences? You guys are creating pretty pictures, not curing cancer.)
The Oscars originally went to box office giants — glossy romantic dramas and swaggering historical epics. Then the movie industry divided into “awards pictures” and “audience pictures.” In the past few years, even the audience pictures have started to fill up with reminders about racism, feminism, immigration, etc. These are important matters, but people go to the movies primarily for escape.
One reason “Top Gun: Maverick” is such a huge success — the biggest movie of Tom Cruise’s career and probably the biggest movie of this year — is that it simply ignores all quarrelsome real-world issues. “TG:M” seeks merely to entertain, not to persuade you that the people who made it are virtuous.
Meanwhile, Disney’s much-touted “Lightyear” came out and did surprisingly poorly after a lot of week-of-release talk about the lesbian relationship in the film. The same-sex marriage is a small part of the story and no one should be bothered by the existence of gay people, even in a kids’ movie, but the shocking underperformance must have Disney wondering whether people stayed away because they thought (even if mistakenly) that “Lightyear” was a message movie.
Disney’s decision to spend a couple of minutes of screen time reminding us that it’s a gay-friendly company may well have cost it millions in ticket sales for what was supposed to be its annual Pixar mega-blockbuster. Disney has to consider the idea that there might be many Pixar fans who have no problem with gay marriage who nevertheless would prefer the matter be left out of kids’ movies. Disney also chose a side in the Florida dispute about teaching sexual orientation to little kids, and it may have damaged one of the world’s most valuable brands.
James Patterson — the quintessence of a popular writer who doesn’t care about sending a message — was swamped with criticism when he suggested white male writers in Hollywood are victims of “just another form of racism.” That sounds dumb on the surface, but every producer in Hollywood is loudly proclaiming his commitment to inclusivity, which is another way of saying he is desperate to hire people other than non-handicapped straight white males. TV networks are proudly announcing new requirements that (at, for instance, CBS) at least 50% of staff writers be members of minority groups. Once hired, such staffers often push for stories about pressing social problems.
Result? A British TV survey found that 62% of viewers think political correctness has gone too far.
“I’m in a lot of meetings now, where people tell me, ‘This will never get on because it’s not woke enough,’” observes Egyptian-born British comedy writer-producer Ash Atalla. Polling shows TV producers are much more interested in foregrounding issues such as transgender rights than the British public (which is notably more PC than we Americans are). In the US, a poll focusing on the entertainment industry found that 65% agree that corporate wokeness has gone too far.
It’s amusing that members of the entertainment industry often refer to it as “the industry,” as though they have forgotten the most important word. With the collapse in Netflix’s stock price, Disney’s box office headache and the revival of “Top Gun,” Hollywood execs must be wondering whether their progressive politics have amounted to a kind of self-imposed woke tax.
Kyle Smith is critic-at-large for National Review.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Authorities in Arizona are looking for a woman who was apparently upset that the fries she ordered at a Wendy’s restaurant were cold and the chicken nuggets were not spicy before allegedly assaulting an employee.
The Casa Grande Police Department said the unhappy customer took things too far when she notified the fast-food restaurant of the botched order. A surveillance photo released by authorities shows the woman accused of assaulting a worker at a drive-thru window.
“She said that she got spicy nuggets instead of normal ones, saying they were burnt” Varina Hunt, a witness to the alleged attack, told Fox Phoenix as she was in the drive-thru line trying to place her order.
The woman was apparently yelling at the employees to fix the order.
“The lady was being harassed by another woman. She was saying, ‘give me my f’ing food.’ She was calling her names and said, ‘I’m gonna throw it at you, and I’m gonna hit you,’ ” she said. “And I heard something being thrown.”
The suspect allegedly threw the bag with fries and nuggets at the employee as well as a drink.
“The lady was definitely overreacting,” Hunt said. “There’s definitely better ways to handle it. It’s called temperament control – like my 3-year-old knows this.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Bargin books just don’t pay Greenwich Village rents.
Lefty neighborhood institution, Unoppressive Non-Imperialist Bargain Books, will close its doors on its 34 Carmine St. storefront this month following a rent hike. The shop is set to be cleared out by the end of June, Patch first reported.
In its three decades in the neighborhood, the tome retailer has become a local landmark for its weathered awning and surprising selection of specialty titles. In 2016, it served as one of then-presidential candidate Bernie Sanders’ four Manhattan headquarters. In 2011, it housed the Occupy Wall Street library.
Although the shop’s longtime proprietor Jim Drougas has admitted defeat, he remains buoyed by the possibility of reopening elsewhere.
“I’ve been having fun all of these years, I’m not despondent,” Drougas told Patch. “I’m actually kind of hopeful something is going to turn up, we’ve had a big impact and a lot of people have been very supportive.”
“Even if we have to close, for now, I’m pretty determined to keep it going somewhere, somehow,” he added.
Staying in Greenwich Village, or at least Lower Manhattan, however, remains the goal.
“We were in this situation and made it out only through our amazing community support! We can do this NYC — don’t give up,” the activist bookshop Bluestockings commented encouragingly on an emotional post about the closure by the Vanishing New York Instagram account.
“The last bastion can’t go down!” wrote another.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A New Jersey teen is so bright — they named her valedictorian, twice.
Daniela Velazquez, 18, received the academic honor last month from both her high school,  Passaic Preparatory Academy, and from Passaic County Community College, whose early college program she entered in 2020 thanks to her stellar grades.
“It’s a great program for students within my high school, especially because my city is a low-income area, so the college credits that we receive help a lot with the financial problems that we might stumble on in the future,” the Passaic native told The Post.
In addition to her workload from high school, where she had a 4.576 GPA, she took college-level courses virtually for two years, earning a 3.99 average and her associate’s degree.
On a typical school day, she would take six high school classes in the morning, and devote afternoons to the completion of two or three college courses, such as ethics, sociology and psychology, per semester.
A first-generation Mexican American, Velazquez recalled her parents’ educational roots.
“My parents never had the opportunity to graduate high school, none the less college,” she said. “My mother didn’t get to graduate middle school. Her last grade was fourth grade because she was very poor in her country, so she had to stay home and take care of her younger siblings. My mom put on my gown, cap, and cords and told me that I was graduating high school for her. It is definitely a moment that I replay in my head often.”
She also had to explain to them what the word valedictorian meant.
“They reminded me that they would have been proud even if I didn’t have the title,” she said.
Throughout her time at Passaic Prep, the self-proclaimed “theater geek” still had time to star in musicals, serve on student government and launch its first chess club.
She also won an award for her volunteer work, which includes being a part of the mayor’s youth council in New Jersey, where she helps low-income residents by handing out backpacks to children and feeding the homeless.
All that hard work left little time for romance, Velazquez said.
“No dating, that’s kind of a rule in my house. People do it secretly … but I didn’t have time.”
She did have one vice during intense cramming sessions: McDonald’s. “Every time I would feel stressed, I would tell my sister, ‘Hey, can we go get chicken nuggets?’”
In the fall, she will attend Columbia University on partial scholarship, where she will double major in psychology and film studies. She was admitted to the Ivy League school through QuestBridge, a nonprofit that connects motivated low-income students to opportunities in higher education.
In her high school yearbook, Velazquez was voted “Most Likely to Become President,” which she said is ironic because she has no interest in the job.
“I would be so scared running the country, my hair would turn grey so fast and I like my brown hair,” she said, laughing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
In 1971, young-adult classic “Go Ask Alice” shocked readers with its frank depiction of an American girl’s descent into rampant drug addiction.
Billed as the “real diary” of an anonymous, white suburban teen, the book starts with the 15-year-old dabbling in psychedelics before plunging into heroin, homelessness, prostitution and eventual overdose.
“Another day, another blow job,” reads one entry.
“Today I sold ten stamps of LSD to a little kid at the grade school who was not even nine years old,” reads another.
One of the most censored books in school libraries, “Go Ask Alice” became a rite of passage for young American readers, fueling the War on Drugs and spawning a gritty new YA literary genre. It received top honors, including the American Library Association’s Best Books for Young Adults. Several critics favorably compared the memoir to Anne Frank’s “Diary of a Young Girl.”
More than 5 million copies later, the book continues to shock a new generation on #BookTok.
But to some, the trajectory of Alice’s downfall — from one acid-laced soda to shooting speed before trying marijuana — seems like uninformed anti-drug propaganda.
Retired radio personality Rick Emerson is one such reader. He was floored by the book in high school, but it failed to pass the smell test as an adult. In 2015, he looked into the background of the book’s mysterious copyright holder, a UCLA-trained therapist named Beatrice Sparks. The result of his seven-year investigation is “Unmask Alice” (BenBella Books), out now —the first full unraveling of the “Go Ask Alice” myth. It’s a story of ambition, deceit and a gullible public, hungry for morality tales.
Born in 1917 in Idaho and raised in Utah, Sparks left high school her sophomore year to work as a waitress after her father scandalized her Mormon community by abandoning his family. Sparks landed on her feet,  marrying an oilman, a fellow Mormon who parlayed his earnings into real estate investments, and had three children. The Sparks family bounced from Texas to California before returning to Utah, where Sparks unsuccessfully tried to break into publishing.
Then on Oct. 4, 1969, everything changed. That morning, 20-year old Diane Linkletter jumped to her death from the window of her Los Angeles apartment after allegedly trying acid. Her grieving father, TV and radio host Art Linkletter, told the press, “She was murdered by the people who manufacture and sell LSD.”
The newspapers ran wild with Linkletter’s take: “LSD KILLED DIANE.” Later, when news of her clean toxicology report made the rounds, Linkletter blamed the jump on an “acid flashback.” President Richard Nixon — in the midst of launching his War on Drugs — invited Linkletter to the White House. Nixon knew that a story like this could galvanize the anti-drug movement more than any fact or figure could, explains Emerson.
It was the perfect moment for a book like “Go Ask Alice.”
Sparks already had Linkletter’s ear thanks to her brief ghostwriting gig with his short-lived record company venture, the Family Achievement Institute. When Sparks came to Linkletter with the story of a young woman who had gotten hooked on LSD and died, leaving behind a diary, Linkletter set up a meeting with publisher Prentice Hall.
The publisher saw the book’s potential. Along with Nixon’s new drug war, American teens were running away and using drugs in record numbers. Unverified stories of acid-spiked drinks routinely hit the media.
There were various red flags in Sparks’ story. She said there was one diary; other times there were two. She said there were audio tapes but refused to share them. Her credentials — she claimed she was a youth counselor, a psychotherapist and a child psychologist — seemed to change with each retelling of the story.
But the tale was too good to pass up. When a Prentice Hall editor heard the 1967 Jefferson Airplane song “White Rabbit,” she knew she had the title: “Go ask Alice, I think she’ll know.”
The publisher nixed any connection with Sparks. The fact that the author was anonymous only heightened the buzz. “Alice” could be anyone, even your daughter.
The media ran with it — everyone from The New York Times to the Library Journal presented the book as a verified teenager’s diary. A million copies sold nearly overnight. Avon Books published the paperback and two years later, in 1973, ABC aired a TV adaptation of the book. That, too, was a supersonic hit, with nearly a third of all US households viewing it.
But Sparks never got any credit.
“After thirty years of trying, Beatrice Sparks had changed the world. And nobody knew it,” Emerson writes. “Beatrice had been erased from her breakthrough.”
Desperate for acknowledgement, Sparks published a second book, “Voices,” with The New York Times publishing imprint Times Books, about her perspective as a professional counselor. The book tanked.
Then Sparks got a call that would change her life.
Marcella Barrett was still mourning the loss of her son, Alden, who shot himself in 1971. His notebook with 67 entries had remained in storage since his suicide.
Alden was a moody child — prone to depression and lovesick over a new girl whose parents didn’t approve of the match. His diary is punctuated with questions over his Mormon faith, the desire to grow his hair long, and diatribes against the Vietnam War.
“I am so lonely. I am so tired and so afraid. I am in need,” he wrote.
When Marcella saw an article about Sparks, who lived a few miles away and was also a Mormon, she decided to give the diary to her without any strings attached or money exchanged.
‘After 30 years of trying, Beatrice Sparks had changed the world. And nobody knew it.’
In 1978, the book came out without Marcella’s knowledge. “Jay’s Journal,” also published by Times Books, featured a skull and a pentagram in shadow on its cover with a subhead that read: “The haunting diary of a 16-year old in the world of witchcraft.” This time Sparks got credit: “Edited by BEATRICE SPARKS, who brought you ‘Go Ask Alice.’”
Alden’s writing was reprinted in some parts and entirely fabricated in others. Some names were barely changed.
Alongside real lovelorn passages about his girlfriend, Sparks had added scenes of orgies, black magic and sacrificial kitten killings: “I hit her and kicked her and mauled her, sex was not enough, I wanted to hurt her!” reads one passage.
Sparks’ second teen “memoir” was a hit.
“This terrifying journal is not fiction,” began a review in the Chattanooga Times. “It’s a book that parents should read.”
Allegations of teenage occultism swept the nation. “Prior to Jay’s Journal ‘teen occult suicide’ was all but unheard of,” writes Emerson. “A decade later it was everywhere.”
Neighbors easily figured out that Alden was “Jay” and his grave became a destination for occult enthusiasts. Marcella put the headstone in storage — like she once did his diary — for a decade before it was safe to return it.
Sparks had clearly made up significant portions of “Jay’s Journal” — but how to prove it? Emerson found his smoking gun at the Sparks archives at Brigham Young University. Drafts of Alden Barrett’s journal were photocopied, altered by hand, and copied again with new sentences added in. Some “original” Alden entries included the pseudonyms used in “Jay’s Journal.”
“It was a clumsy, telling mistake,” Emerson writes. “Sparks couldn’t be bothered to forge correctly, much less dispose of the evidence afterwards.”
The next question was obvious: If Sparks did this with “Jay,” did she do the same with “Alice”?
Emerson looked into “Go Ask Alice’s” origins and found that Sparks did meet a troubled young woman in 1970, whom he calls “Brenda” to protect her privacy.
Brenda was uncomfortable in her own skin, hating her body and dismayed over having to wear dresses at Mormon camp. She was hospitalized at the Utah State Hospital for psychiatric treatment where Sparks worked as a volunteer, mending clothes and helping young people with their homework.
Brenda shared wild stories with Sparks about sex and drugs, while also introducing her to an invisible boyfriend named Steve. She was an unreliable narrator, to say the least.
In 2015, Emerson tracked Brenda down and found that she had overcome her drug addiction, attended college, and now works with at-risk communities. She has never read “Go Ask Alice.” Most tellingly, Emerson found no evidence that a diary of her teenager years ever existed.
“My sense is that it was a patchwork,” Emerson tells The Post. Some of “Go Ask Alice” came from direct talks with Brenda, some from letters Brenda wrote to a friend (who supplied these letters to Emerson), and the rest from news stories and Sparks’ own imagination. “It’s indisputable that large sections of ‘Go Ask Alice’ are just embellished and/or false.”
Sparks didn’t stop with “Alice” and “Jay.” She went on to “find” six other journals from anonymous teens.
“It Happened to Nancy,” published in 1994 during the height of the AIDS crisis, follows a teenager who is raped by a man with the virus and comes to term with her own diagnosis before her death. There’s 1996’s “Almost Lost” about Sammy, a homeless 15-year-old, and her final book, 2005’s “Finding Katie” about a traumatized, pathologically lying foster child adopted by a UCLA-trained therapist who sounds a lot like Sparks. All of these books were published by Avon, and “while none approached the sales of ‘Go Ask Alice’ (or even ‘Jay’s Journal’), each sold well enough to justify another book from Sparks,” Emerson says.
While Sparks continued to present herself as a UCLA-trained child therapist, Emerson found no evidence that she ever obtained a PhD. UCLA has no record of her attendance. He was only able to confirm a five-month enrollment at BYU in 1989.
In 2012, Sparks died at 95. Nine years later, Simon and Schuster, who acquired the rights in 1998, published the 50th anniversary of “Go Ask Alice.” The book is still billed as “a real diary” and the author is still listed as anonymous.
And Sparks will likely live on forever as a successful author — if not an infamous one.
As the final line of her book “Finding Katie” declares: “I am somebody! For eternity!”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Tiger Woods’ recovery from a gruesome leg injury — one that prompted doctors to consider amputation — this year seems more impressive considering a recently released photo of the legendary golfer.
Woods, 46, — who played in the Masters and PGA Championship, but skipped the U.S. Open — attended a junior golf event over the weekend to watch his son, Charlie.
Look at Tiger Woods’ right leg in this recent photo – incredible that he can play at all, much less competitively. @willbardwell @AlanShipnuck @firepitstories pic.twitter.com/oOa7fKZfOY
While at the event, he posed for pictures with several younger golfers; he did so without the black leg sleeve that usually covers his right leg.
The photo clearly shows the extensive scarring on Woods’ leg, blemishes from the single-car wreck that knocked him unconscious in February 2021.
Fans and golfers alike expressed their amazement at Wood’s rehabilitation efforts amid the revealing photo.
“Now many people will give him the props he deserves for walking around Augusta and playing as well as he did this year,” PGA Tour pro Dylan Fritelli said, referencing Woods’ ability to play at this year’s Masters.
Woods, a 15-time major winner, decided to miss this past weekend’s U.S. Open, instead opting to rest in anticipation of playing in the 150th Open, slated for July 14-17 at St. Andrew’s, a legendary — and flatter — golf course.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
She’s 37, flirty and thriving.
Khloé Kardashian got a little “turned on” Thursday during a “Hot Ones” interview with host Sean Evans. The First We Feast YouTube series has celebrity guests answer questions while eating increasingly hot chicken wings.
Early on in the interview, which was filmed on June 9, according to a source close to the show, Evans, 36, congratulated the Hulu reality star on her $17 million custom-built Los Angeles home, and complimented “what I have to say is without hyperbole is the most organized and impressive kitchen pantry I’ve ever seen in my life.”
“I don’t know if you’re flirting with me, but that’s the best flirting you could ever give me: complimenting my pantry,” the Good American co-founder said.
“Whatever you want, you’re gonna get after this,” she said to some off-camera crew laughs.
Kardashian explained that she wanted to limit the amount of plastic in her pantry, leading her to invest in Lazy Susans. She even stained the wood with different colors to complete her monochromatic vibe, she said.
“But I love a good organized anything. It’s a big turn-on for me, as you can see. I don’t know if this is like lingering and getting hotter. I don’t know if it’s you or the wings,” Kardashian quipped, clutching a glass of water with her talon-like pink-tipped fake nails.
“Oof, all right,” Evans replied, using his hands to fan his bald head.
“Or all this pantry talk. I think it’s the pantry talk,” Kardashian pondered. “Keep talking organization and I’m good to go.”
“We might have to de-fog this lens here before we move on to wing No. 3,” Evans playfully scrubbed the camera.
Evans had “no comment” on the flirty exchange when contacted by The Post on Thursday.
The playful comments come as Kardashian is back on the dating market after her longtime boyfriend and baby daddy, NBA player Tristian Thompson, fathered a child with another woman.
She recently shut down a rumor on gossip account @deuxmoi that she was seeing another basketball star, but is now rumored to be dating a private equity investor she met through her sister Kim.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Mishael Morgan accepts the Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actress in a Drama Series award, becoming the first Black actress to do so, onstage during the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards at Pasadena Convention Center on June 24, 2022.
Kelly Thiebaud, winner of the Outstanding Performance by a Supporting Actress in a Drama Series award, poses in the press room during the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards at Pasadena Convention Center on June 24, 2022.
Kevin Frazier and Nischelle Turner with crew from "Entertainment Tonight" accept the Outstanding Entertainment News Series award onstage during the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards at Pasadena Convention Center on June 24, 2022.
Drew Barrymore attends the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards at Pasadena Convention Center on June 24, 2022 in Pasadena, California.
Nicholas Alexander Chavez, winner of the Outstanding Younger Performer in a Drama Series award, gets emotional during the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards at Pasadena Convention Center on June 24, 2022 in Pasadena, California.
Michael Bolton performs during an In Memoriam tribute at the 49th annual Daytime Emmy Awards on Friday, June 24, 2022.
Rachel Lindsay attends the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards at Pasadena Convention Center on June 24, 2022 in Pasadena, California.
Kevin Frazier and Nischelle Turner (C) accept the Outstanding Entertainment News Series award from Tamron Hall, (L) onstage during the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards at Pasadena Convention Center on June 24, 2022 in Pasadena, California.
John McCook, winner of the Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actor in a Drama Series award, and Mishael Morgan, winner of the Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actress in a Drama Series award, pose in the press room during the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards.
Crew from The Kelly Clarkson Show accept the award for Outstanding Entertainment Talk Show onstage during the 49th Daytime Emmy Awards at Pasadena Convention Center on June 24, 2022 in Pasadena, California.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Czech supermodel Karolina Kurkova just sold her Tribeca loft for $4.5 million, The Post has learned.
Located at 92 Laight St., in the River Lofts condo building, the two-bedroom, 2.5-bathroom unit spans over 2,000 square feet.
This home features direct Hudson River views from the west-facing living room, and wide open-city views from east-facing bedrooms.
Kurkova, who has graced the covers of Vogue — and has worked with brands including Louis Vuitton, Valentino, Chanel, Yves Saint Laurent and Victoria’s Secret — had lived in the home since 2005, and purchased it for $2.31 million.
The move to sell her place after 17 years comes as her family outgrew the space, Kurkova, 38, told The Post.
“My Laight street apartment is so special. It has everything you could want in a downtown New York home — incredible views, close proximity to the water and park, a true neighborhood feel but the best part for me was the feeling of happiness and ease when I would come home from work each day,” Kurkova said.
“It is a modern-day oasis in the bustling city,” she said. “I have had some of the best memories there.”
Kurkova had designed the space with architect and former model Robin Osler.
The living/dining room features a hidden television. The white kitchen comes with a  breakfast bar seating and top-line appliances.
Features also include an art gallery and a home office.
The primary suite comes with a balcony and an ensuite bathroom with a dual vanity, and a deep soaking tub with a glass-enclosed stall shower.
Ruthie & Ethan Assouline, with The Assouline Team at Compass, represented Kurkova in the transaction — and Amy Rivers from ELIKA Real Estate repped the undisclosed buyer.
The full-service building offers a 24-hour doorman, a fitness center, bicycle storage, a garden and a parking garage.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
“Today” co-host Savannah Guthrie interviewed Johnny Depp’s legal team on Wednesday’s show, moments after she revealed her husband is working as a consultant for them.
Guthrie spoke with Depp’s lawyers, Camille Vasquez and Benjamin Chew, about the buzzy, volatile defamation trial, which pitted Depp against his ex-wife Amber Heard.
“And a quick disclosure, my husband has done consulting work for the Depp legal team, but not in connection with this interview,” Guthrie told viewers of the broadcast of the NBC News morning show.
Guthrie’s husband is Michael Feldman, a public relations consultant and former political advisor, who once worked for former Vice President Al Gore during his 2000 presidential campaign. Feldman, who works at pr firm FGS Global, declined to comment.
A rep for “Today” did not return requests for comment.
Depp sued the “Aquaman” actress for libel in Virginia’s Fairfax County Circuit Court after she wrote an op-ed in the Washington Post in 2018 referring to herself as a “public figure representing domestic abuse.” The actor known for movies like “Edward Scissorhands” and “Donnie Brasco,” won the bombshell trial last week.
Last week on “Today,” Gurthrie also interviewed Elaine Bredehoft, one of the lawyers who represented Heard in the defamation case. She also anchored NBC News’ special coverage of the trial when the jury reached its verdict on June 1.
The jury awarded Depp $10 million in compensatory damages and another $5 million in punitive damages. Those damages were lowered to $350,000 in accordance with Virginia law.
The jury also found Depp guilty of defaming Heard for a statement made by his lawyer, who said Heard’s claim of sexual abuse was a “hoax.” The actress was awarded $2 million in compensatory damages.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The cab that barreled into a Manhattan building Monday and left six people injured had racked up 18 road violations since late 2019, including for speeding in school zones and running red lights, records show.
A woman who identified herself as the wife of Monday’s 60-year-old taxi driver, Khan Zahangir, told The Post on Tuesday that her husband is struggling after the afternoon mayhem on Broadway between 28th and 29th streets.
“He’s upset,” she said at the Queens home listed for the hack.
She added that her husband was not in the home and not at work, declining further comment.
It was not clear whether Zahangir was behind the wheel of the cab when it lodged the slew of violations in the past year and a half, incurring fines totaling $1,210. The violations are tied to the cab’s license plate, according to the tracking Web site How’s My Driving NYC.
But police identified Zahangir as the cabby behind the wheel Monday when the vehicle hit a cyclist in the bike lane and then rammed into a sidewalk cafe, critically injuring three people and hurting three others, including himself.
Two women became pinned underneath the yellow Toyota RAV 4 hybrid — and about 20 hero New Yorkers worked to lift the roughly 4,200-pound vehicle off them.
Photos showed mayhem on the Manhattan street, as injured pedestrians laid on sidewalks stained in their own blood and were tended to by witnesses and emergency responders.
One image displayed a victim laying on her stomach, and another showed a man on his back in between the bike lane and the street next to a toppled-over cycle.
Morning Report delivers the latest news, videos, photos and more.
Please provide a valid email address.
By clicking above you agree to the 						Terms of Use
In another photo, a victim covered in blood on the ground appeared to be holding her phone above her head.
Mayor Eric Adams said at an unrelated press conference Tuesday that a bike had illegally run a red light when the cab hit him, triggering the bloody chain of events.
Since November 2019, the same cab has twice sped through a red light, racking up $50 fees each time, records show. The yellow Toyota Rav4 Hybrid also had eight school-zone speed-camera violations in that time, the site reported. The other violations included tickets for double parking, an expired meter, bus-lane violations and breaking no-standing rules.
Zahangir suffered minor injuries in Monday’s crash, police said. The others injured are: a 32-year-old woman from San Luis Potosí, Mexico, who might lose her leg; another 32-year-old woman, also from Mexico, who is in stable condition; a 50-year-old man from the Upper West Side who is in stable condition; a 48-year-old woman from Columbus Ohio who might lose her leg and a 31-year-old woman also from Columbus who is in stable condition.
A person at the Upper West Side victim’s office Tuesday confirmed to The Post that the man was injured in the crash and said, “He’s out of the ICU.” The other victims and their families were not able to be reached.
Adams said Tuesday that he spoke to Columbus Mayor Andrew Ginther to assure him the residents were being taken care of.
Witness Kader Issoufou, 45, told The Post on Monday that the cab “hit the cyclist first, then he hit the people eating” at Black Seed Bagels.
“Everybody rushed over and lifted the taxi off two women trapped underneath.
Transit activists are now questioning why cars are even allowed on the stretch of Broadway where the cab crashed.
“A car-free Broadway would have prevented this heinous crash,” Transportation Alternatives Executive Director Danny Harris said in a statement. “This block was also an Open Street last year, when the threat of gruesome car crashes was eliminated entirely.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A woman has revealed how her boyfriend cruelly dumped her and said she wasn’t pretty enough – but has now had the last laugh.
TikTok user @kim.decker showed how she now works as a model and looks very different.
In a video that has racked up over 100,000 views, she showed her before and after photos.
She wrote: “Me: so you are breaking up with me because I’m not attractive enough?
“Him: yeah I know I can find someone prettier, sorry.
Kim then showed herself working on a modelling shoot aged 20 looking very glamorous.
She tagged the video “#glowup” and people have been quick to weigh in her transformation.
One person said: “youre so pretty its unbelivable.”
Another added: “you were pretty b4 and after.”
And a third wrote: “his loss”.
One joked: “Hahahahaha how strong is that first picture”, and Kim replied: “Mom always thought she had 2 sons until puberty.”
This story originally appeared on The Sun and was reproduced here with permission.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
It’s red, white and f – – k you.
Actress Jessica Chastain, 45, marked America’s birthday by flipping a double bird, presumably in response to the Supreme Court overturning its landmark Roe v. Wade decision last month.
“Happy ‘Independence’ Day from me and my reproductive rights,” tweeted the “Zero Dark Thirty” star along with the image of her flaunting the obscene gesture.
The tweet garnered a robust response from both sides of the aisle. Fellow actress Holly Robinson Peete agreed, saying “pretty much,” and former NBA player turned Twitter personality Rex Chapman replied with a broken-heart emoji.
Other celebrities joined in with similarly outraged July 4 posts, including Bette Midler, who tweeted: “4th of July has been canceled due to a shortage of Independence. Sincerely, Women.”
Television personality Padma Lakshmi made her own statement with baked goods, tweeting “#notahappy4th” alongside a picture of a cake decorated in red, white and blue and the phrase “separate church and state.”
“Baby you’re a firework” is a 10 but women in the US have fewer rights than an actual sparkler smh
Rosanna Arquette marked the holiday by tweeting, “The 4th of July is now obsolete because women are not independent or free. Get your Boots off our Wombs.”
The 4 th of July is now obsolete because women are not independent or free. Get your Boots off our Wombs.
It follows a week of angry social media posts from boldface men and women bemoaning the decision that leaves reproductive rights to each state.
“They will never end abortion. Only safe abortion. This is not about life. It’s about control. Those motherf – – kers,” Sophia Bush tweeted after news broke. Amy Schumer, Viola Davis and Eva Longoria were among those who also took to social media to express their anger.
And this weekend, actress Jessica Biel posted a picture of her and husband Justin Timberlake in Paris with the caption:
“You have croissants AND Women’s Rights? Damn, take me back.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Amazon introduced five of the new characters that will appear in its upcoming “The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power” series.
Thursday’s announcement was accompanied by posters of each character’s hands holding various objects, including apples, a scroll and a seemingly pregnant stomach.
In February, the studio shared stunning portraits of the show’s sexy stars with Vanity Fair, including an alluring portrait of Welsh beauty Morfydd Clark, 32.
Clark will portray Galadriel — a character previously played by Cate Blanchett in Peter Jackson’s “The Lord of The Rings” trilogy.
The prequel series is set to take place 1,000 years before the events of “The Lord of The Rings.”
However, there won’t be many other crossover characters, with Amazon creating new, racially diverse roles in order to modernize J.R.R. Tolkien’s Middle-earth.
The new characters are as follows:
Premiering on Sept. 2, the first season of the series reportedly cost Amazon a staggering $465 million, in addition to the $250 million paid to acquire the rights from the J.R.R. Tolkien estate in the first place. For comparison, “Game of Thrones” cost around $100 million per season.
But “The Rings of Power” showrunner Patrick McKay told Vanity Fair that Middle-earth won’t be a hotbed of nudity and orgies, saying the series will be far more family-friendly than the R-rated “Game of Thrones.”
“The goal was to make a show for everyone, for kids who are 11, 12 and 13, even though sometimes they might have to pull the blanket up over their eyes if it’s a little too scary,” he declared.
Other parts of the series will include some of Tolkien’s more universal themes.
“Until now, audiences have only seen on-screen the story of the One Ring — but before there was one, there were many … and we’re excited to share the epic story of them all,” showrunners J.D. Payne and Patrick McKay said in the press release.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Melissa McCarthy was “nervous” to do the late Chris Farley proud during the “Saturday Night Live” 40th anniversary special in 2015.
The “Bridesmaids” star, 51, had to don the comedian’s iconic plaid jacket and green tie from his recurring character of motivational speaker Matt Foley, who is divorced and “lives in a van down by the river” and first appeared in a sketch in 1993.
Farley passed away due to an overdose in December 1997.
McCarthy recently dished to Andy Cohen on his SiriusXM radio show about how she felt wearing Farley’s costume for a skit.
“It was really his jacket and they just kind of, like, clipped it back,” McCarthy said. “And they’re like, ‘We’re gonna take it in, but we don’t wanna damage it. And we’re gonna do all this.'”
She also noted that it was “really wild” for everyone to see her as the late funnyman in his clothes — though the experience “rattled” her.
“It was the one time right before I came through the door, I was so nervous,” said the “Identity Thief” actress said.
“The sweet stage manager [then] came up and he goes, ‘Honey, are you OK?’ My legs were bouncing to the point where I couldn’t — I was holding onto the door. And I was like, ‘I don’t know if I can get the handle open.’ Because I couldn’t. I was not in control of my body,” McCarthy said as she looked back. “And I’ve never done that before. I was just rattled.”
Melissa McCarthy pays tribute to Chris Farley. Amazing. #SNL40 pic.twitter.com/P0ClNL8kiU
Due to her nerves, she phoned her husband, Ben Falcone, before she went onstage to help ease her tensions.
“Chris isn’t gonna do it halfway; you can’t either,” the “Tammy” director, 48, advised his wife. “Come through that door like a train. Do it to make him proud.”
That apparently was enough for McCarthy.
“I literally was like, ‘I’m either gonna black out or I’m gonna come through like a train.’ So, thank God, I think I picked the train,” she recalled.
Farley’s Matt Foley character first appeared to tell a teenage brother and sister — played by David Spade and Christina Applegate — to avoid drugs or they’ll also be living in a “van down by the river.”
The memorable sketch dropped May 3, 1993, and was penned by Farley and his Second City improv friend and “Better Call Saul” actor Bob Odenkirk.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The goofy Hal Wilkerson somehow survived, and thrived, raising five boys in "Malcolm in the Middle." Bryan Cranston, who played Hal, also acted as another famous fake father in the show "Breaking Bad" by taking on the role of drug kingpin Walter White. Or should we say Heisenberg?
Dre Johnson, played by Anthony Anderson, doesn't always say the right thing when it comes to giving his kids advice, but that's what makes watching his performance on ABC's "Black-ish" so much fun.
The freshest father in Bel-Air, Phillip Banks, was played by the late actor James LaRue Avery, who died in 2013. His wealthy character acted as the stern yet caring uncle to protagonist Will Smith in the American sitcom "The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air."
Dads come in all shapes, sizes, and colors, including the yellow patriarch of "The Simpsons," Homer Simpson, played by Dan Castellaneta.
Can a dad pull our heartstrings and be a heartthrob at the same time? That's what Jack Pearson does in "This Is Us." Played by Milo Ventimiglia, he's the patriarch of the Pearson family who appears in flashbacks throughout much of the tear-jerking NBC series.
Threatening mobsters by day and attending his daughter's dance recitals by night? Tony Soprano, played by James Gandolfini, who passed in 2013, is the man that can do both on HBO's crime drama "The Sopranos."
Master of the dad joke, Phil Dunphy, played by Ty Burrell, is the ultimate good guy and couldn't be a more loveable father of three in ABC's "Modern Family."
Our favorite bald dad, Damon Wayans' Michael Kyle was almost too carefree sometimes with parenting in "My Wife and Kids."
San Francisco's favorite family man! Bob Saget, who passed in early 2022, played Danny Tanner, the widowed father of three girls, in the hugely popular '90s sitcom "Full House."
Walt Disney Television via Getty
A true "Family Guy," Peter Löwenbräu Griffin, Sr., voiced by Seth MacFarlane, is the one of the original animated TV dads.
FOX Image Collection via Getty I
Fred Andrews, played by the late Luke Perry who passed in 2019, was the parental guidance that the teenagers on the CW's "Riverdale" could've used more of.
Did someone say pancakes? Rufus Humprey, played by Matthew Settle, is everyone's favorite chef and Brooklyn dad on the CW's "Gossip Girl."
Despite always getting caught up in Steve Urkel's antics, Carl Winslow, played by Reginald VelJohnson, showed us that "Family Matters" in the smash hit '90s show.
Forever fighting the good fight, Sandy Cohen, played by Peter Gallagher, showed the importance of always sticking up for the underdog in the Fox teen drama "The O.C."

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A massive yacht caught fire on a New Hampshire river Saturday and sank after three people and two dogs jumped overboard.
The group were onboard the 72-foot vessel, named the Elusive, on their way to a marina on the Piscataqua River in New Castle when they noticed black smoke coming from below the deck at around 4 p.m., the New Hampshire Department of Safety said.
The three people as well as their two dogs jumped into the river as the Elusive went up in flames. All five were rescued by good Samaritans on nearby boats.
The three boaters — identified as Arthur Watson, 67, and Diane Watson, 57, of New Canaan, Connecticut and Jarrod Tubbs, 33, of Jupiter, Florida — were taken to a nearby hospital, treated and released.
The yacht — shown engulfed in flames and dark smoke in photos shared by the Coast Guard — eventually drifted into Maine waters where it sank about two hours after the initial 911 call.
Authorities are investigating the cause of the fire.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Dozens of illegal immigrants were sent back to Cuba after being stopped in four vessels off the Florida Keys, US Coast Guard officials said.
Boats carrying a total of 45 Cubans were spotted by civilians beginning late Wednesday about 12 miles south of Boot Key, according to the US Coast Guard 7th District on Sunday.
Three other “rustic” vessels carrying more migrants headed to the US were then intercepted by Coast Guard Cutter Charles Sexton’s crew on Friday, including one about 17 miles south of Long Key.
Photos released by the Coast Guard Sunday showed the migrants tightly huddled on small wooden boats, including one that appeared to be extremely tattered.
“The possibility of being stopped by Coast Guard crews while illegally migrating through the Caribbean Sea is high,” Lt. Cmdr. Mark Cobb of the Coast Guard’s Seventh District said in a statement. “No one should risk their lives on unsafe rustic vessels in unpredictable seas.”
The four interdictions off the Florida Keys came just days after the Coast Guard returned 52 people to Cuba on Tuesday upon being stopped south of Key West and other areas while in four boats and one inflatable vessel, the Miami Herald reported.
Coast Guard crews have interdicted 2,464 Cubans since October, marking the largest exodus of migrants since 2016 – when nearly 5,400 Cubans were stopped while trying to enter the US illegally, data shows.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
This weekend, two British institutions — Queen Elizabeth and Paddington Bear — charmed the world in a surprise skit that kicked off the Platinum Party at the Palace tribute concert outside Buckingham Palace.
But many viewers might not have known the real origins of the ursine celebrity who hails from “darkest Peru” — yet was actually inspired by Jewish refugee children.
Author Michael Bond, who passed away in 2017 at the age of 91, decided to write a book about an orphaned cub sent to England after spotting a toy bear alone on a shelf at Selfridge’s department store on Christmas Eve in 1956.
“It looked rather forlorn,” he told The Sunday Telegraph, so he purchased the bear as a stocking stuffer for his wife and began to write a story about it. Less than two weeks later, he had a completed novel which was sold for 75 pounds.
Bond revealed that while writing the first book, “A Bear Called Paddington,” he was partly inspired by vivid memories he had of seeing Jewish refugee children pass through the train station in his hometown of London, on their way to London from Nazi-dominated Europe ahead of World War II.
The Kindertransport was an organized rescue effort that saw nearly 10,000 predominantly Jewish children from Germany, Austria, Czechoslovakia and Poland settled in British foster homes and farms. Often they were the only members of their families who survived the Holocaust.
“They all had a label round their neck with their name and address on and a little case or package containing all their treasured possessions. So Paddington, in a sense, was a refugee, and I do think that there’s no sadder sight than refugees,” he told The Guardian in 2014.
In the first book, the Brown family finds a bear at Paddington railway station in London, sitting on a battered suitcase with a note attached to his coat that reads: “Please look after this bear. Thank you.” Paddington is an orphaned bear who was sent to the United Kingdom by his Aunt Lucy as she has gone to live in the Home for Retired Bears in Lima.
The book also features Paddington’s best friend, Mr. Gruber, an antique dealer and Hungarian refugee who understands why Paddington sometimes feels like an “outsider.”
Bond is said to have based the character on his literary agent, Harvey Unna, who passed away in 2003 at the age of 92.
Unna was born in Hamburg to a Jewish family and was about to become a judge when he was dismissed from the German Civil Service on racial grounds. He managed to get out of Germany and made his way to England, where eventually he started a literary agency and found success representing Bond.
Paddington has been featured in more than 20 books translated into 30 languages and that have sold more than 30 million copies.  Actor Ben Whishaw providing his voice for the popular “Paddington” movie and its sequel — while Volodymyr Zelensky, now the president of Ukraine, did the voiceover in that country.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
It seems as though Chris O’Donnell was somewhat tricked into passing on a leading role in “Men In Black.”
Director Barry Sonnenfeld admitted to pulling some strings in a bid to land Will Smith as the lead in the hit 1997 sci-fi film, including downplaying the movie to O’Donnell in hopes of him turning it down.
The film eventually starred Smith and Tommy Lee Jones as Agents J and K, two government workers who monitor alien activity on Earth.
Speaking to Insider, Sonnenfeld said producers initially wanted O’Donnell and Clint Eastwood as the leading men.
“I had suggested Tommy Lee Jones and Will Smith,” Sonnenfeld told the outlet. “Will was actually my wife’s idea.”
The director said execs needed little convincing to accept Jones, however, getting Smith the lead role raised a few eyebrows.
At the time, Smith was known for starring in “The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air” and for his rap albums rather than starring in blockbuster movies.
He had just finished filming his first major movie lead role in “Independence Day,” however the movie was not yet released at the time.
On the other hand, O’Donnell was a well-known name in Hollywood after starring in “School Ties,” “The Three Musketeers,” and “Scent of a Woman.”
In a desperate bid to dissuade O’Donnell from taking the role, Sonnenfeld revealed he downplayed the movie to him.
“I met with Chris and he had concerns about the script and had another movie offer,” he said. “So I told him, ‘Yeah, we might never fix this script and I don’t think I know how to direct this movie.’ So he passed on the movie the next day.”
O’Donnell turning the role down opened the door for Smith to be in the conversation.
Sonnenfeld recalled setting up a meeting for Smith with the film’s producers, Walter F. Parks, Lauri MacDonald, and Steven Spielberg, in the Hamptons.
“And that’s how Will got the part,” he remembered.
“I think [O’Donnell’s] a good actor, but I had really been thinking about Will since my wife made the suggestion,” he said in hindsight.
And of downplaying the script to O’Donnell, Sonnenfeld said, “Well, you know what, you always want to underpromise and overdeliver.”
“Men in Black” went on to become a box office smash hit, which saw two additional films be made in 2002 and 2012.
Smith recently received a 10-year ban from attending the Academy Awards after he slapped host Chris Rock on stage at this year’s Oscars.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Police crippled gang violence on the Lower East Side after arresting a 17-year-old crew leader and drill rapper on attempted murder charges, the local precinct commander told the community.
“His apprehension has helped us tremendously in taming the violence that continues to affect us,” 7th Precinct Capt. Luis Barcia said at a meeting last week. “A lot of the gang members looked up to him because he’s a rapper — he’s known, he’s popular, he’s got a lot of followers. Without the leader, they don’t have any guidance. You could say they become kids.”
Sources identified the top dog as Jahlik Edmonds, who performs under the name YBC Big Belly and is believed to be a lead combatant in the generations-long battle between the city’s notorious Up the Hill and Down the Hill crews.
The two gangs are rumored to be behind the recent gruesome slayings of a young couple found shot to death in a burning car in the Bronx last month.
Though crimes including robbery, felony assault, grand larceny and petty larceny have all continued to climb in the 7th Precinct since the alleged Up the Hill chief was put in cuffs, police said gang activity has quieted over the past two months.
“Those arrested have been persons of interest in other shooting incidents and by them being in custody, the precinct can refocus their efforts on other crimes,” an NYPD spokesperson said. “Most of the 7th Precinct’s major crimes are not gang related.”
At the end of March, Edmonds allegedly shot a 28-year-old man in the back at the intersection of Madison and Montgomery streets, a source told The Post.
With lead lodged in him, the victim drove himself on the FDR Drive to Bellevue Hospital. The back windshield of his 2009 Toyota Camry was completely shattered from gunfire, photos taken by The Post show.
Edmonds was later arrested on April 20 for attempted murder. Another gang member, Jamaury Bailey, was arrested on April 12 for robbery in relation to the March shooting, sources said.
As a drill rapper with hundreds of thousands of views on YouTube, Edmonds sings about gunning down his enemies while he fans out wads of hundred dollar bills, cruises the streets in a bright yellow Audi, and acts out an armed stick up at a convenient store just for some candy and sodas.
One music video takes an even more disturbing turn when it shows actual footage of Edmonds kneeing a kid in the head and punching another in the face as onlookers cheer and film the brutal beatdowns.
In a 2019 interview with the YouTube channel Kids of Hip Hop, Edmonds said he gets into fist fights daily.
“It would always be me getting jumped, and it’d be me and my guys fighting all the time,” he said. “I don’t like using weapons. When I do stuff, I think about their parents and all that. I’ve got mad love for my ops (rivals).”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Former “Shahs of Sunset” star Lilly Ghalichi has made serious bank off the sale of her Los Angeles home — and it spent just several weeks on the market.
Ghalichi, who hails from Texas, and her husband Dara Mir listed the gated property in Bel-Air for $32 million at the end of April, according to Mansion Global. The spread entered contract in a month and closed this week for $27.7 million, the outlet added.
The pair purchased the home in April 2020 for $19.5 million — a good chunk below the $26 million it asked for sale beginning earlier that year.
Also in April of this year, Bravo axed “Shahs of Sunset” after nine seasons because it had become “too expensive” to make. (Ghalichi, however, hadn’t appeared on the series for some time.)
Ghalichi is an attorney and an entrepreneur who owns the Lilly Lashes beauty brand. Mir is the CEO of 9to5 Seating, which designs and produces office seating.
During their ownership, Ghalichi and Mir renovated the home. The work included the addition of a new kitchen, the installation of a smart home system — as well as updating all the flooring, light fixtures and bathrooms. The listing notes the six-bedroom, eight-bathroom residence has a foyer with double-height ceilings, formal and casual dining rooms, a wood-paneled den and a master suite with its own living area.
The grounds additionally include a pool, a spa and a tennis court. The estate runs a total of nearly 1.2 acres.
The spread previously belonged to automobile executive Lee Iacocca, who was known for the development of the Ford Mustang and the Ford Pinto while working at Ford, as well as for reviving Chrysler in the 1980s as its CEO. He passed away in July 2019 at age 94; Ghalichi and Mir purchased the home from his estate.
Tyrone McKillen and Andrew Hurley, of Compass, had the listing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Grover isn’t the the only one working blue on “Sesame Street.” A leaked clip of Julia Louis-Dreyfus cursing like a sailor on “Sesame Street” is blowing up online.
Social media is in stitches over the uproarious resurfaced outtake, in which the “Seinfeld” and “Veep” star dropped an epic S-bomb during a cameo on the classic kid’s show. The curse-laden clip apparently originated in 1994, but is suddenly going viral on Reddit and Twitter, racking up millions of fresh views as of Sunday.
The 30-second blooper starts off with the now 61-year-old TV icon sharing a scene with Muppets Elmo and Zoe. The take goes belly-up after Louis-Dreyfus says the wrong name, and then subsequently utters an audible “s – – t” after realizing her mistake.
The sitcom star attempts to apologize for firing off the profanity, whereupon Elmo, staying in character, acknowledges that she “said a bad word” — and asks her for “$5” for the swear jar.
“You’re going to be a rich Muppet at the end of this day,” retorts Louis-Dreyfus, while prepping to redo the take.
obsessed with this video of julia saying shit in front of elmo pic.twitter.com/UctDEB5VN6
Needless to say, Redditors had a field day with the “New Adventures of Old Christine” actress’s PG-13-rated outtake.
“That’s gold, Jerry! Gold!” wrote one fan, referencing Steve Hytner’s immortal line from “Seinfeld.”
“Elmo shook down guest stars?” wondered another.
Others marveled at the Muppets’ method acting between takes.
“I love that the Muppets stay in character BETWEEN shots!” exclaimed one “Sesame Street” die-hard. “Of course, it makes perfect sense but it’s neat to see. Must really help the guest feel part of the Sesame Street world.”
Another added, “I love when Elmo goes unscripted.”
In 2018, another “Sesame Street” clip made waves online after Redditors claimed that Grover said the F-word during a scene.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Crosby, Stills & Nash are back on Spotify in an apparent end to the classic rockers’ five-month protest of controversial podcaster Joe Rogan.
The folk rockers, who pulled their library of songs off of the streaming platform in solidarity with ex-band member Neil Young, are reportedly planning to donate their earnings from streams to charities aiding those infected with COVID-19, according to Billboard.
Young, the Canadian-American grunge rocker, removed his catalogue off of Spotify earlier this year after the Sweden-based streaming company refused his demand to fire Rogan over alleged “disinformation” related to COVID-19 vaccines.
“They can have Rogan or Young. Not both,” Young wrote in a letter to his record company’s parent, Warner Records.
Rogan, who signed a $200 million exclusive licensing agreement with Spotify in May 2020, is one of the platform’s most listened-to podcasts, with an estimated audience of some 11 million frequent listeners.
The “Rockin’ in the Free World” hitmaker remains off of Spotify and unavailable to its 182 million paid subscribers as of Monday.
Shortly after Young pulled his music off of Spotify, his former bandmates Graham Nash, Stephen Stills and David Crosby released a statement in February which read: “We support Neil and we agree with him that there is dangerous disinformation being aired on Spotify’s Joe Rogan podcast.”
“While we always value alternate points of view, knowingly spreading disinformation during this global pandemic has deadly consequences,” the band’s statement read.
“Until real action is taken to show that a concern for humanity must be balanced with commerce, we don’t want our music — or the music we made together — to be on the same platform.”
Spotify agreed to take down Young’s music, saying in a statement: “We want all the world’s music and audio content to be available to Spotify users. With that comes great responsibility in balancing both safety for listeners and freedom for creators.”
The company added: “We have detailed content policies in place and we’ve removed over 20,000 podcast episodes related to COVID-19 since the start of the pandemic. We regret Neil’s decision to remove his music from Spotify, but hope to welcome him back soon.”
Other rock stars including Joni Mitchell and Nils Lofgren also pulled their music from Spotify.
Rogan, who frequently interviewed critics of the COVID-19 vaccine and lockdown-related measures aimed at mitigating the spread of the coronavirus, responded by apologizing and pledging to have more balanced views on his podcast.
“If I p—d you off, I’m sorry,” the outspoken UFC commentator said in a nearly 10-minute video on Instagram that was posted in late January.
“I’m not trying to promote misinformation. I’m not trying to be controversial,” he insisted of his record-breaking podcast that feels like “some out-of-control juggernaut that I barely have control of.”
“I’ve never tried to do anything with this podcast other than just talk to people and have interesting conversations,” he said of “The Joe Rogan Experience,” which “started off is just f—ing around with my friends.”
Rogan then lamented the fact that famous rockers were fleeing the platform.
“I’m very sorry that they feel that way. I most certainly don’t want that. I’m a Neil Young fan. I’ve always been a Neil Young fan,” he said.
Rogan also noted that he spoke also to medical officials who have more mainstream-friendly views such as CNN’s Dr. Sanjay Gupta and Dr. Michael Osterholm, a member of President Biden’s COVID-19 advisory board.
“Do I get things wrong? Absolutely. I get things wrong, but I try to correct them,” he insisted.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
An alleged serial stabber with dozens of busts under his belt was freed without bail — twice — because of a loophole in New York’s justice laws that leaves prosecutors with little time to secure indictments against dangerous criminals.
Dylan Maldonado, 26, a reputed member of the Bloods street gang, was busted in two separate assaults last month near his Midtown apartment and initially ordered held on bail in both cases, at the request of prosecutors.
But prosecutors in Bragg’s office weren’t able to put together their cases and present them to a grand jury to nail indictments against Maldonado in the 144 hours required under state statutes — allowing him to be released.
The career criminal’s bail was tossed in both cases, allowing him to walk out of jail, after prosecutors with Bragg’s office hit snags, according to sources and court records.
“If he’s a serial stabber, he shouldn’t be out on the street, that’s pretty obvious,” Steven McGregor, one of Maldonado’s alleged victims, railed to The Post Wednesday.
“What kind of social conduct are we trying to upkeep here?” added McGregor, who said he was still traumatized by the May 9 attack.
McGregor said he was charging his phone at a kiosk at Seventh Avenue and West 39th Street when he was randomly hit in the face and slashed on the right arm.
“I haven’t recovered,” he said. “I got stabbed. It’s a life-changing event. It’s not something you’re going to recover from.”
According to criminal complaints, Maldonado allegedly punched and stabbed two men at Seventh Avenue and West 39th Street on May 9 — and then stabbed a cyclist in the leg on May 20.
He is suspected in at least two other similar attacks in Manhattan since Jan. 1 — and has dozens of prior busts in recent years, law-enforcement sources said.
“Catch and release does not work,” one frustrated cop told The Post. “You can see it in his eyes. This person is not well.”
Said another, “There is no way this guy should be walking around stabbing four people.”
Shortly after midnight on May 9, Maldonado — who is described in court papers as having “a tattoo of an AK47 firearm on his face” — is accused of stabbing one victim at the intersection and punching another “multiple times” before displaying a knife.
The suspect claimed to police the first victim “pulled out a knife on me so I pulled a know on him and we started fighting.”
Maldonado was charged with second-degree assault and ordered held on $10,000 bail at his arraignment two days later, court records show.
But on May 13, the case still had not been presented to a grand jury and a judge cut him loose.
A week later, Maldonado was arrested again near the same intersection, this time for allegedly hitting a passing cyclist and stabbing him in the right thigh, sending the victim to Bellevue Hospital, according to court documents.
Maldonado was charged with second-degree assault and criminal possession of a weapon and ordered held on $20,000 bail.
He was freed without bail on June 6, however, after the same law triggered his release.
The law was already on the books even before soft-on-crime reforms were enacted in 2019.
Sources said the delays in presenting the cases to a grand jury stemmed from prosecutors  having difficulty tracking down a victim in the first incident, and being unable to determine from a surveillance video if it was Maldonado or his companions who did the actual stabbing in the other case.
Prosecutors had asked for bail in both cases, sources said.
Both cases are still pending but, because of the state reforms, the alleged gang member can’t be held behind bars on bail on either unless prosecutors get a grand jury to return an indictment.
New York City Defender Services, which represents Maldonado, did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Wednesday.
The Manhattan DA’s Office didn’t comment.
Additional reporting by Priscilla DeGregory

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A 15-year-old hip-hopper has been charged with murder in the fatal subway stabbing of a 14-year-old up-and-coming rapper in Manhattan, according to police and cop sources Sunday.
The slaying of Ethan Reyes, who performed under the name “Notti Osama,” stemmed from a simmering dispute between the pair, sources said.
The kid accused of killing him was not publicly identified by cops because of his young age. He is being treated for stab wounds at New York Presbyterian Hospital, sources said.
The suspect and Reyes of Yonkers got into a street-level fight that descended into the 137th Street/City College subway station around 3 p.m. Saturday, police said. The pair had an ongoing feud, sources said. It wasn’t immediately clear what it was about.
Reyes initially pushed the other boy on the tracks, sources said. He was then stabbed and tried to run but collapsed on the subway station’s steps, according to police sources.
Cops found Reyes bleeding from the stomach, and the teen was rushed to a nearby hospital, where he was pronounced dead, authorities said.
Police found a knife and broomstick at the scene, while MTA security footage provided “clear images” of all those present, officials said.
Police identified the alleged assailant using the camera footage, sources said.
NYPD on Sunday identified the victim as Reyes. His family had just moved to their Yonkers home in May, neighbors told The Post.
Reyes’ brother is also a rapper, according to police sources. A couple who lives a few houses down said that loud music often comes from the home, especially late into the night and early morning.
The couple said that they have called the non-emergency police line, and another neighbor has called several times citing noise complaints.
Richard Davey, MTA NYC transit president, said in a statement Sunday,”We thank NYPD detectives, with whom we cooperated, for the rapid arrest of a suspect.
“That he and the victim are said to have known each other further underscores the senseless nature of this tragic incident.”
Additional reporting by Kyle Schnitzer and David Meyer

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Shame on you, Tony Awards.
On Sunday night, almost nobody at Radio City Music Hall bothered to stand up for the late Stephen Sondheim.
After a far too modest tribute to the legendary composer/lyricist of “West Side Story” “Gypsy,” “Sweeney Todd,” “Into The Woods,” “A Little Night Music” and many others, who died in November at age 91, sung by Bernadette Peters, only a handful of show people begrudgingly got to their feet.
For one of the greatest musical theater composers of all time. Who gave his entire life to Broadway. With friends like these, who needs enemies?
At the Tonys, his death was a total afterthought — a quick song from Peters and a couple of videos — even though producers had months to plan a star-studded number honoring him. The debacle was befuddling.
As was most of the low-energy, poorly put-on 75th Annual Tony Awards on CBS.
Ariana DeBose, who won the Oscar this year for playing Anita in Steven Spielberg’s “West Side Story,” hosted the evening. It was a nice idea. The dwindling Tonys viewership isn’t going to get any bigger, so why not go with a fan favorite?
But being a master of ceremonies didn’t come naturally to DeBose, and her songs and banter were forced and unfunny. Neil Patrick Harris, Hugh Jackman and even James Corden were all leagues better in the gig.
Nathan Lane had the funniest and most off-the-cuff award presentation. He should’ve hosted instead.
The winners, in a season sorely lacking popular hits, were mostly predictable. Best Musical went to the outre “A Strange Loop,” Best Play to terrific, but already-closed “The Lehman Trilogy,” Best Musical Revival to “Company” and Best Play Revival to “Take Me Out.” But there were some tight races that ended in shocks.
Deirdre O’Connell’s win for Best Actress in a Play (“Dana H.”) was a lovely surprise — and her speech encouraging “weird art” was the best of the night — as was Simon Russell Beale’s first, richly deserved Best Actor in a Play victory.
Myles Frost, who plays Michael Jackson, won Best Actor in a Musical in a surely very close contest against Jaquel Spivey of “A Strange Loop.” And Joaquina Kalukango (“Paradise Square“) beat heavy-hitters Sharon D Clark (“Caroline, or Change”) and Sutton Foster (“The Music Man”) for Best Actress.
But aside from the all-important Best Musical prize, it’s the telecast’s performances that have audience members rushing to Telecharge to buy tickets to new shows… or choosing to see “The Phantom of the Opera” for the 43rd time instead.
What came off the best was “MJ the Musical,” about the Prince of Pop, and “Paradise Square,” the worst show of the lot, because the wonderful Kalukango sang the musical’s one good song — “Let It Burn.” (Her song got a standing-o, proving the audience’s legs weren’t numb.)
The “Spring Awakening” cast’s reunion performance of “Touch Me” was gorgeous, too. But that closed 13 years ago. And the sextet of pop-singing queens from “Six” brought a jolt of energy. Needlessly. Their sales are already huge, top Tony or not (they won Score and Costumes).
“A Strange Loop”‘s number (one of its few appropriate tunes) was adequate, although the winning show remains hard to explain in an elevator pitch, and Hugh Jackman was too low-key as Harold Hill in “The Music Man” — one of the night’s biggest losers.
Still, it’s the Sondheim snub that stung the most. Why, for one of Broadway’s best, did CBS send in the clowns?

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
He’s silent no more: Johnny Depp is using his latest album to sing out about winning his contentious defamation trial against ex-wife Amber Heard, according to a report.
“I think you’ve said enough for one motherf—ing night,” he sings on the record he made with legendary British guitarist Jeff Beck, which is set to be released Friday, the Sunday Times of London reported.
Depp penned two songs on the album, titled “18,” with Beck, the former Yardbirds guitarist. The tunes appear to reveal how Depp may have been feeling during the grueling, weeks-long trial that exposed the couple’s troubled married life to the world.
“You’re sitting there like a dog with a seven-year itch,” he sings on one track, called “Sad Motherf—in’ Parade,” according to the Times.
“If I had a dime, it wouldn’t reach your hand,” he belts out in another line of the song.
Depp, 59, joined Beck, 76, on a string of tour dates throughout the UK in June. Their album is named for the youthful age the pair say they feel whenever they play music, the paper reported.
After Depp’s two songs, the remaining tracks off the album are cover songs, including “Caroline, No” by the Beach Boys’ Brian Wilson, and Lou Reed’s “Venus and Furs” by the Velvet Underground, according to The Times.
Outside of his prolific acting career, Depp has a long history of playing music. He recently announced he will be going on tour next summer with his rock supergroup “Hollywood Vampires,” which consists of Depp, Joe Perry, Alice Cooper and Tommy Henriksen.
Depp scored a win in his case last month against Heard, 36, whom he sued for defamation after she wrote a piece for the Washington Post 2018 alleging abuses against an unnamed partner.
After a nationally televised trial, a seven-person jury awarded Depp $10 million in compensatory damages and $5 million in punitive damages – though Virginia law caps punitive damages at $350,000.
Heard was awarded $2 million in her countersuit against her ex-husband.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
To celebrate the 100th birthday of his beloved Judy Garland, Rufus Wainwright went over the top — or better yet, over the rainbow — with his centenary gift: It’s an entire new album, “Rufus Does Judy at Capitol Studios,” that dropped on Friday — exactly 100 years after his iconic idol was born on June 10, 1922.
It’s the second Garland tribute LP by the 48-year-old art-pop artist, after 2007’s “Rufus Does Judy at Carnegie Hall.” And also on Friday, he’ll fête the Hollywood legend — who died on June 22, 1969 — with the last night of this week’s “Rufus Does Judy at City Winery” residency in Chelsea.
Here, Wainwright shares how he discovered Garland, what she means to him as a gay man, and why Pride Month is the perfect time to honor her.
Obviously Judy Garland has meant so much to you throughout your life. How did you first get exposed to Judy?
Well, “The Wizard of Oz” was a kind of yearly TV event that would occur around Easter usually. So the whole family would watch it. It started then, and then I sort of followed her entertainment yellow brick road. When I got to Hollywood and I saw her history — and also sort of the lore of the gay world — those things just kind of haunted me for many, many years.
Why do you think she has been the ultimate gay icon, that she has been so special to the gay community?
I think that she experienced a lot of the same traumas that a lot of gay men experience, whether it’s through battles with addiction or feeling really taken advantage of by society — or not respected, shall we say. Sometimes gay men, especially from that generation, were not allowed to express themselves, so there’s that kind of trapped feeling … And I think that a lot of gay men feel like there’s this inner Judy who wants to be known for who they are.
There’s also this connection between Judy and Stonewall, because she died right before the Stonewall Riots in 1969.
I was honored to be able to sing “Over the Rainbow” on Tuesday at Stonewall, where they unveiled this beautiful portrait of her that will be a permanent fixture of that space. It meant a lot to me as someone who’s been gay their whole life and also really known about Judy Garland their whole life.
There was “Over the Rainbow,” and then the rainbow became the symbol of the gay movement.
Yeah, I think it memorializes it. It very much kind of adds to the strength that, sadly, the gay community needs.
A gay man used to be called “a friend of Dorothy,” of course referencing her “Wizard of Oz” character. But it’s pretty incredible that she has remained in the fabric of the gay community for all these years, for generations really.
What’s nice about it is that at the end of the day — in spite of all of the symbolism and dramatic stories and so forth attached to her — in the end, it’s all connected to the fact that she was an incredible singer and a great musician. And anyone — be it gay, straight, bisexual or transgender — can listen to those records and be moved by them. And that’s the most important thing.
In your City Winery show on Tuesday night, you talked about the fact that when you did “Rufus Does Judy at Carnegie Hall,” you really connected with Judy in a different way because of things that you were going through.
When I first did the concert many years ago, in a lot of ways it was to exorcise Judy from me. I was a little bit overly obsessed with her. And certainly in my trials and tribulations with drugs and alcohol, I was fighting this kind of Judy-esque demon in a way. It was a way of maybe letting Judy go for a little while and maybe even setting her free … But years later now, I’m a little older, and I’ve been around for a while, and I’ve certainly survived Hollywood. Now she’s back, and it’s more about her positive aspects and more about her strengths and her kind of resilience that I’m more attracted to at the moment.
When you recorded this new album, you even used the microphone that she once used, right?
Yeah, I did. I used her mic, and I recorded at Capitol Studios [in Hollywood] where she made a lot of records. It’s more of a kind of jazz record, which I never really expected to make. It’s with these really wonderful players who are really good at getting into the minutiae of the music, and so we were able to do that in that incredible room.
As we remember Judy and honor her on her 100th birthday, is there anything about her that you think is underappreciated?
Well, she was one of the great actresses too. Her sense of timing was impeccable in terms of acting. And it’s a pity that she never did anything on stage, in the sense that she was never in a Broadway show. I think that would have been an amazing turn of events.
What’s the Judy Garland song that speaks to you in the most personal way?
Well, I mean, at the end of the day one has to go with “Over the Rainbow.” I would say it’s probably the best song ever written. It’s the kind of song that, when you sing it, you have to become invested emotionally in it. You can’t just toss it off. You gotta go there.
If you had gotten to meet Judy, what would you have liked to say to her?
Oh, I don’t know … Wanna go to an AA meeting with me? [Laughs.]

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A subway slashing in The Bronx that left a man with severed wrists started over loud music, according to a criminal complaint.
“Turn your music down, you f–king f—-t,” Runadieo Jordan, 52, allegedly yelled at his 31-year-old victim on a No. 2 train near Third Avenue and 149th Street around 1 a.m. Wednesday, the document says.
The victim responded, “What did you say to me?” the complaint states.
That’s when Jordan allegedly pulled his knife and cut the man on his right wrist.
The victim was left with severed arteries that have required him to undergo two surgeries, and he still has limited use of his wrist, the document states.
Jordan fled the train after the attack but was arrested a day later on suspected heroin possession in Manhattan — and then charged in the slashing while still in custody on the drug rap, officials said.
He was hit with a litany of charges in the transit case, including assault, criminal possession of a weapon and aggravated harassment, court records show.
After his arrest, the defendant was shown surveillance of himself and said, “Yeah that’s me. I ride the trains all the time. What of it?” according to the criminal complaint.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
She sold her home “reel” fast.
Emma Stone, the Oscar-winning actress who’s graced the silver screen with roles in “La La Land” and “The Help,” has parted ways with the beachy Malibu manse she’s owned since 2018. And it went into contract about a week after it was listed.
The Wall Street Journal reports that Stone, 33, sold the three-bedroom for $4.42 million — a nice chunk above the $4.29 million she sought when she listed it in May. She reportedly received about five offers from interested buyers, but the identity of the new owner isn’t known.
Stone, originally from Arizona, spent $3.25 million to call this California spread her own. Perched on a blufftop with views of the Pacific Ocean, the one-story ranch property has roughly 1,800 square feet of living space and stands on approximately 3.2 acres. Most rooms inside look out to the water.
“This is a prime example of a category that is so in demand,” listing agent Eric Lavey of Sotheby’s International Realty told WSJ. (Rochelle Maize, of Nourmand & Associates, represented the buyer.) “Where, under $5 million, can you get an experience like this? Good luck, it’s not happening.”
Beyond a celebrity attachment, the new owner will also get a newly remodeled kitchen, whose touches include painted brick and a skylight over the sink. Listing images also show a brick patio with space for seating, eucalyptus and yucca trees that surround the property, a living area with floor-to-ceiling windows and a fireplace — even a bathroom with chic white-tone tiles. There are also beamed ceilings and an airy feel, thanks in large part to white and neutral tones adorning the space.
It isn’t clear why Stone sought to part ways with this house, but it isn’t the only one she owns. She also has places in Los Angeles, in New York City and in Austin, Texas.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Mayor Eric Adams kicked off the Juneteenth weekend with a visit to a Hamptons synagogue Saturday, assuring congregants he is committed to protecting “innocent people” and railing against prosecutors who have turned the country into a place where “lawlessness is acceptable.”
“Far too often we pass bills and laws that protect people who commit crimes,” he told the packed Hampton Synagogue in Westhampton Beach.
“What about innocent people? How about a zero tolerance for the victims of crimes? How about refocusing our attention on the innocent people who get up everyday and do what’s right?”
Adams also promised that he would continue “supporting and protecting our police” in order to rebuild New York City after the pandemic.
“If we get it right in New York City, it gets right across the whole country,” the mayor said.
The mayor’s appearance marked the second time he addressed the upscale Orthodox congregation, which is led by his longtime friend Marc Schneier, a former vice president of the World Jewish Congress.
Stay up on the very latest with Evening Update.
Please provide a valid email address.
By clicking above you agree to the 						Terms of Use
The two met in 1995, when Adams was an NYPD captain.  They have worked together to promote Jewish and African American interests, Schneier said when introducing the mayor, who appeared after morning religious services.
Schneier’s sermon focused on celebrating Juneteenth — which marks the day, June 19, 1865, when the last enslaved African American learned they were free after the Civil War —  which will be observed for the first time Monday as a federal holiday.
“Appreciate the challenge that faced African Americans in this country,” Schneier said. “They are emancipated and then are told to go out and rebuild your lives among the very same people that persecuted you, that oppressed you, that beat you.”
Adams, who showed up in a crisp white shirt and understated blue plaid suit, told congregants that he is committed to strengthening his administration’s relationship with the Jewish community to fight against anti-Semitism in the Big Apple, which has seen a surge in incidents this year.
“Inside our school systems we have to be very clear about teaching out cultures, …teaching the experience of the Holocaust,” he said. “We must engage in real conversations with our young people.”
In the first three months of the year, there were 86 anti-Semitic incidents in the five boroughs, according to the NYPD. At this rate, the numbers are set to exceed the total 198 such attacks tallied in 2021.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
June has a few special celestial events to add to your sky-gazing summer bucket list, including a quintet of planets to enjoy.
Throughout most of June, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn will stretch across the sky like a string of pearls appearing in the dawn hours before sunrise.
Sky & Telescope Magazine is calling it a “planet parade” because the planets will also be in the correct order from the sun.
Mercury will be the hardest to spot as the last to appear in the lineup just before it’s swallowed by sunlight. However, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn should be easy to see all month.
As a quartet, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn have appeared in conjunction over the past few months, but June is the last chance to see the group together before they begin to spread further out in the night sky.
Look for the planets in the sky before sunrise by gazing southeast.
This celestial event requires no special equipment, but the view will be even better if you have access to a telescope or a local observatory. Binoculars could also help improve your experience.
If you want to know which planet is which, know that they are arranged in their natural order from the sun: Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. A sky-gazing app like Stellarium can also help you identify all the planets.
Early in June, Mercury and Saturn will be the smallest in the sky. As the month progresses, the planets will begin to appear further apart in the sky.
Mercury will be more illuminated and higher on the horizon by mid-June, making it easier to spot.
Toward the end of the month, the five-planet alignment will add a sixth gem to the show. On June 24, Mercury will pup up above the horizon about an hour before sunrise. As a bonus, the crescent moon will appear between Venus and Mars.
According to NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Venus and Saturn will bow out as morning objects for most observers by September.
Another treat for summer sky-gazing also happens this month. NASA astronomers say June is also an excellent month to view the globular star cluster known as Hercules Cluster M13. This globular star cluster is thought to be nearly 12 billion years old.
This collection of stars is best viewed with a telescope and will appear high in the eastern sky during the first hours of darkness all month.
No telescope? No problem, find public observing events near through NASA’s Night Sky Network.
The full moon in June is known as the strawberry moon.
The full lunar display falls on June 14 if you want to enjoy some outdoor time or maybe camp by moonlight. A new moon on June 28 will be the best time to head to a dark sky location away from city lights to look for your favorite constellations.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Kim Kardashian has so much love for sister Khloé Kardashian.
So much so that the 41-year-old reality-TV personality enlarged the crotch area for her SKIMS bodysuits — especially for her younger sibling.
Khloé, 37, has been outspoken about the shapewear suits needing to have larger areas down under and Kimmie delivered.
Kim took to her Instagram Stories earlier this week to reveal that she spoke with her SKIMS team to redesign her bodysuits.
“@khloekardashian it’s your lucky day,” the mother of four wrote on a video clip.
“I’m in a @skims design meeting and we’re going to widen the shapewear bodysuit vagina area just for you,” she added.
The “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” star then included the hashtag #TheKhloeKut in her post.
She continued in a voiceover: “Khloé, you would be so proud. I’m in a full SKIMS shapewear meeting and guys, we are making the vagina part in the bodysuit thicker – wider, sorry.”
“We’re changing a few things for all of the comments and questions that you guys have been asking for for a really long time,” Kim said.
She then took a snapshot of the crotch area of one of her shapewear suits and stated: “Just for you, Khlo, widening it.”
The “Revenge Body” star previously discussed the tight-fitting garments on an episode of Hulu’s “The Kardashians.”
Khloé commented that while she was wearing an “amazing” SKIMS bodysuit, she claimed that the crotch area is secured with just a “sliver” of fabric and asked her sissy if it was supposed to only cover her “cl – t.”
“The vagina needs a little more fabric, just a little wider, and for all you little bitches, why does it matter?” she wondered.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
NEW YORK — Alec John Such, the bassist and a founding member of Bon Jovi, has died. He was 70.
Jon Bon Jovi on Sunday announced the death of Such, the New Jersey rock band’s bassist from 1983 to 1994. No details on when or how Such died were immediately available. A publicist for Bon Jovi didn’t immediately respond to messages.
“He was an original,” Bon Jovi wrote in a post on Twitter. “As a founding member of Bon Jovi, Alec was integral to the formation of the band.”
Bon Jovi credited Such for bringing the band together, noting that he was a childhood friend of drummer Tico Torres and brought guitarist and songwriter Richie Sambora to see the band perform. Such had played in a band called the Message with Sambora.
The Yonkers, New York-born Such was a veteran figure in the thriving New Jersey music scene that helped spawn Bon Jovi. As manager of the Hunka Bunka Ballroom in Sayreville, New Jersey, Such booked Jon Bon Jovi & The Wild Ones before joining the singer-songwriter’s band. He played with Bon Jovi through the group’s heyday in the ’80s.
Such departed the band in 1994, when he was replaced by bassist Hugh McDonald. He later rejoined the band for its induction into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame in 2018.
“When Jon Bon Jovi called me up and asked me to be in his band many years ago, I soon realized how serious he was and he had a vision that he wanted to bring us to,” said Such at the Hall of Fame induction. “And I am only too happy to have been a part of that vision.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Learn everything you know about music from your dad? This Father’s Day, repay the favor and give him a gift that lets him continue to explore his love of music. TuneIn Audio Streaming has music for his every mood, with a combination of local stations from around the world, iHeartRadio stations and exclusive music channels for every genre.
TuneIn also provides access to podcasts, sports, news, and more with over 120,000 streaming radio stations at his disposal, for a fraction of the price of competitors like Sirius. And right now through June 19 a year-long premium plan is available for just $39.99 — 66% off the usual price — in honor of Father’s Day.
Does your favorite dad have a long commute? TuneIn is a universe of audio that can be accessed anywhere — from mobile and desktop apps on your devices, to your AppleWatch, Tesla, CarPlay, Roku, Google Home, Amazon Echo, and more.
Let dad explore 24/7, commercial free news channels from all sides, including CNN, Fox News, and MSNBC, or pick from podcasts like TED Radio Hour and NYT’s The Daily. Is he a big Yankees or Mets fan? We bet he’ll also appreciate the live sports and sports talk radio offered, with live play-by-play of MLB games, as well as NHL and college games that can be accessed anywhere.
With 4.7 stars on the App Store and an esteemed Editors’ Choice nod, as well as 4.7 stars on the Google Play Store and a 9.2 star rating on CNET, listeners are falling in love with TuneIn. Happy customer, Tony raved, “I’m really happy with this purchase. I recently canceled my SiriusXM subscription and I’m listening to the same channels through TuneIn premium that I used with SiriusXM at a fraction of the cost. Best purchase I’ve made in a long time.”
If you need a last-minute Father’s Day gift for an awesome man in your life or you’re looking for the perfect present that will satisfy his love of music or podcasts, a year’s premium plan with TuneIn Audio Streaming is sure to make him smile. But hurry, this $39.99 steal only lasts through June 19.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Mayor Eric Adams visited just three homeless shelters despite pledging to make unannounced inspections at facilities in the scandal-scarred system, The Post has learned.
And only one of those surprise drop-ins is on the books, as is mandated by the state, records show.
Facing a mounting homeless crisis and a Post exposé of the filthy, dangerous conditions at  city-run or funded shelters, Adams vowed a crackdown on March 10 and then later claimed to have visited five facilities, one in each borough.
The facilities are required to report the unannounced visits to the state’s shelter watchdog.
An Adams spokesman insisted that two unexpected visits — which were not documented in records obtained by The Post — came on the same day in March in the Bronx.
“Mayor Adams has made multiple visits to shelters and intake centers across the five boroughs in the middle of the night and during daytime hours, and has visited homeless encampments and subway stations since the early months of his administration,” City Hall press secretary Fabien Levy said in a statement when pressed on the discrepancy in trips the mayor claimed to have made.
“As the mayor has repeatedly said, every New Yorker deserves a safe, clean place to rest their head at night,” he added.
None of the three visits were at any of the infamous facilities highlighted by The Post — which triggered Adams’ initial promise of spot inspections.
“I’m going to visit some of those sites,” Adams told reporters on March 10. “I’m going to do some pop-up visits. Unacceptable and we have to do better.”
“I don’t want people sleeping on the side of the roads. As I drove up here, I saw people having encampments on the side of the road,” he added. “That’s an indictment. We have to do better.”
Advocates for the city’s indigent assailed Adams for not delivering on his promise, which the mayor made in response to widespread criticisms of his orders to conduct sweeps of encampments in stations and on the streets.
“If Mayor Adams was really visiting shelters frequently, he would see why so many homeless New Yorkers instead sleep on the streets or in the subways,” said Jacquelyn Simone, a top official at the Coalition for the Homeless.
Regulations require city shelter operators to notify both the city Department of Homeless Services and state Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance “immediately” whenever there is “[u]nscheduled on-site presence of press or elected official.”
Only one such report was filed with OTDA between when Adams first made the commitment on March 10 and April 20, the date the request for the records was made under the Freedom of Information Law.
It shows Adams visited a shelter in East Harlem on 125th Street on March 26 for “approximately” 16 minutes around dinner time.
The mayor arrived at 6:24 p.m. and the report stated that Adams asked the staff questions as he walked through the kitchen, TV room and the computer room. He posed for a picture with staffers before leaving at 6:40 p.m., the report said.
City Hall claimed the March 26 stop was actually Adams’ second unannounced visit to a shelter and provided previously unreleased photos that a spokesman said showed the mayor touring another facility in the Bronx on March 17.
Levy also pointed to a contemporaneous tweet sent on March 17 from Adams’ official account that showed the mayor visiting a Bronx processing center.
The three visits stand in sharp contrast to Adams portraying himself as taking the homeless crisis seriously.
“That’s why I went out to visit my shelters. I wanted to see the product,” he said on MSNBC’s show “Morning Joe” on April 8. “I didn’t announce I was coming. In the middle of the night, I show up and I said, ‘I want to walk through the shelter. I want to see the product that you’re serving New Yorkers.’”
A week earlier, Adams emphasized the importance of doing unscheduled inspections of the embattled shelter system.
“I’m doing these spot checks. I’m not stating that I’m coming, because I don’t want people putting their best foot forward,” Adams told reporters on March 29.
He added that the city’s neediest could take comfort in what he had found.
“I’m seeing clean housing for people where they’re able to get meals, they’re able to take showers,” he said.
At the time, he said he had visited five shelters — one in each borough. City Hall declined repeated requests to clarify the discrepancy between Adams’ statements and what the documents show.
In March, The Post revealed allegations from residents of city-run or funded shelters of rampant violence, theft, rodent infestations and failure to provide basic sanitary products.
“I’m going to visit some of those sites,” Adams said, asking the reporter to come up to him after the press conference and provide the locations of the sites highlighted by the story.
“I’ll speak with you after so you can identify some of those locations for me and I’m going to do some pop-up visits,” he said at the time.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Can’t get that Harry Styles song out of your head? We have good news for you. This summer you can sing along to all your favorite artists for free.
Here’s the beat drop: between June 21 and July 13, Amazon Prime members can score up to four months of Amazon Music Unlimited for no cost at all. Additionally, non-prime members are able to snatch up three free months of streaming when they sign up.
With Amazon Music Unlimited, members have access to over 90 million songs. Curate your playlists with streaming hits like “Heat Waves,” “Good 4 U,” and “Slow Down Summer.” Or if music isn’t you’r thing, tune in to one of their podcast episodes.
Plus, if something’s not sounding right, there’s unlimited skips. Since Amazon Music Unlimited is ad-free, you also don’t have to worry about your jam session being interrupted.
This exclusive summer deal is music to our ears. But if for any reason you wish to cancel your Amazon Unlimited Music plan after the trial period is over, you can do so at no charge.
Or if you’re still listening, Prime members can renew their Amazon Music Unlimited plan for $8.99 per month, and non-Prime members can keep streaming for $9.99 per month.
Amazon Music Unlimited Family Plan. At Just $14.95 a month, your entire family can listen to music on up to six different devices at the same time.
Score Amazon Music Unlimited free for four months until July 13, and enjoy over 90 million songs and podcasts.
Sit back, plug in your favorite headphones, and let Amazon Music Unlimited do the rest.
For more content, check out the New York Post Shopping section.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A youth basketball coach in Riverside, California, is facing accusations of sexually assaulting one of his players.
Jamien Nicholas Lovell Jackson, 41, committed sexual assault against one of the female players he was coaching for a travel basketball league last year, according to the Riverside Police Department.
Police arrested Jackson on Thursday and booked into the Robert Presley Detention Center. He’s charged with lewd and lascivious acts on a minor, child annoyance, and sending harmful matter to a minor.
Court records indicate he was released from custody Friday on $55,000 bail.
Police told FOX 11 that Jackson had been associated with girls’ youth basketball and sports photography in the Inland Empire area for several years. It’s unknown whether there were any other victims.
Anyone with information is being asked to contact Detective Edward Vazquez at 951-353-7136.
It wasn’t immediately clear if he had retained an attorney who could speak on his behalf. Jackson’s next court appearance is scheduled for August 19 at the Riverside Hall of Justice.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The tiny Chicago suburb where at least six people were fatally shot at a Fourth of July parade Monday was previously best known as a backdrop for some of most iconic movies of the 1980s.
From “Risky Business to “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off,” the sprawling homes and tree-lined streets of Highland Park, Ill., gave movie fans a sense of the affluence and comfort in which wealthy kids courted trouble outside the Windy City.
The suburb also was the place where teen misfits conjured up their ideal woman in “Weird Science” and heartthrob high-school senior Jake Ryan’s wild party took place in “Sixteen Candles.”
Late director John Hughes set most of his movies in and around Chicago, with Highland Park among his go-to locations.
Ferris Bueller’s best friend, Cameron Frye, lived in a stunning local glass-sided house overlooking the wooded ravine where he destroyed his dad’s prized 1961 Ferrari 250 GT Spyder convertible in one of the movie’s most memorable scenes.
Known as the Ben Rose House after its first owner, the landmark home was designed by the late Chicago architect A. James Speyer, a disciple of famed modernist Mies van der Rohe.
The Emmy-winning 2001 TV documentary series “American High” also chronicled a year in the lives of 16 Highland Park teens as they grappled with issues including drug use, parental divorce and coming out as gay.
Members of the 1990s championship-winning Chicago Bulls — including hoop legends Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen and the team’s late general manager Jerry Krause — all owned mansions in Highland Park at one time.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Co-host Vanessa Hudgens arrives at the 2022 MTV Movie & TV Awards.
Billy Eichner arrives at the 2022 MTV Movie & TV Awards.
Co-host Tayshia Adams speaks onstage at the 2022 MTV Movie and TV Awards.
Dixie D'amelio, Marc D'Amelio, Charli D'Amelio and Heidi D'Amelio accept award for Best New Unscripted Series for 'The D'Amelio Show' onstage during the 2022 MTV Movie & TV Awards.
Kathy Hilton and Paris Hilton accept the Best Reality Return Award for 'Cooking with Paris' and 'Paris in Love' at the 2022 MTV Movie and TV Awards.
Sydney Sweeney, winner of the Best Show, Best Fight, and Here For The Hookup awards for 'Euphoria', poses backstage during the 2022 MTV Movie & TV AwardsSydney Sweeney, winner of the Best Show, Best Fight, and Here For The Hookup awards for 'Euphoria', poses backstage during the 2022 MTV Movie & TV Awards.
Olivia Rodrigo and Jennifer Lopez pose for a photo backstage at the 2022 MTV Movie and TV Awards.
Jimmy Fallon accepts the award for Best Talk/Topical Show for 'The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon' during the 2022 MTV Movie & TV Awards.
Kornbread, Angeria Paris VanMicheals, Bosco and Kerri Colby accept the Best Competition Series award for 'RuPaul's Drag Race' onstage during the 2022 MTV Movie & TV Awards.
Jack Black arrives onstage with pyrotechnics to accept the Comedic Genius Award at the 2022 MTV Movie and TV Awards.
Paris Hilton presents the Reailty Royalty award to Bethenny Frankel onstage during the 2022 MTV Movie & TV Awards.
Thriving at (almost) 53: J.Lo is set to enjoy the year ahead, according to respondents of a recent OurTime poll.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
She issued an Amber alert to Johnny Depp.
Embattled “Aquaman” actress Amber Heard might’ve lost the legal battle — but she’s not conceding defeat just yet: She’s challenged Johnny Depp to do his own interview if he has a problem with her bombshell NBC “Dateline” appearance in which she’s doubling down on accusations that he abused her.
Heard, 36, issued the challenge Friday just hours before her explosive interview with “Today” show host Savannah Guthrie is slated to air.
“If Mr. Depp or his team have a problem with this, we recommend that Johnny himself sit down with Savannah Guthrie for an hour and answer all her questions,” a spokesperson for Heard told The Post in a statement.
Her comments follow a 20-minute preview clip on Peacock, which showed Heard giving the NBC show numerous documents from a doctor that “represented years, years of real-time explanations of what was going on.”
“There’s a binder worth of years of notes dating back to 2011 from the very beginning of my relationship that were taken by my doctor, who I was reporting the abuse to,” Heard told Guthrie in the segment. “Her notes represented years, years of real-time explanations of what was going on.”
The documents, which are shown on-screen, detail one 2012 instance in which Depp allegedly “hit her, threw her against a wall and threatened to kill her,” according to “Dateline.”
Eight months after that, Depp allegedly “ripped her nightgown, threw her on the bed,” according to the program, and in 2013, he reportedly “threw her against a wall and threatened to kill her.”
However, Heard’s legal team was unable to admit the documents into evidence in the highly publicized trial as the judge had deemed them “hearsay.”
A spokesperson for Depp, 59, has since responded to the interview, telling “Dateline” that the “Donnie Brasco” actor simply wants to move on with his life after winning the defamation case.
“It’s unfortunate that while Johnny is looking to move forward with his life, the defendant and her team are back to repeating, reimagining and relitigating matters that have already been decided by the court and a verdict that was unanimously and unequivocally decided by the jury in Johnny’s favor,” they said in a statement.
The bombshell statements come after Depp was awarded more than $10 million in his defamation case earlier this month. A jury in Fairfax, Virginia, found Heard liable for defaming Depp in a 2018 Washington Post op-ed in which she described herself as a victim of domestic abuse. The jury also found Heard was defamed by one of Depp’s lawyers but only awarded her $2 million in damages. However, experts said it’ll be a while before the actress has to pay any money.
Nonetheless, Heard maintained in Tuesday’s interview teaser that she “stand[s] by every word” she uttered in her losing defamation trial testimony.
Surprisingly, despite the alarming abuse accusations she leveled at Depp, the star insisted that she “absolutely” still loves the “Finding Neverland” star.
“I loved him with all my heart,” the “Rum Diary” actress said about Depp. “I tried the best I could to make a deeply broken relationship work and I couldn’t. I have no bad feelings or ill will toward him at all.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Brittney Griner, the WNBA star arrested in Russia this February for allegedly bringing drugs into the country, is not a hostage, a Kremlin spokesperson said.
Dmitry Peskov told NBC this week he “would strongly disagree” with the US State Department’s classification of Griner as “wrongfully detained.”
“We can not call her a hostage,” Peskov told the outlet. “She violated Russian law, and now she’s being prosecuted.”
“Why should we make an exemption for a foreign citizen?” Peskov said.
He added that Griner was not unlike “hundreds and hundreds of Russian citizens that were sentenced for carrying hashish.”
But Griner has yet to see her day in Russian court, with her pre-trial detention extended multiple times since her arrest.
The 31-year-old All-Star was arrested at a Moscow airport in mid-February for allegedly having cannabis vape cartridges in her luggage. She was entering the country in order to play for a Russian team during the WNBA’s off season, as she has for the past several years.
In May, the White House sent her case to the Office of the Special Presidential Envoy for Hostage Affairs, a State Department team tasked with negotiating the release of Americans being held hostage and others classified as being wrongfully detained in other countries.
Russian authorities have previously said Griner’s arrest was based on “objective facts and evidence.”
“She was caught red-handed while trying to smuggle hash oil,” Moscow said in a statement last month. “In Russia this is a crime.”
Griner’s detention came at a time of heightened tensions between Moscow and Washington over Russia’s imminent invasion of Ukraine. She faces five to 10 years in Russian prison if convicted on drug-smuggling charges.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
CANBERRA, Australia — NASA will launch a research rocket from remote northern Australia this month in the agency’s first blast off from a commercial space port outside the United States.
Three suborbital sounding rockets will be launched from the Arnhem Space Center on Indigenous-owned land near the mining town of Nhulunbuy in the Northern Territory on June 26, July 4 and 12, said NASA and the launch pad’s owner, Equatorial Launch Australia.
The launch site was chosen because it is in the Southern Hemisphere and close to the equator.
“This commercial launch range in Australia opens up new access to the Southern Hemisphere’s night sky, expanding the possibilities for future science missions,” NASA associate administrator for the Science Mission Directorate Thomas Zurbuchen said in a statement.
The 12.2-meter (40-foot), 2,200-kilogram (4,900-pound), Canadian-designed Black Brant IX rockets would focus on the Alpha Centauri A and B star systems. A third mission would study X-rays emanating from the interstellar medium — the clouds of gases and particles in the space between stars.
NASA’s Heliophysics Division director Nicky Fox said the launches more than 300 kilometers (186 miles) into space would “allow us to explore how a star’s light can influence a planet’s habitability among other things.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Peekaboo — this baby is ballin’ in Gucci and Versace, too.
With a $1,200 solid-gold pacifier in his mouth and an $1,100 diamond-encrusted bracelet on his wrist, 1-year-old bundle of bling Jareem is obsessively pampered by his single, unemployed mom Kasey Akram — who would happily “walk around naked” to ensure her tot has “whatever he likes.”
“As soon as I had my little boy, my obsession changed from how I looked to focusing on my son,” Akram, 32, explained to South West News Service.
“What Jareem wants Jareem gets — the last pair of shoes I bought myself were [$1.21] Primark flip-flops, and on the same day, I bought him Gucci [sneakers],” added the former model-turned-mom, from Sheffield, South Yorkshire, in the UK.
In addition to his designer shoes, the diapered darling often dons a $900 Versace chain along with his collection of costly jewels — at least the pricey pieces he hasn’t tossed yet.
“I spent [$1,200] on a solid-gold [binky], and he chucked it in the middle of town and lost it. I cried for three days,” said the overindulgent mom of one. Over the past year, she has also shelled out a whopping $240 to have baby Jareem’s palm read in order to learn his favorite color.
“Whatever he likes, he gets. And if I can’t afford it, I ring his dad and get the money,” said Akram. “I’m not working at the moment. I do all this on benefits and the help of my ex-partner.”
Akram — who admittedly didn’t want kids prior to the COVID-19 outbreak — became pregnant with Jareem in 2020. And she’s since lavished the boss babe with pricey apparel, extravagant accessories and luxury accommodations.
“Apparently I’m too soft with him, but if you had a child in the middle of the pandemic, you would be the same,” said the obliging mom, who bathes her lucky little one in a tub of milk and honey several times a week.
Jareem is also regularly treated to an all-organic breakfast in his $363 designer bed each morning at 6 a.m., followed by a delightful screening of “Peppa Pig” (on the TV that Akram moved from their living room into his bedroom) and a soothing baby-oil massage.
And the pampered prince’s palate is just as refined as his daily routine.
“He’s never seen a slice of white bread in his life, and what I eat he eats — he likes olives, he likes grilled peppers,“ said the doting mom. And Akram, fearing certain chemicals in tap water might cause her baby to sprout breasts, will stop at nothing to ensure Jareem’s water supply is purified.
“He’s never drunk tap water in his life,” she boasted. “I [fired] my nanny because she gave him tap water.”
And although Akram — who gleefully gifts Jareem with stylish haircuts and mini pedicures — is happy to fulfill the boy’s every wish, some of her friends disagree with her opulent devotion.
“He’s the loveliest little boy in the world and I’ve fallen out with friends over how much I’ve spent on him,” she said, confessing that when her bed broke, she slept on a mattress on the floor and purchased Jareem a bed frame shaped like a tractor.
“If I want to spend the money on my son, that’s my choice,” Akram insisted. “I don’t care if I walk around in Primark shoes as long as my prince has the best.”
And the overindulgent mama plans to baby Jareem for the rest of his life — even when he’s all grown up and takes a wife.
“His dad always says that when he turns 18, he’ll get a girlfriend and move out, but I say, ‘No, we’ll have bunk beds when he’s too old to share a bed with me,’ ” said Akram.
“I always ask [Jareem] if he gets a girlfriend when he’s older and she doesn’t like me if he’ll kick her out, and he says, ‘Yes,’ ” she gushed. “When he finally gets married, his wife is going to hate me.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
An intoxicated man died after he fell onto the tracks and hit his head in a Manhattan subway station Sunday morning, cops said.
The 24-year-old apparently lost his balance and tumbled onto the tracks from the J train platform at the Delancey Street-Essex Street Station around 1:50 a.m., according to police.
He did not make contact with a train or the third rail, and was declared dead at Bellevue Hospital, police said. His cause of death was pending.
HIs identity wasn’t immediately released.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The city’s iconic Puerto Rican Day Parade returned to its full boisterous self Sunday after a two-year COVID hiatus, drawing a crowd of thousands including Mayor Eric Adams and other local pols.
A beaming Adams, flanked by city Department of Transportation Commissioner Ydanis Rodriguez, walked up the East Side of Manhattan waving a Puerto Rican flag while wearing a matching white shirt and hat with the ensign emblazoned on them.
Thousands of revelers decked out in Puerto Rican colors also braved the rainy weather to start at Fifth Avenue and 43rd Street about 11 a.m. and walk north to 79th Street.
US Secretary of Education Miguel Cardona, the son of Puerto Rican parents, served as the parade’s grand marshal.
“¡Viva Puerto Rico!” Adams’ official mayoral account tweeted. “A little rain didn’t stop the largest Puerto Rican population outside of La Isla del Encanto itself from taking the streets to show their pride!”
Among the New York politicians who participated in the march were Gov. Kathy Hochul,  Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-NY), Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY), Congressman Adriano Espaillat (D-NY), state Attorney General Letitia James, Adams’ predecessor and congressional candidate Bill de Blasio, fellow New York 10th Congressional contender and city Councilwoman Carlina Rivera, City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams and New York Secretary of State and former Assemblyman Robert Rodriguez.
Sunday’s parade was the first major celebration since 2019 of the 8 million Puerto Ricans living on the island and elsewhere, because the event, which has been held since April 1958, was significantly scaled down in 2020 and 2021 because of the coronavirus.
On Friday, Adam raised the Puerto Rican flag at Bowling Green Park in Downtown Manhattan to celebrate the return of the full-fledged in-person parade.
“This city says, ‘Mi casa, su casa. This is your city. This is our city,’” he said. “And we’re here together. And this is an important time. I’m looking forward to this weekend.
“It’s just a powerful moment that the Puerto Rican community has played a major role in building this city [on] so many levels.”
National Puerto Rican Day Parade Board Chair Louis Maldonado said in May, “This is a milestone year for the parade, and our return to Fifth Avenue is yet another sign that [the city] and the Puerto Rican community are strong, resilient and as vibrant as ever,”
Yarimar Bonilla, of the Center for Puerto Rican Studies at CUNY, told WNYC, “There’s so much healing that we need to do after this pandemic that has caused so much stress.
“We need these community events to celebrate ourselves and remind ourselves of who we are and what we can be when we come together.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Looks like Dwayne Johnson is a big momma’s boy.
Worth an estimated $270 million, the actor, entrepreneur, and former wrestler dropped $3.48 million for an Encino, Calif., home for his mom, Ata.
This marks the third home he has purchased for her over the years, including a home in Florida. But Johnson explained how this one was extra special.
“When I was a little boy, I hated when my mom would cry ~ these days, I’ll happily take her tears of joy,” Johnson, 50, explained in an Instagram post. “I surprised my mom and bought her a new home. Took me and my design team 8 weeks to get it ready, where she could walk thru her front door for the very first time and everything she saw was brand new and a total surprise.”
“I’ve been lucky enough to have bought her a few homes over the years, but this one is special as she’s told me over and over these past few years, ‘After a lifetime of traveling, I want this home to be my last. Thats my dream,’ ” he revealed. “Mom, there’s no greater feeling than to make you happy ~ welcome home.”
Records obtained by The Post show that Johnson purchased the six-bedroom, four and half-bathroom, Cape Cod-style home in September. But his mom didn’t move in until recently.
Spanning over 4,400 square feet, the gated home comes with luxury finishes that include a great room with French doors, a chef’s kitchen with navy cabinetry, a custom tile backsplash, Carrera marble countertops, and a living room with a fireplace and white vaulted ceilings.
The kitchen also comes with a breakfast nook.
The primary suite features direct access to the outdoor space, a spa bath with dual sinks and a freestanding tub.
Pegged as a “bona fide Los Angeles sanctuary,” the hedge-enclosed backyard features an expansive lawn with multiple lounge areas, a built-in barbeque, citrus trees, a game area, and a pool and spa.
Johnson posted three video clips of his mom walking into the home for the first time.
In one video, which is set to the set to the famed “Over the Rainbow” cover by late Hawaiian singer Israel Kamakawiwo’ole, Ata, 73, can be seen approaching the home.
Above the entrance hangs a sign reading “Le Samoana” — a nod to his mom’s Samoan ancestry.
In two additional videos, Johnson gave a tour of the interior, pointing out meaningful aspects of its interior décor.
One room, which Johnson labeled the “Smackdown Room,” showcases rock/DJ memorabilia over the years.
Another room showcases her collection of vintage ukuleles mounted on a wall. Of the photographs also visible in the space, Johnson wrote: “I was able to unearth pictures of our ancestors that she hasn’t seen since she was a child growing up in Samoa.”
F. Ron Smith with Compass held the listing.
Meanwhile, Johnson shelled out $27.5 million for a sprawling six-bedroom, 12-bathroom Beverly Hills mansion in April 2021.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Director Todd Phillips is clowning around — again.
Phillips apparently confirmed a sequel to his blockbuster 2019 “Joker” film on Tuesday, posting a series of images to Instagram, including a red script cover with the title “Joker: Folie à Deux,” as well as a shot of Oscar-winning franchise star Joaquin Phoenix smoking while reading the screenplay. The script cover lists the writers as Phillips and Scott Silver, who both penned the first installment.
The official Warner Bros. Twitter account also shared Phillips’ note. The Post has reached out to the studio for further confirmation and comment.
While no sequel plot details were divulged by Phillips, the film’s French subtitle generally translates as “madness for two” and can mean a shared delusion between two people. Some outlets have suggested that could bring an appearance by the Joker’s partner-in-crime, Harley Quinn, a character previously played by Margot Robbie — opposite Jared Leto’s version of the Joker — in 2016’s “Suicide Squad.”
A post shared by Todd Phillips (@toddphillips)
No projected release date was included in Phillips’ post.
Fans responded to the news with both excitement — “Everybody stay calm, it’s happening!!” one enthused Instagram commenter replied — and dread, with one Twitter response that fretted, “I speak for everyone that we don’t want a sequel.”
The possibility of a “Joker 2” was floated about a year ago when Phillips’ lawyer, Warren Dern, let slip that one was in the works during an interview; however, the movie was not confirmed by Warner Bros. at the time.
Phoenix, 47, won the 2020 Academy Award for Best Actor in his role as the maniacal DC supervillain in the critically acclaimed, “seriously dark urban drama” about a cackling clown — a k a Arthur Fleck  — whose criminal exploits unleashed panic throughout Gotham City. The movie also starred Robert De Niro, Zazie Beetz, Frances Conroy, Brett Cullen, Shea Whigham and Douglas Hodge, among others.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
She’s the “bad guy” with some good tricks.
In an interview with Matt Wilkinson on Apple Music 1, Billie Eilish revealed that she used one of her dancers as a “body double” onstage at Coachella 2022.
“I dressed her up in a show look that I had worn before. We got a black wig and we put buns in it and we gave her a mask and sunglasses and she wore my shoes and my socks,” said Eilish.
“I put her up at the back of the stage and she stood there while the lights went on and everybody thought it was me,” the “NDA” singer continued. “And nobody ever knew it wasn’t me, literally nobody knew. And while she’s up there, I put on a big black coat and a traffic vest and a hood and just glasses.”
The switcheroo happened during the intro of the 20-year-old headliner’s set. Bits and pieces of Eilish’s songs “Oxytocin” and “Happier Than Ever” played to plumes of smoke and lights as an Eilish-looking figure stood on stage, taking it all in. However, the sneaky singer’s face was not shown on the festival’s giant screens until two minutes in, at which time she launched into “bury a friend.”
Earlier this month, Eilish and her brother, Finneas, debuted a new song titled “TV” during a concert in Manchester, England. The unreleased track referenced her recent breakup with Matthew Tyler Vorce and the Johnny Depp and Amber Heard defamation trial.
“What’s the point of anything / All of my friends are missing again / That’s what happens when you fall in love.
“The internet’s gone wild watching movie stars on trial / While they’re overturning Roe v. Wade,” Eilish sang. Finneas also softly and slowly strummed his guitar to the beat.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A transgender Lutheran bishop in California resigned over allegations of racism from the congregation.
San Francisco bishop Megan Rohrer became the Evangelical Lutheran Church of America’s first openly transgender bishop last year. Rohrer faced backlash following a December vote to oust Rev. Nelson Rabell-Gonzalez as pastor over his mostly-Latino congregation following an investigation into verbal harassment allegations, NBC News reported.
Video footage shows Rohrer announcing Gonzalez’s removal on December 12. The distraught congregation can be heard yelling questions and complaints at Rohrer.
“Pastor Nelson has worked a lot for this day to happen. He has done a lot for our community. He has fought for our rights,” one congregant said, according to the Associated Press.
The church later set up a panel to hear complaints from Gonzalez’s congregation, who were deeply unhappy with their pastor’s removal.
Rohrer had reportedly worn a bulletproof vest to the December 12 service announcing Gonzalez’s removal and had threatened to call the police on a pair of congregants, according to the AP.
Some congregants alleged that Rohrer had carried out the firing in a racist manner, and the panel ultimately recommended racial sensitivity training for Rohrer and other church leaders.
Rohrer addressed a letter of resignation to the church synod Saturday, blaming “the constant misinformation, bullying and harassment” for the decision.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A black former elevator operator at Tesla’s flagship California assembly plant on Tuesday rejected a $15 million award in his lawsuit alleging racial abuse by coworkers, opening the door for a new trial after a judge slashed a $137 million jury verdict.
Lawyers for Owen Diaz, who had sued Tesla in 2017, turned down the judge’s award in a brief filing in federal court in San Francisco. They said in a statement that the award was unjust and would not deter future misconduct by Tesla.
“In rejecting the court’s excessive reduction by asking for a new trial, Mr. Diaz is again asking a jury of his peers to evaluate what Tesla did to him and to provide just compensation for the torrent of racist slurs that was directed at him,” his lawyers said.
Tesla did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
US District Judge William Orrick lowered the jury award, which was one of the largest of its kind in a discrimination lawsuit, to $15 million in April. He had also denied Tesla’s motion for a new trial, conditioned on Diaz’s acceptance of the lower award.
Earlier this month the judge denied Diaz’s motion for permission to appeal that ruling and gave him two weeks to accept the lower award or agree to a new trial.
Tesla is facing a series of lawsuits involving alleged widespread race discrimination and sexual harassment at its Fremont, California factory, including one by a California civil rights agency.
Last week, a Tesla shareholder filed a lawsuit accusing the company’s chief executive, Elon Musk, and board of directors of neglecting worker complaints and fostering a toxic workplace culture.
Tesla has denied wrongdoing and says it has policies in place to prevent and address workplace misconduct.
Diaz alleged that his colleagues and a supervisor subjected him to a hostile work environment that included slurs, caricatures and swastikas in his nine months working at the Fremont plant in 2015 and 2016.
A jury had awarded Diaz $6.9 million of compensatory damages and $130 million of punitive damages last October, but Orrick in April said those numbers were excessive.
Diaz’s lawyers in their statement on Tuesday said Orrick’s decision highlighted systemic bias that federal judges have against juries, which in turn violates the constitutional rights plaintiffs have to a trial by jury.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The Galveston Hurricane of 1900 was the deadliest natural disaster in US history - killing between 6,000 - 12,000 people in Texas. It destroyed over 7,000 buildings and left over 10,000 people homeless.
The Great Miami Hurricane of 1926 destroyed a large portions of South Florida and killed at least 373 people. Pictured here is the destruction on Collins Avenue, Miami Beach. The storm effectively ended the Roaring 1920s in Florida, causing approximately $90 billion in damages.
Sometimes called the "Long Island Express," the New England Hurricane of 1938 rushed over New York to hit Connecticut and Boston with 12-foot storm surges. An estimated 600 people died in the storm.
A particularly deadly and long lasting storm, Hurricane Hazel in 1954 killed between 400 - 1000 people in Haiti. It caused at least 95 deaths in the U.S. after it first hit Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. As it moved northward, Hazel became an extratropical storm where it killed another 100 people in Canada.
Hurricane Donna ravaged the eastern seaboard in 1960, killing 50 people in the continental U.S. and another 107 in Puerto Rico. Donna is the only Hurricane on record to hit Florida, the Mid-Atlantic, and New England with hurricane-force winds.
Hurricane Andrew in 1992 was one of the most destructive in U.S. history. The storm caused an estimated $30 billion in damage. Andrew also spawned at least 28 tornados along the Gulf Coast. Nearly 126,000 homes were destroyed and 180,000 people were left homeless.
One of the deadliest storms in U.S. history, Hurricane Katrina killed at least 1,833 people. It is also currently tied with Hurricane Harvey as the costliest storm in US history - causing an estimated $125 billion in damage. Katrina caused a massive humanitarian crisis as an estimated 15,000 to 20,000 people took shelter in New Orleans' Louisiana Superdome.
Hurricane Sandy in 2012 was the largest Atlantic hurricane on record when measured by diameter. Sandy caused an estimated $70 billion in damage across 24 different states, including the entire eastern seaboard. A total of 157 Americans died during the storm.
Hurricane Harvey in 2017 flooded the streets of downtown Houston. Harvey was the wettest storm on record - dropping over 60 inches of rainwater on southeast Texas. The storm reportedly displaced over 30,000 people in Texas and killed 68.
In 2017, Hurricane Maria was the strongest hurricane to hit Puerto Rico in over 80 years. It devastated the island's power grid and caused the worst blackout in U.S. history. Maria killed almost 3,000 people on Puerto Rico alone.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Are Tyler Herro and girlfriend Katya Elise Henry on the rocks?
It certainly seems that way based on recent social media posts shared by model and influencer Henry, with the topic of cheating at the heart of some of the cryptic messages.
“If you cheat on someone that is willing to do anything for you, you actually cheated yourself out of loyalty,” read one message posted by Henry, according to screenshots.
Henry, who welcomed daughter Zya with the Miami Heat guard last September, also shared the message, “Not everyone is going to think you’re gorgeous, amazing and magical. They’re wrong though.”
Though it remains to be seen what exactly is unfolding between Henry and Herro, 22, she appears to have unfollowed the NBA star as of Monday afternoon.
Henry also seems to have deleted photos of the couple on social media, including a Twitter snap she shared in May in celebration of his Sixth Man of the Year award.
Elsewhere on Twitter, Henry has been re-sharing positive affirmations, including a message from Friday that read, “You are worth more than second thoughts and maybes.”
Herro and Henry are believed to have started dating in March 2020, when the NBA star tweeted, “wyd” at the fitness model.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Jennifer Hudson earned her EGOT on Sunday at the 2022 Tony Awards when she won for “A Strange Loop,” joining the ranks of the select few who have gotten all prestigious performance awards.
Hudson, 40, joins the exclusive list of 16 other winners including the likes of Audrey Hepburn, Alan Menken, Andrew Lloyd Webber and Whoopi Goldberg, who all won awards at the Emmys, Grammys, Oscars and Tonys.
The prestigious title was given to Hudson as a producer for the Tony Award-winning musical “A Strange Loop,” which won Best Musical on Sunday.
Hudson’s path to an EGOT began in 2007 when she won an Academy Award for her role in “Dreamgirls.” She later received Grammy awards in 2009 for best R&B album and in 2017 for her performance on “The Color Purple” soundtrack.
Also in 2021, Hudson won the Emmy for an animated series called “Baby Yaga.”
“A Strange Loop” received a whopping 11 Tony nominations including Best Musical and Best Actor as well as the Pulitzer Prize. The show, written by Michael R. Jackson, won the Tony Award for best new musical and Jackson won the award for Best Book of a Musical.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The Queen of Christmas, Mariah Carey, isn’t having a very merry start to the summer.
In documents acquired by The Post, Andy Stone, who co-wrote Vince Vance & the Valiants’ country song “All I Want For Christmas Is You,” is suing Carey for copyright infringement — claiming the diva never sought or obtained use of his title for her perennial monster holiday hit.
Stone is also coming after Carey’s co-writer on the song, Walter Afanasieff, in the civil suit, which was filed in the US District Court of the Eastern District of Louisiana.
Stone released his 1989 twangy version — which musically and lyrically sounds nothing like Carey’s pop performance — before Carey changed the holiday season forever in 1994. In the suit, he claims his song got extensive airplay during the 1993 holiday season, a year before Carey released hers.
The Scrooge is suing the “Obsessed” singer for $20 million in damages.
“Plaintiff [Stone] personally requested that Defendants [Carey and Afanasieff] cease and desist from further distribution of Plaintiff’s work,” the suit reads in part. “Despite Plaintiff’s request, Defendants continue to exploit Plaintiff’s work ‘All I Want for Christmas is You,’ reaping tremendous financial awards and other pecuniary benefits to the detriment of Plaintiff.”
According to the documents, Carey and Afanasieff “knowingly, willfully and intentionally engaged in a campaign to infringe [Stone’s] copyright in the work … to the commercial gain, personal profit and unjust enrichment of the defendants and the irreparable injury and financial loss” of Stone.
Carey’s representative declined to comment when contacted by The Post.
Decades later, streams and radio airplay of Carey’s “All I Want For Christmas Is You” continue to stuff her stocking full of cash. The song has over a billion streams on Spotify alone.
According to the lawsuit, Stone is a self-employed artist in the business of performing, selling and licensing his copyrighted music and earns his livelihood from fees received from these activities.
Carey’s Christmas song reached No. 1 on the Billboard Top 100 chart around the holiday in 2019 and 2020.
The song set Spotify’s most streamed track on Spotify in 24 hours (female) record in 2019 — then beat it again in 2020, according to Guinness World Records.
“WOW,” Carey tweeted in 2020. “I know people think I’m making “coin” (lil’ secret: artists make very little from streams) but the real reason I’m sitting here in astonishment & gratitude is seeing the joy this little song I wrote brings to people. THANK YOU & MERRY CHRISTMAS!!!”
When they got together in the summer of 1994 to write songs for the album “Merry Christmas,” Afanasieff and Carey carved out the chords, structure and melody for “All I Want for Christmas Is You” in just 15 minutes.
“It’s definitely not ‘Swan Lake,’ ” Afanasieff admitted. “But that’s why it’s so popular — because it’s so simple and palatable!”
He also said he hasn’t heard from the “Honey” singer since they worked on her 1997 album “Butterfly,” after which she decided to explore a more R&B-influenced direction.
“It’s a shame because we had great chemistry,” Afanasieff said. “My greatest dream is to work with her again. Mariah, all I want for Christmas is you!”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Sara Jumping Eagle grew up on the Pine Ridge reservation in South Dakota, one of the poorest counties in the US. She graduated from Stanford Medical School and returned to the reservation to help the Lakota people as a pediatrician and activist.
Now 50, Jumping Eagle never expected to wind up on a busy street in Santa Monica last month — in a physical brawl with “The Flash” star Ezra Miller, 29. But she believes that the troubled Hollywood superhero has brainwashed, assaulted and possibly drugged her 18-year-old daughter, Tokata Iron Eyes, after grooming the girl for years. Miller is now traveling with Tokata and several other young women in California, she told The Post.
“He’s not letting Tokata or the other girls bathe or wear makeup,” Jumping Eagle claimed to The Post. “They have to ask his permission. It’s an R. Kelly type situation and it’s very scary.”
Jumping Eagle and her husband, attorney and Native American activist Chase Iron Eyes, 44, say Miller’s toxic behavior includes the appropriation of Native beliefs. She told The Post that Miller, the New Jersey-born child of a Manhattan publisher and his actress wife, even lectured them on what kind of Lakota medicine man her family should use.
“Like this guy knows s–t about what he’s talking about,” Jumping Eagle said. “Telling us what to do in our own culture?”
Jumping Eagle said she is glad the grandmother who raised her, Juanita White Eyes, is no longer around to see what’s happened to Tokata.
“#EzraMiller is [a] spiritual voyeur dabbling in various indigenous peoples’ spiritual beliefs, combining w voodoo; using these beliefs [in] Tokata Iron Eyes mind, luring more people in cult-like manner,” Jumping Eagle tweeted last week.
The “Justice League” star was arrested in March in Hawaii for disorderly conduct and later pled no contest. Miller, who uses them/they pronouns, was also accused of allegedly throwing a chair at a woman and being the subject of 10 911 calls in less than a month in Hawaii. They were caught on video apparently choking a woman in Reykjavik, Iceland, on April 1.
Tokata, who has called Miller her “comrade” on social media, was in Hawaii with the actor when they were arrested.
Jumping Eagle and her husband both flew to Los Angeles from Pine Ridge in late May to, they say, rescue Tokata, who’s also an activist, from what they describe as the “cult-like” grip of Miller.
Calls and emails from The Post to Miller, the actor’s parents, Miller’s agent at CAA, Warner Bros. and Tokata herself went unanswered. Tokata posted a video on Instagram Thursday defending herself against accusations she is being controlled by Miller.
“It’s nobody’s business and nobody is owed a story or outcome,” she said in the two-minute video. “This is my life and these are my decision and I’m disappointed in my parents and the press — in every way. “
Tokata dropped out of a private high school in Massachusetts in December, her parents said, to live with Miller in Vermont and go on road trips with them all over the country. She has not had a phone since January 2022, by her own admission. Her parents failed to persuade her to leave the actor in LA, however, and returned to Pine Ridge without her.
But before they left, Jumping Eagle said that she filed a police report about what she called Miller’s assault of her on the street. (She showed The Post photos of bruises she claimed were inflicted by the actor during the skirmish.) The couple also went to the Warner Bros.’ headquarters in Burbank to pressure the company to do something about its “The Flash” star. The Post did not hear back from the Santa Monica Police Department about whether a police report had been filed.
In court documents filed in Standing Rock Sioux Tribal Court last week, the couple allege that Miller, 29, “uses violence, intimidation, threat of violence, fear, paranoia, delusions and drugs to hold sway over a young adolescent Tokata.” Both Jumping Eagle and Iron Eyes have tweeted out frantic cries for help for their daughter in recent days.
The tribal court has issued an order of protection against Ezra on behalf of Tokata. A hearing is set for next month.
Tokata was around 9 years old in Nov. 2012 when Miller, then 19, came on a fact-finding mission to a uranium-mining region of the Black Hills in South Dakota that the Lakota consider a sacred site.
Miller returned in 2016, when Tokata was 12, to participate in the #NoDAPL protest on the Standing Rock reservation in North Dakota, along with celebrities including Mark Ruffalo and Shailene Woodley. Tokata was there, protesting the North Dakota Access Pipeline alongside her parents, when she and Miller first formed a friendship, Jumping Eagle said.
By then, Tokata was already considered a youth leader and had testified against the mining at the site while protesting at numerous tribal water rights demonstrations.
Tokata proved such an influential activist over the years that Angelina Jolie interviewed her for her 2021 book, “Know Your Rights and Claim Them.”
Miller flew Tokata out to London, where the actor was filming “Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them,” in 2017. Jumping Eagle said another family from Standing Rock accompanied Miller and Tokata, so she wasn’t worried about the trip.
It wasn’t until last week that Tokata’s parents, stunned by the recent events involving their daughter, began calling around to people who knew both Miller and Tokata. Jumping Eagle said she reached out to the family friend who went to London with Tokata and Miller in 2017— and was shocked by what she told her.
“She said she caught Ezra trying to sleep in the same room as Tokata, who was 14 at the time,” Jumping Eagle claimed. “She told him, Ezra you can’t sleep in there with her’ and kept checking on him the whole time they were over there.”
But back then Jumping Eagle and her husband had believed that Miller — who identifies as non-binary and queer — was harmless and just “buddies” with their daughter. Over the next few years, the star and Tokata kept in touch. Once Iron Eyes brought Tokata to New York for a “Respect Our Water” protest after being invited by Miller and others, Jumping Eagle said.
Miller continued to visit the family at Pine Ridge, where he became infatuated with a local medicine man named Jasper. On another occasion, he told Tokata’s family he knew a better medicine person than theirs. “Can you imagine that?” Jumping Eagle said. “He thinks he knows our culture better than us?”
It was Miller who suggested Tokata, who was growing bored at the the Red Cloud Indian School at Pine Ridge, transfer in 2020 for her junior year to Bard College at Simon’s Rock in Massachusetts, an accelerated private high school affiliated with Bard, which Miller’s sister attended.
But Tokata ended up dropping out of Simon’s Rock late last year after an intensified involvement with Miller, Jumping Eagle said. Tokata began spending time at Miller’s Vermont home with an entourage that included people like queer performance artist Stella Marbles.
Although both Miller and Tokata say they are gay and possibly transgender, Jumping Eagle said she believes the two have been having sex for months.
“Ezra’s using ‘they’ pronouns because they don’t want to be labeled a white, privileged male,” Jumping Eagle told The Post. “But that’s what Ezra is. Ezra’s gaslighting everyone with the pronouns. What he’s doing with Tokata is R. Kelly type stuff. But he doesn’t know who he’s f—king with. Tokata has a family who loves her. And you don’t f–k with water protectors.”
Although Tokata herself, as well as Miller’s supporters, have called Tokata’s parents abusive and transphobic, Jumping Eagle says that is false.
“None of these people know us,” she said. “We have another child who identifies as non-binary. In our culture there have always been what we call ‘winkte’ or ‘two-spirit’ people who are important and respected in our community.”
Led by Miller, the group took road trips down South, including to New Orleans, as well as to California.
Jumping Eagle said her husband noticed Miller’s increasingly strange behavior, saying that the actor calling themselves the reincarnation of Jesus Christ and spoke about the FBI and the KKK following them.
In late January, a friend of Miller’s who doesn’t want to be identified called Jumping Eagle and Iron Eyes to say Tokata was in danger at the house in Vermont.
Tokata’s parents then went to Miller’s home in Vermont and said they found Tokata in what appeared to be a psychological breakdown.
“She was ranting and babbling and not making sense and Ezra was just sitting there smirking and snapping his fingers like it was all a show,” Jumping Eagle said. Jumping Eagle said Tokata was visibly bruised and believes she was being given marijuana, LSD and ketamine.
Tokata’s parents succeeded in bringing her back to Pine Ridge, where they took her to their medicine man and to a sweat lodge to detox. They prayed Lakota prayers, Jumping Eagle said.
“I kept telling Tokata, you already have what Ezra and so many of them are seeking,” Jumping Eagle said. “We pray with the sacred pipe and the spiritual ways of Lakota people and we’ve passed that on to our kids.”
Tokata got much better while at home, her mother said, but ultimately left again to return to Miller. When her parents heard again that Tokata was in LA with Miller and their entourage in May and not doing well, they flew out again to get her on May 29.
After the Native American couple confronted Miller, Tokata and some friends at a home in Santa Monica, the group started running down the street.
Jumping Eagle found herself eventually on busy Lincoln Boulevard where, she claimed, Miller assaulted her while she was trying to persuade Tokata to get out of a car and come home.
“Ezra was slamming the door on my arms,” Jumping Eagle said. ” I started hollering, Ezra stop!’ The police eventually came but Ezra and Tokata had gone.”
Miller, whose breakout film was “We Need to Talk About Kevin” in 2011, stars as Barry Allen in Warner Bros.’ film version of DC Comics’ “The Flash.” The movie, estimated to cost between $100 and $150 million, was postponed from this summer to June 2023, amid rumors — so far unfounded — that Warner Bros. might replace Miller because of the actor’s increasingly erratic behavior.
“The movie seemed ready to go,” Jeff Bock, a media analyst at Exhibitor Relations told The Post. “The fact that it’s being postponed seems to be only the result of all this mess around Ezra Miller. It’s a worst case situation for a studio that wants to move ahead with what could be a three-picture franchise. Depending on what happens with this situation with the young woman, it could be a nightmare for them. Either way it may be a one-and-done for Ezra. You can’t be a big movie star and act this way.”
Now, Jumping Eagle and her husband want Warner Bros. to get involved in their battle.
“Ezra just keeps hurting people,” she said. “He’ll probably just drop my daughter eventually but what kind of shape will she be in when he leaves her? And who’s next?”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Monticello is going woke — and trashing Thomas Jefferson’s good name in the process.
The Charlottesville, Virginia, home of the Founding Father and America’s third president is one of our best-known national monuments, familiar from its appearance on the nickel since 1938.
But the hilltop mansion designed by Jefferson himself, once preserved as a tribute to the author of the Declaration of Independence, now offers visitors a harangue on the horrors of slavery.
“The whole thing has the feel of propaganda and manipulation,” Jeffrey Tucker, founder of the libertarian Brownstone Institute and a recent visitor, told The Post. “People on my tour seemed sad and demoralized.”
The new emphasis is the culmination of a 10-year effort to balance the historical record, officials of the Thomas Jefferson Foundation, the nonprofit that owns the estate, have said.
But visitors complain that employees go out of their way to belittle Jefferson and his life.
“The tour guides play ‘besmirchment derby,’ never missing a chance to defame this brilliant, complex man,” Stephen Owen of Enochville, NC, wrote on Facebook.
“Half of the comments on Jefferson were critical,” wrote William Bailes of Chester, Virginia in an online review after visiting in June. “Even my 11-year-old daughter noticed the bias.”
Tucker described his guide last month as “surly and dismissive” of Jefferson’s accomplishments.
“Someone asked if Jefferson had built a machine in the house, and the guide said, ‘Nah, he never built anything, he was just a tinkerer,’” Tucker recalled.
“It was ridiculous. He was the architect of this house and of the University of Virginia — what are you talking about?”
Jefferson’s life story is full of thorny contradictions. The world’s foremost proponent of liberty, who wrote the immortal words, “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal,” was nonetheless a committed slave owner until his death in 1826.
That has made him a prime target for the left. Last year, a Jefferson statue was unceremoniously booted from the New York City Council’s chamber, where it had stood for 187 years.
In the past, the managers of Monticello sanitized Jefferson’s history for the 25 million tourists who have flocked there since it was opened to the public in 1923. References to slavery were few, and signs labeled “Servants’ Quarters” marked sites where Jefferson’s slaves once lived.
“Our goal is to present an honest, inclusive history of Monticello in all its aspects as well as Jefferson’s contributions to the founding of the country,” Jenn Lyon, a Monticello spokesperson, said.
But on a visit this week, The Post found, the grievance has become the predominant theme at Monticello, from the ticket booth in the visitor’s center — decorated with a contemporary painting of Jefferson’s weeping slaves — to its final gift-shop display.
Not even the president’s world-famous music room, an octagonal space carefully restored to its 18th century grandeur and decorated with Gilbert Stuart’s original presidential portrait and classical busts, is safe from revisionist disapproval.
A grim modern painting of a faceless figure with a matte black head now looms over the room, positioned so that it directly confronts visitors as they enter the mansion.
The huge 4-foot-by-5-foot work, a new addition to Monticello’s collection, was “commissioned in honor of Juneteenth last month,” said Susan Woodward, The Post’s guide on Wednesday. “It’s quite provocative, I do believe,” she added.
The figure’s “hands and face of featureless tar” represent “the faceless lives of all who served in bondage, witnessing but never recognized,” an identifying card explains.
The anachronistic artwork is just one of many jarring signs of over-the-top politicization at Jefferson’s beloved home.
Guides begin their outdoor tours of Monticello’s gardens and grounds by invoking the Native Americans who once lived on the land.
“How does that land come to be in European possession?” a guide named Justin asked an unresponsive group of vacationers from Germany. “A lot of violence, right?” he prodded.
Placards with conversation starters on the topic of civil rights festoon a patio outside the snack shop. “Is ‘all men are created equal’ being lived up to in our country today?” one reads. “When will we know when it is?” it continues — supplying a negative answer to the first question.
Books by critical race theory proponents Ibram X. Kendi and Ta-Nehisi Coates enjoy pride of place in the visitor center’s gift shop, while the smaller Farm Shop store displays five titles on Jefferson’s slaves — and a single biography of the man himself.
Interpretive signage throughout the estate places slavery at the forefront of each historical feature by adding the word “enslaved” before every possible job description, often multiple times: “an enslaved cook,” “enslaved postilions,” “Jefferson’s enslaved valet, Burwell Colbert.”
Meanwhile, a “trigger warning” alerts sensitive visitors outside a basement room that plays a video about Sally Hemings, the mixed-race slave who, many historians believe, bore Jefferson six unacknowledged children.
The presentation “covers difficult subject matter and can inspire strong emotions … We encourage you to respect the feelings of your fellow guests,” the signage reads.
Indeed, the story of Hemings is told in more detail — and with far greater sympathy — than that of the third president himself.
Guides launch into Hemings’s biography on the slightest pretext. During The Post’s tour, a description of an interior archway in the library, as well as a comment on Jefferson’s love of French cuisine in the dining room, gave Woodward openings to expound on what little is known of Hemings’s life.
“The entire focus was on his mistress,” complained Wesley Stevens of Tulsa, Okla. “They are trying to rewrite history to make it seem like the founding fathers were terrible immoral creatures that happened to start a country.”
The Thomas Jefferson Foundation is run by a roster of big-money Dem donors and former Democratic officials, including:
Monticello’s push to “finish the restoration of the landscape of slavery” on the estate has largely been funded by left-leaning philanthropist David M. Rubenstein, who donated $20 million toward that effort in 2015.
Rubenstein, a private-equity billionaire and former Carter Administration official — recently pledged to continue his extensive investments in China — and is on the boards of the globalist World Economic Forum, China’s Tsinghua University, and the Council on Foreign Relations, among others.
“In the long term, China has a very bright economic outlook, it has a large population, very hardworking people, well-educated and so forth,” Rubenstein said in May at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, as he hailed the country’s government its “pretty good handle” on the economy.
But in Virginia, George Allen, the state’s former GOP governor and US Senator,  blasted Monticello’s new focus as “contemporary politicization of a beautiful historic property.”
“Some of this to me just detracts from how people can be inspired and understand Thomas Jefferson and his time and how brilliant he was, how creative he was, his innovations and how ahead of his time he was,” Allen said.
Douglas MacKinnon, author of “The 56 – Liberty Lessons From Those Who Risked All To Sign The Declaration of Independence, agreed.
“It’s very problematic to look at 1776 and Thomas Jefferson through the prism of 2022,” MacKinnon said. “You can’t go back 250 years to know what was in their hearts at that time.”
“Jefferson was the ultimate Founding Father of our nation,” he added. “His name should not be diminished because of our political disagreements.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Being the tallest kid in class doesn’t often come with bragging rights — but living in the tallest home in a state capital certainly does.
In Saint Paul, the capital of Minnesota, a 19th-century home perched on a 1.55-acre bluff lot has the distinction of being the city’s tallest single-family residence — and it’s now for sale, its listing brokerage told The Post. Asking $1.85 million, the four-story spread takes advantage of its signature stature with a top-floor observatory that looks to views of the Saint Paul and Minneapolis skylines, as well as the Mississippi River Valley. Typically, homes in the area stand three stories high.
Built in 1886, the 9,400-square-foot property at 4 Crocus Hill fits seven bedrooms, five full bathrooms and two powder rooms inside — not to mention a dose of history. Designed by prominent Minneapolis architect William Channing Whitney, the home was built for the politician Edmund Rice — though its fourth floor came much later, in the 1970s. The original building cost: $15,000, or some $461,000 in today’s figures.
Rice, who died three years after the home’s construction at age 70, was a Democratic politician who served two terms as Saint Paul’s mayor, from 1881 to 1883 and from 1885 to 1887. In 1887, he resigned to represent his Minnesota district in Congress. Originally from Vermont, Rice was an attorney and the president of the Minnesota and Pacific railroads.
Subsequent residents included a man named George R. Finch, who helped secure the location of the State Capitol in Saint Paul, and William Rush Merriam, a Republican who served as Minnesota’s eighth governor — who spent five years living in this home.
Despite the century-plus age of the residence, as well as the owners who have come and gone, original details remain to this day.
They include a working pipe organ, which stands in a room with wooden ceiling moldings and surrounded by oversize leaded windows on three sides. Listing images additionally show other old-world touches, such as a wooden staircase, fireplaces with wooden mantels and handsome hardwood flooring.
Meanwhile, for modern sensibilities, the gourmet kitchen has commercial-grade appliances — including multiple dishwashers — and the attached three-car garage is heated. The master suite also comes with dressing rooms, sunrooms and a study.
Mary Hardy, of Edina Realty/Luxury Portfolio International, has the listing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Come on, Barbie, let’s go party!
Greta Gerwig’s upcoming “Barbie” movie is taking the internet by storm with neon pink convertibles, a shirtless Ken and fans of all ages.
The movie based on the plastic icon is set to hit theaters on July 21, 2023 starring Margot Robbie and Ryan Gosling.
Aside from Robbie’s (or, should we say Barbie’s) platinum blonde mane and hollywood beauty, the most striking part of the film is the brilliant fashion.
Since 1959, Barbie has been a fashion icon sporting everything from blue aerobics fits, chic tweed blazers and hot pink heels. It only makes sense that Robbie be styled in the same kitschy style.
We’ve already spotted the actress in 80’s neon roller skating gear alongside Gosling and a bubblegum pink cowgirl fit adorned with stars and flared bottoms.
#BARBIEJuly 21, 2023Only in theaters pic.twitter.com/mauCGpizD1
Barbie may simply call these dazzling closet choices “style,” but we’re calling them products of Barbiecore, the fashion trend based on the quintessential Mattel doll.
The Barbiecore trend is quickly picking up speed with stars, such as Lizzo and Kim Kardashion, over-accessorizing and dressing in all-pink looks, while Gen Z launches into it full speed ahead.
To prepare for the upcoming film and jump in on the monochromatic, Elle Woods trend, we listed our favorite Barbiecore fashion picks below — such as clear sunglasses, platform heels and everything pink. After all, “life in plastic is fantastic.”
It doesn’t get more retro than this. These Forever 21 jelly block heels come in neon green, pretty pink and clear glitter. A part of the brand’s Forever 21 x Barbie collection, you can dress up your doll-inspired look with a square toe, Barbie logo and a lug platform sole.
Shop the brand’s entire Barbie collection here.
Part of the brand’s Smash Tees x Brunette exclusive collection, this relaxed crewneck is made with 100% cotton French Terry. Showing off its Barbie pink color and 70’s style graphics, it’s a must have.
Shop the full collaboration here.
In these clear, rectangular sunnies, you’re guaranteed to live in your best Barbie girl fashion. This two-pack comes with both a pink and green pair with gold colored metal.
We can see our younger selves now: dressing up our Barbie doll in this dress before she heads out to meet Ken for her very special Valentine’s date. Now, Shein is allowing us to make like Barbie ourselves, and we are all in.
The heart print dress features a neck tie, snug fit and backless silhouette.
A jelly pink sole and rhinestone embellishments? Count us in! This Steve Madden Maxima Sneaker is begging to be worn by Barbie. Margot Robbie, we suggest you advise your style team ASAP.
Ready to look cute as ever in this floral printed crop top? Details include silky knit material, a deep V-neckline, long sleeves and an open back.
Pink floral drop earrings? Oh my! Made to look fresh where ever you go, you can score these dangly accessories in pink, blue or green.
Elevate your Barbeicore fashion with this pink ruffled pick from Trina Turk. Created in a cotton candy pink color and a sleeveless design, this dress screams femininity.
Share the love with this four-pack of polka dot headbands. Wear these cute accessories with a ponytail or with your locks down.
You can’t make like Barbie without a pair of sparkly hot pink heels. Dress them down with some white jeans or dress them up with a stunning dress.
Check out New York Post Shopping for more content.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Actor Tony Sirico — best known for his role as mobster Paulie Walnuts on “The Sopranos” — is dead, his brother, Robert, announced on Facebook on Friday. He was 79.
​”It is with great sadness, but with incredible pride, love and a whole lot of fond memories, that the family of Gennaro Anthony ‘Tony’ Sirico wishes to inform you of his death on the morning of July 8, 2022,” wrote Robert, who is a priest.
“Tony is survived by his two beloved children, Joanne Sirico Bello and Richard Sirico, grandchildren, siblings, nieces, nephews and many other relatives.
“The family is deeply grateful for the many expressions of love, prayer and condolences and requests that the public respect its privacy in this time of bereavement.”
His “Sopranos” co-star Michael Imperioli — who played Christopher Moltisanti, protégé to Tony Soprano, portrayed by the late James Gandolfini — also posted a remembrance on Instagram, saying in part: “Tony was like no one else: he was as tough, as loyal and as big hearted as anyone i’ve ever known.”
A post shared by @realmichaelimperioli
Another co-star, Steven Van Zandt, who played tough guy Silvio Dante, tweeted his condolences to the actor’s family.
“A larger-than-life character on and off-screen. Gonna miss you a lot my friend,” he wrote.
RIP Tony Sirico. Legendary. Silvio’s best buddy “Paulie Walnuts” in The Sopranos, Frankie “The Fixer’s” older brother Antonino “Father Tony” Tagliano in Lilyhammer. A larger than life character on and off screen. Gonna miss you a lot my friend.  Deepest condolences to the family. pic.twitter.com/pAkDnqfLEs
Their “heartbroken” co-star Jamie Lynn Sigler also posted to social media about the special bond she felt for her colleague and friend.
“I loved you so much. I have never been able to walk into a room that you were in without you giving me an enormous hug, drenching me in your cologne, and making sure I knew any man that came near me would have to answer to you first,” she wrote, sharing a photo of them together.
A post shared by Jamie Lynn Sigler (@jamielynnsigler)
Sources told TMZ that he had been living in an assisted living home in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, for a few years due his declining health.
The Post has reached out to Sirico’s representatives for confirmation.
When he was 55, Sirico was sleeping on a cot in his mother’s living room in Brooklyn when he was cast as Walnuts. He originally auditioned for the role of Uncle Junior — who would be played by Dominic Chianese.
Sirico and Walnuts’ lives had many parallels. Born in Brooklyn, New York, on July 29, 1942, the late actor was just 7 years old the first time he got arrested for stealing nickels from a newspaper stand. He would be arrested 28 more times and would and two trips to the slammer.
In 1971, he even spent 20 months at the notorious Sing Sing prison for felony weapons possession.
“The first time I went away to prison, they searched me to see if I had a gun — and I had three of ’em on me,” he told the LA Times in 1990.
“In our neighborhood, if you weren’t carrying a gun, it was like you were the rabbit during rabbit-hunting season.”
The hit HBO crime drama ran from 1999 to 2007.  He won two Screen Actors Guild Awards for his ensemble role: one in 2000 and another in 2008.
In a 2020 interview, Sirico praised his former “Sopranos” co-star Gandolfini, who died in 2013 at age 51, calling the actor his “right f–king arm” and saying he was “so f–king happy to be as close” as the two were.
In his decades-long career, Sirico appeared in numerous guest roles on other shows including “Kojak,” “Miami Vice,” “Chuck,” “Medium,” “Lilyhammer” and “American Dad.”
Sirico played gangsters in over a dozen movies, including “Goodfellas,” “Mob Queen,” “Mighty Aphrodite” and “Gotti.”
“I make a pretty good living because I die well. I get hired to get killed,” he once told the LA Times, estimating that he died in 13 of his then-27 films.
Additionally, he temporarily lent his voice to “Family Guy” character Vinny Griffin — who was the family’s dog for three episodes in 2013.
Sirico and former “Sopranos” actors Federico Castelluccio and Vincent Pastore reunited in the 2018 film “Sarah Q.”
His brother’s posting asked that memorial donations be made in his honor to Wounded Warriors, St. Jude’s Hospital and the Acton Institute.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Prince Harry and wife Meghan Markle released a new photo of their daughter, Lilibet Diana, on Monday to mark her 1st birthday.
Inheriting her father’s red hair, a smiling Lilibet donned a light blue dress and ribbon for the adorable photo.
The portrait was snapped during Lilibet’s first birthday party in the UK on Saturday, according to the couple’s spokesperson.
The Duke and Duchess of Sussex hosted a small party for their only daughter at their UK home, Frogmore Cottage, after the family made the trip from California for the Queen’s Platinum Jubilee.
Close friends and family attended the intimate backyard party, the spokesperson said.
Claire Ptak, the London baker behind the couple’s 2018 wedding cake, made a birthday cake for Lilibet, they added.
The birthday portrait is only the second photo the couple have released of their daughter after she was featured on the family Christmas card last year.
Lilibet, who was born in California, only met her great, great grandmother — and namesake — for the first time last week after Harry and Meghan arrived in the UK with their 3-year-old son Archie.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
An Iranian refugee known to Norwegian intelligence services has been identified as the gunman who opened fire at an Oslo gay bar early Saturday, killing two and injuring at least 20 others.
Zaniar Matapour, 42, described as a one-time plumber who moved to Norway with his family from a Kurdish region in Iran at age 12, allegedly opened fire at three different locations in and around the London Pub just after 1am Saturday, just hours before a Pride parade was to be held in the city.
The acting chief of the Norwegian Police Security Service, Roger Berg, called the attack “an extreme Islamist terror act.”
Norwegian cops said Matapour also took aim at people outside the Herr Nilsen jazz club and a fast food restaurant. He was wrestled to the ground and taken into custody within five minutes of the rampage. Two weapons, including a fully automatic gun, were retrieved from the crime scene, they added.
Two men, one in his 50s and another in his 60s, were killed, police said. Ten people were treated for serious injuries but none are believed to be in critical condition, the AP reported. Eleven other people had minor injuries.
A police spokesman said Matapour has a “long history of violence and threats”as well as “difficulties with his mental health.” He told local media Saturday that Matapour had been on police intelligence radar as far back as 2015 but as recently as a month ago was deemed no longer a threat.
Matapour also has a rap sheet for infractions like knife and drug possession, police said Saturday.
Matapour’s defense lawyer, John Christian Elden, told the AP that his client hadn’t talked to cops yet and cautioned against speculating on his motive.
“He has not given any reason,” Elden said. “It is too early to conclude whether this is hate crime or terrorism.”
Frightened clubgoers at the London Pub hid in a basement and frantically called their relatives early Saturday as a gunman opened fire upstairs on the eve of he city’s annual Pride parade.
Oslo’s Pride parade was cancelled in the wake of the attack but thousands showed up Saturday anyway.
“This is for many a silent parade, but for others it’s a protest against two people being shot and killed on Saturday,” Ole Johannes M. Foss told Aftenposten. “It’s very powerful to be here. We see people crying next to us. We are here in pure solidarity with the whole movement. I am very shocked that something like this can happen in Norway in 2022.”
“We’re coming back to London! The fight continues!” a participant at Saturday’s celebration told Aftenposten.
Bili Blum-Jansen, who was in the London Pub, told a local TV outlet that he ran to the basement to escape the gunfire and hid there along with 80 to 100 other people.”Many called their partners and family, it felt almost as if they were saying goodbye. Others helped calm down those who were extremely terrified,” Blum-Jansen told TV2.
“I had a bit of panic and thought that if the shooter or shooters were to arrive, we’d all be dead. There was no way out.”
“Tonight’s shooting is absolutely horrific and pure evil,” the club announced on Facebook. Our thoughts go to the dead, injured and relatives. All employees in London are safe and physically unharmed. Take care of each other during this time.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
NASHVILLE, Tenn. — Tennessee Secretary of State Tre Hargett was arrested Friday night for allegedly driving under the influence after leaving a music festival in the state.
Hargett, a Republican, was booked into the Coffee County Jail shortly after midnight Saturday and released a few hours later, according to jail records.
Hargett’s office released a statement on the arrest Saturday.
“On Friday night after leaving the Bonnaroo Music Festival, I was stopped by the Tullahoma Police Department and subsequently arrested for DUI,” Hargett said in the statement. “Driving Under the Influence is a serious matter, and I regret the circumstances that led to my arrest. I respect law enforcement and will trust the legal process as we move forward.”
Hargett is scheduled to appear in court on July 14, WKRN-TV reported.
Hargett served a decade in the General Assembly before overseeing the Tennessee Regulatory Authority. He was elected by the General Assembly to serve as secretary of state in 2009 and reelected in 2013, 2017 and 2021, according to the secretary of state’s website. Hargett is the chief executive officer of the Department of State with oversight of more than 300 employees.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Bongbong. President of the Philippines. Given name? Ferdinand Marcos. Father? Late president of the Philippines Ferdinand Marcos. Mother — who’s had her own headlines — Imelda Marcos.
Back before whatshisname invented lightbulbs, she and I met. The Shah of Iran had invited friends to celebrate His Majesty’s 2,000-year-old city Persepolis. Guests like Princess Grace, Haile Selassie, Spiro Agnew, Imelda. This week — Imelda in Manila, me in New York — traded phone calls. Years come, tragedies go, but friendship of half a century goes on.
When Kayser-Roth Corporation owned Miss Universe I, assistant to the president brought celebrity judges and in 1974 arranged to televise it worldwide from Manila. First time outside the USA. Estimated audience 500,000. Imelda built us a special theater. Came fearful hurricane warnings. Our crew numbered hundreds. Calmly, the first lady sent up her air force to “seed the clouds.” What that meant, who knew. What it did, I know. Black clouds moved off the island of Luzon. The day cleared. The show televised. Next day that hurricane socked us for three days. I was there, I know.
The country is 12 hours ahead. On one trip there then-President Marcos held a gala in my honor. Gowns, jewels, music, magic, photographers, TV, flashbulbs. The major photo? Me fast asleep on the president’s shoulder. Hey, it’s a long flight.
So, yes, for sure I know the mom of the new president of the Philippines.
On the phone we remembered her New York trial. Life then was her East Side townhouse and Gen. Douglas MacArthur’s Waldorf suite where, one day, her friend Doris Duke, USA’s richest female, brought two lawyers plus Imelda’s needed millions for bail. Nobody was to know. Me already there, I got locked into a john where I could hear it all.
June 30 her “only son” becomes president. She says: “Of age when his father was alive, he always wanted to be a politician. School was in England. He spent 20 years studying there. And then ran in our province. Became governor, senator and — with my wishes and prayers — president. I will stand there wearing my best Filipino dress. I still keep my old clothes but my daughter is making a special gown.
“I know what difficulty is. I remember those days when I faced jail and was all by myself. Fighting alone. Returning to Manila there were cases against me. I thought I’d never come back. The government was against me. I faced it all alone with people praying to help me. I was in such a sad state.”
We relived her standing to face a NY judge. We remembered her collapsing and being rushed to a hospital. We recalled a priest conducting Mass in her living room. We reviewed her walking St. Patrick’s Cathedral aisle on her knees.
“Now I live alone. Large apartment. Many care for me. My children live nearby. July 2 I’ll be 93.”
Lives change on both sides of the globe. Off to address a graduation, Sen. Chuck Schumer got word daughter Jessica was in labor. He and wife Iris raced to the hospital, overnighted, and come morning welcomed their first granddaughter.
His eldest, son-in-law Mike Shapiro and toddler son Noah, welcomed Eleanor Alys Schumer-Shapiro at NYU’s Tisch Hospital on June 3. She’s named with a hat tip to Eleanor Roosevelt. Ellie’s 6 pounds, 12 ounces, 20 inches. How’s that for the congressional record?
The other flash announcement is that gramps Schumer did NOT get that news on his ancient relic flip phone.
Babies haven’t any hair; oldie heads are just as bare. Between the cradle and the grave; lies a hairdo, even a shave.
Only from Cindy Wadsworth Longfellow, kids, only from Cindy Wadsworth Longfellow.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
One person was seriously hurt in a Brooklyn house fire Saturday morning.
The blaze broke out at 319 Sumpter St. in Ocean Hill shortly before 10:30 a.m. and went to three alarms about a half hour later, according to the FDNY.
It spread to two adjacent homes before being brought under control at 12:13 p.m. All three homes were severely damaged.
The injured victim, who was in serious but stable condition, was taken to Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, the FDNY said.
Two firefighters were also taken to the hospital with minor injuries.
The cause of the blaze is under investigation.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A mass shooting in Harlem killed a college basketball star and injured eight people early Monday, leaving a total of at least 20 victims shot citywide in fewer than 6 hours — and signaling an ominous start to summer.
At least 13 people were also shot citywide Friday through Sunday, authorities said.
“It’s only going to get worse,” a veteran NYPD detective in Manhattan told The Post of the bloodshed. “Unless the [Manhattan] DA starts enforcing these gun laws, this violence will continue, and it’s going to be total anarchy in the summer.”
Two women and seven men, including hoopster Darius Lee, 21, were shot near the intersection of East 139th Street and Fifth Avenue around 12:40 a.m. Monday, according to the NYPD. Lee, who police said was not an intended target, died of his wounds.
Rapper Rich Rhymer was trying to film a music video nearby when a dispute broke out between two groups, and the shooting occurred, cops said. It wasn’t clear if any of the people involved in the video shoot was part of the deadly fight, officials said.
Responding officers found five people shot on a footpath just under the Madison Avenue Bridge, said NYPD Chief Brian McGee, commanding officer of Detective Borough Manhattan North, at a morning press conference.
Those victims were transported to local hospitals by EMS, McGee said. The four other victims were taken to area hospitals by private means.
The surviving victims were another 21-year-old man, a 22-year-old man, two 24-year-old men, a 31-year-old man, a 42-year-old man and two women, 22 and 23, cops said.
“It’s Father’s Day weekend,” Police Commissioner Keechant Sewell told reporters early Monday. “It’s a weekend where people were supposed to be able to enjoy themselves with their families.”
“The emboldened individuals responsible for this are exactly who our officers are battling every day to make our city safe,” she said.
The Manhattan detective, with two decades on the job, ripped borough DA Alvin Bragg for his alleged soft-on-crime policies that have included not seeking bail or prison time for most defendants and downgrading certain felonies to misdemeanors.
“Gov. [Kathy] Hochul needs to remove Alvin Bragg. The criminals know to come to Manhattan because they know they’re going home after they’re arrested,” the source said.
The detective added, “You can’t put a band-aid on a bullet wound. We don’t have enough personnel.
“Now [Mayor Eric Adams] wants to separate cops and have them go out alone, and it’s not like it was in the ’90s, when people had some respect for them. He’s putting the cops in danger,” the cop said, referring to Hizzoner’s comments last week saying he wants the NYPD to start solo officer patrols in city subways to cover more ground.
“And any cop who came out in the past eight years? We call them the eight-year cops. They came out under [former Mayor Bill de Blasio], are the soft cops, and you can’t blame them. That’s the way they were trained. They want to negotiate everything, and you can’t negotiate with criminals.
“This is a physical job, and sometimes you have to get physical. When you got physical under de Blasio, you would get your gun and shield taken. At least Eric’s letting the police police. But it’s eight years of a mess that [de Blasio] created that has to be unfolded.”
Mayor Eric Adams said he was in Harlem until 2 a.m. after the shooting.
“We are going to continue to zero in on removing guns off the street,” Adams said. “We have removed over 3,000 guns thus far. We’re going to continue to go after those shooters, and I’m happy to hear that the court system is picking up some of these cases.
“But we have to move even further to ensure dangerous people go to trial and [get a] determination that they are guilty and serve time,” he said.
Monday’s nine Harlem gunshot victims were among at least 20 people shot citywide between 8:45 p.m. Sunday and 2:30 a.m. Monday, law enforcement said.
Three people were shot on Taft Avenue near Westervelt Avenue in the Brighton Heights section of Staten Island around the same time as the Harlem mass shooting, authorities said.
A 22-year-old woman was shot in the back, a 32-year-old was grazed in the stomach and a 47-year-old grazed in the buttocks, cops said.
The woman was taken to Richmond University Medical Center by EMS, and the men were walk-ins at the same hospital, authorities said.
All three are listed in stable condition.
A few minutes later, a man was shot in the neck during a dispute on Grand Avenue near 69th Lane in Maspeth, Queens, cops said.
He was taken to the Elmhurst Hospital Center with non-life-threatening injuries.
In the Bronx, a 30-year-old man was shot in the arm on East Burnside Avenue near Creston Avenue around 1:15 a.m., authorities said.
He was taken to St. Barnabas Hospital in stable condition, cops said.
And about an hour later, a man was shot in the groin and a woman in the left leg on Stanley Avenue near Van Siclen Avenue, part of East New York’s Linden Houses, cops said.
Around 11:20 p.m. Sunday, a 27-year-old man was struck in the stomach on Jerome Avenue near Featherbed Lane when shots rang out during a dispute, cops said.
He was taken to the same hospital, also with non-life-threatening injuries.
About five minutes earlier, a 50-year-old man was blasted in the chest and leg on West 121st Street near Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard in Harlem, cops said.
He was taken to Mount Sinai Morningside in stable condition, authorities said.
In Brooklyn’s Canarsie neighborhood, a 28-year-old man was shot on East 94th Street near Avenue K around 9:40 p.m., police said.
He was taken to an unspecified hospital in stable condition.
Around an hour earlier, a 45-year-old woman – an innocent bystander – was shot in the back during another gathering on Nelson Avenue near West 174th Street in Morris Heights, cops said.
She was taken to St. Barnabas Hospital, where she was listed in stable condition.
On Father’s Day overall, nine people were shot in seven incidents in the city. That figure includes those injured after 8:45 p.m. but does not cover the nine more Harlem victims shot early Monday.
Six people were shot in as many incidents Saturday and two people in as many incidents Friday.
The city saw more bloodshed on Sunday’s date last year — with 13 people shot in 10 incidents, cops said. On Saturday’s date in 2021, four people were shot in as many incidents, and on Friday’s date, there were three gunshot victims in as many incidents.
“I think they’re trying, but I don’t know what you could do,” said resident Sean Ogburn, who lives next to the spot where Lee was shot and killed, of city officials.
“Most of the guns don’t come from the city,” said Ogburn, 49. “It all comes from out of state, so as long as other states are going to be lax on guns and allow people to get them and access them freely, they’re going to come up here.”
Additional reporting by Kenneth Garger, Haley Brown and Jorge Fitz-Gibbon

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Five-time Tony-winner Angela Lansbury received a special award for lifetime achievement at the 2022 Tony Awards on Sunday but did not accept the award in person, which sparked concerns from her fans.
The 96-year-old actress, who starred in several shows such as “Sweeney Todd,” “Gypsy” and “Mame,” was not present at the 75th Tony Awards that were held Sunday at Radio City Music Hall.
The award aired during the pre-show, with her former “Sweeny Todd” costar, Len Cariou, introducing her.
Fans immediately voiced concern about the Broadway icon’s absence from the award show.
“Angela Lansbury’s absence, even by video, is concerning. And perhaps helps explain why this wasn’t on the main broadcast,” tweeted one user.
“They couldn’t even have Angela Lansbury record an acceptance speech for her lifetime achievement award? How awkward. Then again, maybe she knew she would be part of the pre-show and figured we don’t deserve to hear a word,” added another.
“Someone check on Angela Lansbury,” a concerned fan wrote.
“I wish they would have asked Angela Lansbury to send a recording because I would have loved to hear from her. She was greatly missed,” chimed in another.
The Post has reached out to Lansbury’s management for comment.
Other fans were angry her award was not highlighted in the main telecast.
“Absolutely shameful that the Lifetime Achievement Award for Angela Lansbury is not on the main telecast, as well as being horribly brief. I don’t care whether she’s there or not,” one Tonys viewer wrote.
“How on earth did they not put Angela Lansbury’s lifetime achievement award during the primetime show?” added someone else.
“Are they seriously f–king honoring Angela Lansbury in the pre-show,” one asked. “HOW MANY LIVING LEGENDS DO WE HAVE. You MAKE TIME for them.”
Instead of an acceptance speech, the New York City Gay Men’s Chorus also paid tribute to her with a version of “Mame” after Cariou introduced her.
“There is no one with whom I’d rather run a cutthroat business with,” joked actor Len Cariou, 82, who starred in the title role for “Sweeney Todd” opposite Lansbury (who played Mrs. Lovett) in 1979.
“When we first met at the first rehearsal of ‘Sweeney Todd,’ I was very excited and admittedly a bit in awe of the most incredible credentials that she had,” he said.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Comedian and actor Colin Jost has officially closed a big chapter with the sale of his longtime Manhattan pad.
Jost, the 39-year-old “Saturday Night Live” mainstay who has lived in this West Village duplex since 2011, sold it for $2.32 million last week, The Post has learned.
Made up of two bedrooms and two bathrooms, Jost — who grew up on Staten Island and attended Harvard University — initially hoped to score $2.5 million for the co-op.
The move to sell the residence, where the comedian lived as he established his “SNL” career, comes after he welcomed his first child with wife, Scarlett Johansson, last August.
Spanning over 1,400 square feet, the home comes with a private patio and a private garden. What’s more: The garden even comes with a pre-wired projector screen.
Through the home’s foyer is the main living area, which features an exposed brick wall, a woodburning fireplace and French doors that lead to a Juliet balcony overlooking the garden.
Adjacent to the living room is a petite windowed kitchen, accented with painted yellow cabinets. On the same floor is the second bedroom with shuttered windows and an exposed tub.
According to the previous listing, the tub is out in the open for “ultimate relaxation.”
On the lower floor is the primary bedroom suite with an ensuite bathroom that comes with a large linen closet, an overhead rain shower and a walk-in closet.
Noble Black and David Son of Douglas Elliman held the listing.
Meanwhile, Jost and Johansson, who married in October 2020, have been touring new potential homes for their growing family, including a sprawling $23 million Upper East Side penthouse last month, The Post first reported.
Johansson, 37, herself recently sold her longtime penthouse as well, but at a loss. The home had been on the market since 2019.
Between the two of them, they own six other properties, including two homes in the Hamptons.
Johansson also owns homes in Los Angeles and the celeb-favored Snedens Landing, N.Y.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
SANTA MONICA, Calif. — Bill Cosby denied allegations he molested a 16-year-old at the Playboy mansion nearly 50 years ago but said he didn’t ask women if they were underaged before having sex, according to a deposition made public on Wednesday.
In a sworn videotaped deposition from 2015, the 84-year-old comedian testified he didn’t remember meeting Judy Huth and her friend at a park in San Marino, Calif. in 1975. Huth claims that Cosby forced her to perform a sex act inside the Playboy mansion game room.
“I don’t know why,” a frustrated Cosby said to Huth’s attorney, Nathan Goldberg, in the video when asked why Huth made such claims.
“What if I meet someone, people come up and sit next to me, or I meet 100 people … they say hello and take a picture. That (the picture) might show up somewhere. … It doesn’t mean they were with me or I was with them.”
On Wednesday, Huth’s attorneys played snippets of Cosby’s 2015 deposition for the jury since the comedian, who is blind, hasn’t attended the trial in person.
Huth, who alleged Cosby molested her at the Playboy mansion in April 1975 when she was 16-years old, is suing Cosby for sexual battery and emotional distress.
In the video, Cosby testified that when he visited the mansion, there was a protocol– he would push a button and the gates would open.
“The procedure, if I had a guest, would be to announce myself and to announce that I had guests,” Cosby said. “I would say I had three guests, four guests.”
Cosby said he didn’t recall if guests’ ID’s were checked, but he remembered people would sign the guest book located in the foyer of the main building of the mansion. The comedian, however, said he sometimes took guests directly to the game room, which was adjacent to the main part of the mansion.
“Do you deny that you took Ms. Huth and her friend … to the Playboy mansion in 1974 thereabouts, while filming of ‘Uptown Saturday Night’ was taking place?” asked Goldberg.
“I don’t recall,” the comedian said. Cosby also testified he didn’t remember if he gave the young women alcohol prior to going to the mansion.
“On those occasions, when you would want to have sexual relations with a woman you found attractive, would you try to make sure they were over the age of 18 before you pursued them,” Goldberg pressed.
But Cosby shook his head and said no when asked if he knowingly went out with girls who were under the age of 18 during the 1970s.
Huth’s attorneys concluded their case after playing the bombshell Cosby tape, but not before Cosby’s attorney, Jennifer Bonjean, completed her cross-examination of Huth.
On Wednesday, Bonjean asked Huth if she remembers eating dinner at the mansion with Cosby just hours after the comedian allegedly molested her.
Huth said she remembered actor Peter Lawford, who was also at the mansion, ate his dinner, but she couldn’t recall if she had dinner with Cosby and a group of about 15 people.
“So you remember Peter Lawford being there but you don’t remember if the guy who allegedly assaulted you was,” Bonjean asked Huth.
“I don’t know,” Huth answered. She did recall that it was movie night at the mansion, but Huth said she didn’t want to stay because she was afraid of what Cosby would do to her.
“I wanted to leave … I wanted out of there,” Huth said. “I didn’t watch the movie … I was not going to sit in the dark with Bill Cosby after what he did to me, ma’am. That’s the truth.”
Bonjean also pressed Huth about whether her alleged encounter with Cosby was her first sexual experience.
“I thought I was 15,” Huth replied.
“So at 15, it would’ve been your first sexual experience,” Bonjean asked Huth. “Are you saying you forgot your first sexual experience? It wasn’t Bill Cosby, was it?”
Huth, who looked offended at the line of questioning, said she didn’t remember if she was already with her boyfriend that summer.
Morning Report delivers the latest news, videos, photos and more.
Please provide a valid email address.
By clicking above you agree to the 						Terms of Use
“Are you saying that Mr.Cosby’s penis was the first penis you ever touched?” Bonjean asked.
In a heated exchange, Bonjean asked Huth if one of the reasons why she didn’t immediately tell her father about the alleged molestation was because Cosby is a black man.
“You did not want to tell anyone about your incident at the mansion … because he was a black man, and in your community, your household, that just wouldn’t have flown, right,” Bonjean asked.
“So if it was a white man, it would’ve been OK and I could tell everybody,” a shocked Huth replied. “No! That’s not true!”
Bonjean also asked Huth about her mental health history. In her complaint, Huth claimed she underwent severe emotional distress shortly after her youngest son turned 15-years-old in September 2014, which she claims triggered trauma from the 1975 molestation.
In prior depositions, Huth said she was 15 when she was molested by Cosby, but changed her testimony this week and said she was actually 16-years old.
Bonjean grilled Huth on her medical records, which said the 64-year-old was previously diagnosed with major depressive disorder before 2014.
When asked about records that showed she had been taking Zoloft and Xanax as early as 2011– before she claims her trauma from Cosby resurfaced– Huth said she didn’t recall taking those prescriptions.
Bonjean also asked Huth about other traumatic events in her life that predated her claim for emotional distress, including physical and sexual abuse she experienced as a child.
Huth said her stepfather and mother would hit her and her grandfather attempted to molest her when she was a child.
“I cried, he stopped,” Huth said of her grandfather. “I was four.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A man wanted in connection to the deadly mass shooting at a Fourth of July parade outside Chicago was taken into custody Monday night.
Police announced Monday evening that Robert “Bobby” Crimo III, 22 — who was named as the prime person of interest in the shooting that killed six and wounded dozens more — was taken into custody in Lake Forest, Ill., following a short police pursuit.
A North Chicago police officer spotted a vehicle on US 41 matching the description of the one Crimo was believed to be driving and attempted to pull him over.
Crimo instead hit the gas and fled in the 2010 silver Honda Fit. A brief chase followed before Crimo came to a stop and surrendered without incident, Highland Park Police Chief Lou Jogmen said at a press briefing.
Footage of the arrest shows Crimo’s car stopped at an intersection with dozens of police vehicles behind. He exits the vehicle with his hands up and lies face-down on the roadway at the instruction of police. Officers then swarm him with their guns out and cuff him.
Crimo was being taken to the Highland Park Police Department and no charges had been filed as of Monday evening.
Police launched a massive manhunt for Crimo, who was believed to be armed and dangerous, hours after a gunman rained bullets onto unsuspecting parade-goers from a rooftop in Highland Park, a Chicago suburb.
The shooter opened fire on the crowd below with a high-powered rifle, killing six and injuring 24 others, minutes after an Independence Day parade began at 10 a.m.
Eyewitness footage showed a frantic scene as attendees — some of them bloodied — ran for their lives as the sound of rapid gunfire exploded. Many were running with young children in their arms and ducked for cover behind cars or ran into nearby businesses.
Law enforcement warned residents to stay out of the area while the shooter remained on the loose Monday afternoon.
“STAY OUT OF THE AREA – allow law enforcement and first responders to do their work,” the Lake County Sheriff’s Office tweeted as the carnage unfolded.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Lil TJay was one of two people shot in New Jersey early Wednesday, just weeks after declaring it was going to be “a good summer.”
The Bronx-born rapper was struck multiple times at The Promenade in Edgewater. The Bergen County Prosecutor’s Office said cops responded to reports of shots fired at the location just after midnight.
When they arrived, they discovered 21-year-old Lil TJay, whose real name is Tione Marriot, with multiple gunshot wounds.
Antoine Boyd, 22, was also found with a single gunshot wound, officials said.
Both were transported to an area hospital for treatment. Officials did not release their conditions, but TMZ reported that Lil TJay underwent emergency surgery.
Officials said the shooting happened after Mohamed Konate tried to rob Lil TJay, Boyd and a third person the rapper was with, 24-year-old Jeffrey Valdez. Valdez and Boyd each had an unlawful weapon on them at the time.
Konate was arrested later Wednesday by detectives from the Bergen County Prosecutor’s Office and the New York Police Department. His extradition to New Jersey is pending, officials said.
He’s charged with three counts of attempted murder, three counts of armed robbery, two counts of possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose and fourth-degree aggravated assault.
Boyd and Valdez were both charged with unlawful possession of a weapon and were being held at the Bergen County Jail in Hackensack awaiting an initial hearing.
Lil Tjay has over 7 million followers on Instagram. He rose to fame on SoundCloud and was signed by Columbia Records in 2018. His debut album, “True 2 Myself,” peaked at No. 5 on the US Billboard 200.
In an Instagram post just two weeks before he was shot, the rapper posted a video of himself dancing shirtless with a big chain with the caption “dis gon be a good summer.”
He was scheduled to perform at the Nickelodeon Universe Theme Park in American Dream Mall on July 22 as well as a slew of music festivals in Europe, according to SeatGeek.com and tour dates posted to the rapper’s website.
Fellow artists and athletes offered their prayers for the wounded rapper.
“Pray for my lil bro lil Tjay,” tweeted hip-hop star French Montana.
The “Run It Up” rapper was busted in Brooklyn in 2020 after cops found a cache of guns in a Cadillac Escalade he was riding in after it was pulled over.
He was arraigned on New Year’s Eve on charges of criminal possession of a weapon, criminal possession of stolen property and unlawful possession of marijuana. He was sprung on a $50,000 bond posted by celebrity bondsman Ira Judelson.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Sunday’s the Tonys. Tune in to see famous faces such as Hugh Jackman, Sutton Foster, Sam Rockwell, Billy Crystal.
Broadway’s Antoinette Perry Awards began April 1947. No statuettes. Winner Ingrid Bergman got a compact. Director Elia Kazan a cigarette lighter. Tickets to the Waldorf ballroom were $7.
The shows were Tennessee Williams’ “A Streetcar Named Desire.” Jessica Tandy, Marlon Brando, Kim Hunter, Karl Malden. Road companies were Uta Hagen, Anthony Quinn, Judith Evelyn, Ralph Meeker. “All My Sons” won the Drama Critics and taking deep bows — Basil Rathbone in “The Heiress.”
Judith Anderson starred in “Medea.” John Gielgud, “Crime and Punishment” with Lillian Gish. Maurice Evans and Katharine Cornell knocked off another “Antony and Cleopatra” revival. Top ticket: $5.80, or about the same as today’s price for the concessionaire’s candy bar.
Comedy? Tom Ewell and Nina Foch in “John Loves Mary.” Hot was Dorothy Gish in “The Story of Mary Surratt.” Falling on their assets were movie stars James Mason in “Bathsheba” and Tallulah Bankhead in “The Eagle Has Two Heads.” Nobody resuscitated those again anywhere — not even in downtown Louisiana on a Monday in hurricane season.
B.C. — Before COVID — spenders paid $1,150 to see “Hamilton.” For the regular $190 seat you might sit in New Jersey. 1947, first year of the Tonys, “Phantom of the Opera” was $29.
The Music Hall’s doing a red carpet with NY1’s Frank DiLella. And — despite scientists having constructed a clock that might lose only one second per 20 years — trust me, the Tony Awards show will still run 40 minutes overtime.
A hundred years ago the Lincoln Memorial was unveiled. About 50,000 attended . . . Last month, 118 recorded shootings — same month last year was 172. NYPD Commissioner Sewell: “We’ve seen seven straight weeks of shootings going down.” . . . Be it known Kamala Harris, who speaks nothing to nobody, speaks constantly to her sister Maya. Checks her for every idea. Maya — lawyer, Hillary adviser, promoter of people of color — was her sister’s campaign chairperson. Kamala makes no move without consulting her and should ask her how to work Joe Barfden’s mouth. Or her own . . . Al Franken is back on the road doing stand-up. Even re-screening his 2006 doc “Al Franken: God Spoke.” The thing’s 90 minutes — longer than he was in the Senate . . . PLAYING a man in “Shakespeare in Love” Gwyneth Paltrow: “The beanbag codpiece made sitting and walking difficult. But guys in the cast told me dirty jokes. Dressed as a lady they became more precious and scurried away.” . . . Michael Caine: “Infidelity is because people don’t know what’s out there. I was single, famous and rich for years so I know what’s available and I have no curiosity left.”
Bloomingdale’s doing a book to celebrate its 150th anniversary. Donna Karan, Katie Couric, Baz Luhrmann, Calvin Klein, Michael Bloomberg contributed quotes. What they love about the store, favorite item they bought, what’s Bloomingdale’s mean to NY? To you personally?
Banker: “You can’t take it with you. Being divorced I know I can’t take it with me. Why? Because my wife took it with her.”
Only in New York, kids, only in New York.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Richard Rojas, the man who killed a teen tourist and injured dozens of pedestrians when he plowed his car through Times Square, was cleared of responsibility Wednesday because he was mentally ill at the time.
A New York City jury accepted Rojas’ defense that he was psychologically disturbed during the 2017 rampage, meaning he likely now will be sent to a mental health facility, instead of facing lengthy prison time.
Jurors didn’t doubt that Rojas, 31, was behind the wheel of the car that plowed into crowds of pedestrians on May 18, 2017. But they found he “lacked responsibility by reason of mental disease or defect” on the one count of murder and 23 assault charges he faced.
While it is rare for a judge or jury to accept a defendant’s insanity defense, it isn’t entirely unprecedented.
Here are some other instances in the US where evidence of insanity has outweighed guilt in different cases:
Lorena Bobbitt made national headlines when she hacked of her then-husband John Wayne Bobbitt’s penis with a kitchen knife in 1993.
Then aged 24, Lorena testified she attacked her husband in their Virginia apartment after he came home drunk and tried to rape her.
Lorena, who had been facing up to 20 years for malicious wounding, was eventually found not guilty due to insanity. She was ordered to undergo a 45-day evaluation period at a state hospital and then released.
“How can you regret something that was not planned?” Lorena said in a 2019 “Today” interview. “You have to understand, I wasn’t in my right mindset.”
John Wayne’s penis was reattached following a 10-hour surgery — and he went on to have a successful porn career.
The man who shot and wounded President Ronald Reagan in 1981 was freed from court oversight just last week after decades in a Washington mental hospital.
John Hinckley Jr., who was charged with attempting to assassinate the 40th president, was acquitted by reason of insanity.
His defense attorneys argued that Hinckley had been obsessed with the movie “Taxi Driver” and its leading actress Jodie Foster. At one point in the film, the main character tried to kill a presidential candidate.
The shooting outside a DC hotel left Reagan’s press secretary, James Brady, partially paralyzed. Secret Service agent Timothy McCarthy and Washington police officer Thomas Delahanty were also wounded.
An Iowa teen was found not guilty by reason of insanity in 2014 over the beating death of his 5-year-old foster brother — after testifying he thought he was killing a goblin.
Cody Metzker-Madsen, then 17, had been charged with first-degree murder in Dominic Elkins’ death.
The little boy’s body was discovered at the bottom of a ravine near their home in Logan and an autopsy ruled showed he’d died of blunt-force head injuries and drowning.
During his trial, Metzker-Madsen testified that he could see goblins fighting people he knew. He also said he didn’t realize it was his foster brother when he started beating him with a brick and shoving his head under the water.
The judge ordered Metzker-Madsen to be held at a state medical facility after his trial.
Louisiana woman Chelsea Thornton was declared legally insane by a judge after she murdered her two young children.
Thornton, then 28, was charged with shooting dead her 3-year-old son and drowning her 4-year-old daughter in her apartment in 2012.
She was facing life in prison without parole before the judge issued the insanity defense ruling.
Texas mom Andrea Yates confessed to drowning her five young children in a bathtub in 2001.
Yates was initially convicted of capital murder in the deaths of Noah, John, Paul, Luke and Mary — who were all under 7 years — in 2002, but the case was appealed and eventually overturned.
She was found not guilty by reason of insanity in 2006 and held in a Texas mental health facility.
Yates has repeatedly waived her annual right to a hearing that could determine if she’s eligible to be released — with the most recent being in April.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Assemblywoman Yuh-Line Niou likes to shout loudly about the need to defund cops while making sure she lives in safety.
Her hypocrisy is as pathetic as it is naked.
Turns out she fled East Harlem to live with her then-fiancé in the Financial District because he “didn’t think [she] was safe up there” after getting robbed and witnessing violent street crimes including rape. Safe in Lower Manhattan, she then won her Assembly seat.
Her flight sends a strikingly different message  from her rant calling a group of cops going into the subway after a funeral for fallen hero Police Officer Jason Rivera a “frightening show of intimidation.” Or from her (since updated) Assembly campaign website, where she baldly stated that “we need to defund millions from the police.”
Other Dems, including Harlem Assemblywoman Inez Dickens (who stayed put uptown, despite crime), have rightly blasted Niou’s hypocrisy, which most of the defund movement shares. Its proponents demand policies that make life far worse for average New Yorkers and then get to live 100% free of the ugly consequences.
How many people in Niou’s old neighborhood have the luxury of decamping for a ritzy downtown pad? How many New Yorkers live ensconced on a Brooklyn Army base, like Jumaane Williams, another prominent defunder? How many have a private security service just for their little slice of the nabe, like Maya Wiley?
Defunders know public safety is vital and effective policing is key to maintaining it. Their own actions prove it. It’s only other people’s safety they gamble with.
Niou is running in a crowded field for the new 10th District US House seat. She’s endorsed by such top lefties as state Sen. Julia Salazar and onetime TV star Cynthia Nixon. All people, it should be noted, with the wherewithal to stay far away from rising crime.
One group defunding doesn’t draw raves from? Everyday New Yorkers: 52% of them want the NYPD budget to grow. Maybe because more than 70% fear they’ll become a violent-crime victim.
If Niou & Co. continue to get their way on crime, those fears will become near-certainties.
But don’t worry! You can always just move.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
You can now live in the grand home that a star of “Grand Hotel” once called her own.
The floor-through co-op at 450 E. 52nd St. where the actress Greta Garbo lived for nearly 40 years until her death in 1990 has listed for $7.25 million, The Post has learned.
That asking price, though nothing to sniff at, could mean a loss for the unit’s current owners if it sells for that amount. But perhaps history can repeat itself. The residence last sold in late 2017 for $8.5 million, according to city finance records — 43% more than the $5.95 million it asked for sale. At the time, the home’s ties to Garbo, who bought it in 1954 and used it as her primary residence in the decades that followed, prompted a bidding war that drove up the price.
The sellers are listed in public sales records as John and Marjorie McGraw; the former appears to be the former chairman of the publishing company McGraw Hill. Moreover, they also appear to be fans of Garbo — who hailed from Sweden — and seemingly chose to keep her legacy going by keeping certain items that show her tasteful décor.
The home last listed with a number of her furnishings and works of art intact — and when it sold, reports at the time said the owners didn’t plan on gutting the space. The reports also said that Garbo’s belongings were not included in the sale. Garbo’s great-nephew, Craig Reisfield — whose late mother, Gray, inherited the apartment after Garbo passed away (his parents resided there until 2012) — told the Wall Street Journal that the buyers displayed “a reverence for my great aunt,” adding “I think they’re going to be great stewards.”
But it appears the McGraws kept certain items and installations following the purchase, as the new listing images show immediate similarities with those of the previous. For instance, the master bedroom’s walls and headboard still come clad in Garbo’s favorite pink Fortuny silk, and another bedroom still has a pink- and green-accented V’Soske rug that she reportedly designed herself. Other features, such as wooden wall panels and built-in shelves, still adorn the dwelling.
Something else that remains: the front-seat views of the East River through large windows.
“The passing boats reminded her of her beloved, native Stockholm,” the listing says.
The kitchen comes newly renovated; it includes a new Miele side-by-side refrigerator/freezer. Just off the kitchen stands a formal dining room. The living room, which was Garbo’s favorite space, has a gas fireplace. A balcony even stands on the other side of French doors. Meanwhile, a study with an ensuite bathroom can be used as a third bedroom.
Will Kerr and Woody Kerr, of Corcoran, share the listing with Brian K. Lewis, of Compass, in a co-exclusive.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The sicko who allegedly pushed a woman onto Bronx subway tracks told cops he was drinking at the time and didn’t mean to commit the disturbing crime, according to court documents.
The comments by Theodore Ellis, 31, were revealed in a criminal complaint against him that was made public after his Wednesday arraignment at Bronx Criminal Court, where he was ordered held on $150,000 cash bail.
Ellis has been charged with attempted murder,  assault, attempted assault and reckless endangerment for allegedly pushing a 52-year-old woman onto the roadbed at the Jackson Avenue station in Melrose on Sunday afternoon.
The woman suffered a broken collarbone, dislocated shoulder and head contusion in the random, unprovoked attack that was captured on surveillance video, according to the complaint.
The victim was taken to Lincoln Hospital where she remained until Tuesday, police sources said.
After the attack, Ellis told police “I didn’t mean to push her onto the tracks. I was drinking,” according to the court docs.
He also admitted to police that he is the man seen shoving the woman in the video, the complaint says.
Chilling footage from the station shows Ellis allegedly grab the woman by her shoulders and whip her around off of the platform.
Fellow commuters were able to pull the woman off the tracks and back to safety.
Ellis was busted Tuesday at the same Bronx subway station after an MTA worker recognized him from wanted posters.
He has numerous prior arrests dating back to 2006, including raps for aggravated harassment, narcotics, robbery, grand larceny, animal abuse, resisting arrest, obstruction and assault.
His next court appearance is scheduled for June 10.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
“Thor: Love and Thunder” took America by storm on its opening night Friday, raking in $69.5 million at the box office, according to IMDB’s Box Office Mojo.
The overall weekend sales of the Disney/Marvel collaboration, with Chris Hemsworth resuming his role as the titular character, could approach $244 million, according to Deadline.
Should the projections hold, Thor would rack up 2022’s third highest three-day domestic opening, after “Jurassic World Dominion” and Disney’s “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness,” Variety reported.
“Top Gun: Maverick,” which The Post called “the perfect summer movie,” coasted into second place, taking in $4.5 million.
The success of the reboot, which recently surpassed $1 billion in ticket sales since its May 27 release, earning it the title of highest grossing movie of 2022, has let to talk of a possible third installment of the Tom Cruise-led franchise.
The money-making “Elvis” is still striking a chord with moviegoers, ranking third on the list. In fact, Austin Butler. who is “wow-ing” audiences as the King, is already generating Oscar buzz for his performance.  The Baz Luhrmann-helmed biopic pulled in $3.3 million to bring its total to $129.9 million worldwide.
Disney’s “Lightyear,” was fourth Friday night with $939,000 in receipts, while “Marcel the Shell with Shoes On,” the stop-motion animation film inspired by comedian Jenny Slate’s YouTube clips, took in $102,000.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Glenn Greenwald blasted former NBA star and CNN+ host Rex Chapman over the weekend for what Greenwald called “a repulsive outburst of overt racism” directed against Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas.
According to Greenwald, Chapman had suggested that Thomas, who has been harshly criticized by liberals for being one of six justices who voted to overturn Roe v. Wade last month, “isn’t really black because he doesn’t go to NBA games.”
Greenwald then accused Chapman of depicting Thomas as a “race traitor” for marrying a white woman.
“To describe Chapman’s blatantly racist bile as offensive — to those in inter-racial marriages but any decent person — is to understate it,” Greenwald tweeted.
“But it’s regarded as noble because this is how the liberal-left treats any dissident member of marginalized groups they believe they own.”
The Post has sought comment from Chapman.
Since retiring from the NBA in 2000 after a 13-year career, Chapman has overcome an addiction to painkillers as well as an arrest for shoplifting — finding work as a basketball commentator and social media influencer.
On Thursday, Chapman posted a meme showing Thomas alongside his wife Ginni under the caption: “Coup we be any cuter?”
CNN's @RexChapman had a repulsive outburst of overt racism last night.First, he suggested Clarence Thomas isn't really black because he doesn't go to NBA games.Then, he depicted Thomas a race traitor for being in an inter-racial marriage:https://t.co/6KIqzdZus3
Ginni Thomas has drawn scrutiny from the Jan. 6 House Select Committee, which is investigating last year’s US Capitol riot that disrupted Congress ratifying Joe Biden’s 2020 election victory.
The wife of the Supreme Court justice sent texts to then-President Trump’s Chief of Staff Mark Meadows and other Trump supporters after he lost the election to Biden.
“Help This Great President stand firm, Mark!!!” Thomas wrote in Nov. 10, 2020, according to the Washington Post.
“You are the leader, with him, who is standing for America’s constitutional governance at the precipice. The majority knows Biden and the Left is attempting the greatest Heist of our History.”
Ginni Thomas has insisted she has nothing to hide and looks forward to testifying before the panel.
Chapman’s meme also included photos of Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron, a rising star in GOP politics, alongside his white wife, Makenze Evans.
Bill Clinton used to come to our games in Landover with the Bullets. Clarence Thomas – never.
“He’s next in Mitch’s world to succeed Clarence Thomas…” Chapman, a Bowling Green, Ky. native who played basketball at the University of Kentucky, wrote of Cameron.
In a subsequent tweet, Chapman posted video from a 2018 graduation event at Christendom College in which Thomas is seen posing with the son of late Justice Antonin Scalia and other white graduates.
“Not another person of color in the picture,” Chapman wrote.
The former Charlotte Hornets, Washington Bullets, Miami Heat and Phoenix Suns guard then tweeted: “Clarence Thomas would last 20-30 seconds in an NBA locker room.”
“Why have you never seen Clarence Thomas at an NBA game? As in — ever?” Chapman wondered, before adding: “Bill Clinton used to come to our games in Landover with the Bullets. Clarence Thomas — never.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The Toula Portokalos saga continues.
“My Big Fat Greek Wedding” writer and star Nia Vardalos revealed on Tuesday that shooting for the third film has finally commenced in Athens.
The 59-year-old dropped the news on Instagram with a video, while also thanking her producers at Playtone, Gold Circle, HBO and Focus Features.
“Much love and gratitude to you all for your support as we waited to film. Greece baby. Greece,” she captioned her clip.
She also dropped a bombshell in the video, officially announcing that she’ll be directing the feature.
The Canada native recorded the video from her crisp white hotel room in the Mediterranean country.
“We are in Greece filming ‘My Big Fat Greek Wedding 3’ and thank you for all the lovely messages of just waiting,” Vardalos said.
A post shared by Nia Vardalos (@niavardalos)
She noted that she was in her hotel getting ready to shoot and even gave fans a quick snippet of the set.
The screenwriter divulged back in September that she finally completed the script for the third installment of her hilarious family comedy series.
The “My Life in Ruins” star posted a photo of herself alongside her “My Big Fat Greek Wedding” co-stars Lainie Kazan, Louis Mandylor and Gia Carides.
The foursome gathered to honor their old friend and castmate Michael Constantine, who died in August.
Vardalos said that the upcoming threequel will honor and be dedicated to Constantine.
“[Michael] had told me he wouldn’t be able to join us for the third film and his wish was that we go on. I wrote the screenplay to reflect Michael’s decision and will always treasure his last messages to me, hoping we were filming soon,” the “Larry Crowne” actress wrote. “We miss you Michael, thank you for bringing my words to life with such passion and accuracy, you will always be with us.”
“My Big Fat Greek Wedding” premiered in 2002 and followed Toula (Vardalos), a 30-year-old Greek woman living in Chicago who marries a non-Greek man (John Corbett) amid her family’s objections. A sequel was released in 2016.
The comedy was a sleeper hit and earned an Oscar nomination for Best Original Screenplay in 2003.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A livery driver was killed in a hit-and-run crash in the Bronx Sunday morning, cops said.
The 45-year-old man was driving a Toyota Camry west on 168th Street at Webster Avenue in Morrisania when his vehicle was struck by a Chevy around 4:30 a.m., according to police.
The Toyota driver suffered neck and body trauma and died, police said.
The other driver fled the scene on foot.
The Toyota, which had Taxi and Limousine Commission plates, was crushed in the crash, photos show.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
What does German-based Adidas have in common with Italy’s infamous fashion house Gucci? Both make iconic, stylish staples and are two of the biggest names in fashion history, and today, we can see they can really create an internet-breaking collaboration.
On June 7, Adidas and Gucci dropped the highly anticipated Adidas x Gucci collaboration, which debuted on the fall 2022 runway.
Since then, stars such as Madonna and her son David Banda have been spotted wearing the desired collection as we mere mortals anticipated its retail store launch.
Now, the collection extends beyond the stars and the catwalk. It’s live.
Starting today, fans can discover the collection on the design house’s website, the Adidas Confirmed app, select stores and pop-up shops in Los Angeles, New York, Miami, Chicago and Houston.
The collection includes men’s and women’s shoes, accessories, jewelry and lifestyle pieces. Each desirable item from the cool clothing collab adheres to Gucci’s edgy, exclusive elegance while maintaining the modern ubiquity of Adidas.
Further design details include various amalgamations of the iconic Gucci and Adidas logos, Gucci red and green colors and the famous Adidas three stripes. And if we do say so ourselves, the collection nods to the allure of vintage (an idea designer Alessandro Michele thoroughly enjoys) as the style assortment includes tube socks, tracksuits, bold prints and vibrant colors.
For more branded shopping, check out the Adidas website here.
Check out the New York Post Shopping section for more recommendations.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Welcome to Cancer Season, the time of year where we fully embrace the beginning of summer.
Hot on the heels of the Summer Solstice, we turn within to understand our inner needs, emotional strength and reflect on what means the most to us as we stand within the longest days of the year.
The mighty Sun will swim within the tide pools of Cancer from June 21 until August 22. Cancer is symbolized by the Crab and embodies our emotional center. This Water sign encourages us to build our stability and security, as well as pay attention to our intuition.
We connect with our families, better understand our place in our heritage and can improve our homes and domestic lives. Cancer is the fourth zodiac sign on the wheel, known as a Cardinal sign. This helps us to pioneer into emotional growth and understand our most basic needs.
Ruled by the Moon, the luminary of emotions, Cancers crave to nurture those around them, develop a sacred space and nourish their souls. Take a deep dive into global trends and predictions for what’s hot—and what’s not in Fashion, Music, Fitness, Hair, & Finance (Cryptocurrency & NFTs!) and Beauty for Cancer Season 2022! Do not miss it! Be sure to follow me, all my favs and everything in pop culture astrology to stay in the know!
Follow celebrity stylist, Jana Rae.
WHAT’S IN for Women’s & Men’s Fashion: Cancer Season kicks off the arrival of summer and nothing brings the “summer feels” like the Cannes Film Festival!  Global film industry players and celebrities gather in the south of France in the seaside resort of Cannes to bring the watery Cancer vibes to celebrate the industry’s brightest! While Cannes is known as an International Film Festival, it’s also all about the industry’s brightest celebrities gracing the red carpet.
Follow celebrity music producer, Craig J Snider.
WHAT’S IN: Our Cancer Season pick is “Running Up That Hill” by Kate Bush, the classic 80s ode to love returns with a vengeance.
Simultaneously dominating TikTok and “Stranger Things,” Kate is back on all our virtual airwaves! The song is a classic ode to love with a twist. It’s about a couple that has a strong love, but it creates problems and insecurities. “If I only could I’d make a deal with God, I’d get him to swap our places”: she wishes that the man could experience what its like to be a woman and vice versa. The lyrics actually transcend gender and are as insightful now as they were over 30 years ago. Imagine if we could do that: what that would mean for all the misunderstandings that we endure in our current world? The production surprisingly holds up and could be something you could hear on a 2022 playlist. Kate inspired multiple generations that came after, a true pioneer indeed.
Follow celebrity fitness trainer, Don Saladino.
WHAT’S IN: Here’s your Cancer season fitness tip: Open Books. This is a great movement to open up your thoracic spine and get some movement in the upper torso. (Can also be easily done on a beach towel) Enjoy!
Special Discount Code for New York Post Readers: NYPost for 25% off all his programs here.
Don has previously spoken with the New York Post in regards to being a superhero trainer for mega stars such as Hugh Jackman and Blake Lively.
Follow celebrity hairstylist, Brandon Liberati.
WHAT’S IN: It’s Cancer season: my favorite zodiac sign! Being a Cancer myself, this hair trend gives me all the FEELS. The element that rules this zodiac sign is Water. So naturally “Liquid Hair” is this season’s hottest trend! Unlike this trend’s predecessor “Glass Hair” which had blunt, sheet-like straightness, “Liquid Hair” is silky and smooth, much softer just like this sensual zodiac sign. Cancerians favor fluid movements like the tide (and their moods), so this hair trend moves like water with plenty of shine as it catches the sun just like a calm summer day in July at the ocean’s edge.
Follow celebrity hairstyle, Kristan Serafino.
The dichotomy of Cancer’s hard shell lining and soft, sensitive and compassionate interior makes perfect sense for a bolder direction of Men’s hair.  From Justin Beiber’s longer buzz cut, to Jay Z’s thick twists, to Korean boy band Min-Ho’s bleach blonde hair and JungKook’s strong middle part, all styles are bold and prominent which falls in-line with what we will see in the weeks ahead in Cancer Season!
Serafino Says Pro Tip: Don’t forget to try THE BEST PASTE.™
Kristan Serafino has recently worked with Ryan Reynolds, Danny Devito, Sir Kenneth Branagh and Richard Gere!
Follow cryptocurrency investor, Amanda Maxwell.
WHAT’S IN: As almost anyone can tell you, the crypto/stock market has officially entered a bear market. This can obviously have you feeling very emotional this Cancer Season, and rightfully so. Since the beginning of this year, crypto and stocks have taken quite a hit as the Fed withdraws their stimulus programs, which of course leads to temporary price turbulence.
This month as we channel our inner Cancer, we have to remember to give ourselves compassion, and understand our sensitivity to the topic.  In the end, we have to remember that the technology and economic issues that made Crypto such a viable option to rectifying the world’s problems, is still in play.  People from all over the world are staying true to the Cancer nature of loyalty, and holding tight to what they know will be an equalizing force in this world.
Special Tip:  Someone told me many years ago, when in doubt, zoom out! It’s an incredibly powerful mental tool that allows you to follow along the path of any stock/crypto and realize how much over the years that asset has grown, regardless of current price fluctuation. This helps you to remain calm in times of turbulence.
Disclaimer: I am not a Financial Advisor. This is not financial advice. Please do your own research before investing.
Follow Apryl Joi Vibe Visionary.
Mercury retrograde chewed us up and spit us right out into Cancer season! Cancer energy is filled with embracing the full depths of our emotions and what better emotion than love [is love]? This year’s theme for the NYC Pride March is “Unapologetically Us” which is so on-brand for Cancer energy! Cancers’ Sun symbol is the crab and likewise they have a tough protective exterior yet inside they are compassionate creatures who also make others feel loved.
Come out of your shell, Cancer, and use this spirit to support the LGBTQ+ community and enjoy the festivities! Cancer is a sponge that absorbs surrounding energy so this season will have you feeling emotions deeper than you’ve ever dreamed of!  Although Miss Carey has no official plans of joining the festivities this year, there will be appearances by plenty of other praise-worthy Queens including Grand Marshal and social media influencer Ts Madison and the Queen of Rap Lil Kim, who will be headlining NYC Pride Island music festival that afternoon.
The last NYC Pride March was held in pre-pandemic 2019, where nearly 40,000 people marched alongside an estimated 5 million spectators. Don’t worry if large crowds aren’t your thing because for the last five years, ABC-TV has telecasted the iconic march.  So dust off that margarita machine and invite your friends over for a watch party!
Follow entertainment & Hollywood make-up artist, Lizzy Polanco.
WHAT’S IN: Cancer season is here! What better way to kick off this nurturing and magical zodiac season than by fully engulfing yourself in shades of ruby, which is also one of Cancer’s corresponding birthstones! Throw on some ruby lips and apply some ruby tones of eyeshadow to give you that hard shell with a soft interior a la Cancer!
Special shout out to Brandon Liberati and Lizzy Polanco for their birthday season! Enjoy the sweetness of Cancer Season! You heard it here first.
Astrology 101: Your guide to the stars
Kyle Thomas is a globally recognized pop culture astrologer who has been featured in “Access Hollywood,” E! Entertainment, NBC & ABC television, Cosmopolitan magazine, Hulu, Bustle, Elite Daily, Marie Claire and more. He is known for his cosmic guidance for celebrities, business executives and prominent influencers. His work harnesses the power of the stars in regards to entertainment lifestyle and trends affecting people worldwide. For more information, visit KyleThomasAstrology.com.
Because the approaching full moon shines on you from your opposite sign you may find that partners and loved ones are a bit too emotional for your tastes this week. Don't take what they say and do too seriously - it's unlikely they mean it.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Spend a few decades at the helm of Dior Beauty public relations, a globe-trotting gig that entailed wrangling spokes-royalty Sharon Stone and Charlize Theron, and you develop a discerning eye for miracle crèmes and luxe lipsticks. No wonder Dianne Vavra knew exactly what she wanted to stock in her new Huntington, LI, boutique.
Opened in March, Vavra New York is already attracting a diverse, dialed-in customer base thanks to its beauty assortment — a curated mix of cult fragrances, clean skin-care products and a smattering of makeup.
“I’m getting women and men who really love discovering new brands,” says Vavra, a native New Yorker who spent her formative teen years on the Upper East Side. “I had a guy come in today and purchase three Ilona Beauty Budapest Cocktail masks and Kari Gran sunscreen for a trip he’s taking to Portugal.”
Other best sellers? “Flora Mirabilis face oil is the No. 1 hostess gift, by far,” Vavra notes. “The packaging is gorgeous.” She’s had to reorder Winnøw Clean By Design, a CBD-fueled face cream, twice, and has a waitlist for Soma Ayurvedic Jasmine Body Oil and Ashlie Johnson Dark Rose Body Scrub on backorder. One breakout hit Vavra wasn’t expecting is Aleph, a New Zealand-based makeup brand for which she’s the sole US retailer.
“I wasn’t sure how it would do, given that it’s not really known here,” she says. “But every single person who enters the shop purchases at least one piece. It’s easy to apply, multipurpose, sustainable, vegan and gluten-free.”
The boutique has also become the go-to spot for vintage accessories, from a killer bejeweled cuff to a gently loved Chanel bag. And that “treasure chest” filled with $10 trinkets? It’s blowing up on TikTok.
Though Vavra continues to do p.r. for a handful of brands under the banner of Spotlight Beauty, and sells her own Le Trench coats at Vavra New York, she’s utterly loving her new life as a shopkeeper.
“It’s an honor to be considered a resource after all my years in the industry, seeing and trying everything,” she says. “I only carry brands I know inside out and personally love, and it’s so fun to see people’s eyes light up.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The madman who allegedly fatally shot three people at an Alabama church was a federally licensed gun dealer who allegedly failed to keep a record of a weapon he’d sold, running afoul of authorities, a new report said.
Robert Findlay Smith, 70, of Birmingham, was sitting by himself at a potluck supper at Stephen’s Episcopal Church when he suddenly whipped out a handgun opened fire on three elderly attendees.
He was only stopped after another churchgoer hit him with a chair, pushed him to the ground and got the weapon.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms had given Smith a warning letter in February 2018 after an “on site” compliance investigation at his Sicard Hollow Road home, AL.com reported, citing a joint investigation by The Trace and USA Today into how the ATF monitors gun dealers and manufacturers.
Smith, who did business as “Original Magazine 2,” earned the caution after failing to record the sale or disposition of a firearm in seven days.
And while there were 86 weapons on hand, the investigation by the two outlets found ATF records which said Smith’s inventory showed 97 firearms and that he had “failed to record the disposition of … [the] firearms.”
No one at the church seemed to know Smith, and the motive is unclear for the Thursday killings of Walter Rainey, 84, Sarah Yeager, 75, and Jane Pounds, 84, who died of her injuries the next day.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
When Harvey Karp walks through airports, he often finds himself being high-fived by men he doesn’t know. The pediatrician is something of a rock star to generations of American parents — his bestselling book “The Happiest Baby on the Block,” now celebrating its 20th anniversary of publication, has become a must-have item for millions of parents deep in the newborn trenches for one simple reason: He demystifies newborn babies, and tells (often sleep deprived) readers how to make their babies sleep.
“Being a pediatrician, you’re part of the family,” says Karp, who also invented the popular Snoo, the smart sleeper bassinet that automatically rocks the baby to sleep. “It delights my heart.”
Originally, the book was going to have a different focus.
“I was going to write a book about colic,” he says, describing the frequent, prolonged crying and fussiness in babies, a condition for which there is no guaranteed treatment.
“I told my marketers, ‘What do you think of the name The Karp Colic Cure? Pretty good, right?’ They said, ‘It’s nice alliteration, but we would never buy it. No one will read this book.’ They said, think of a positive name. Something bright and happy.”
And thus, a classic was born.
“The book revolves around one simple concept – the 4th trimester,” says Karp of the term, which was added to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary this year and which describes the first three months after a baby is born and is adjusting to life outside the womb. “You have to understand that your baby is born 3 months too soon, and that the womb is a symphony of sounds, every time the mother walks or breathes. Once you understand that, you understand that putting the baby in a bed amounts to sensory deprivation.” To this end, he has devised the 5Ss for soothing newborns: Swaddle (wrapping the baby firmly in a swaddling blanket, mimicking the feeling of being in the womb); Side or stomach position (the ideal position to calm the baby); Shush (the noise all babies are soothed by, as it sounds like the womb); Swing (small, tiny movements while supporting the baby’s neck and head); and Suck (a pacifier).
Karp is also the author of “The Happiest Toddler on the Block,” the follow-up to “Happiest Baby.” happiest toddler. “The premise of the toddler book is that toddlers are not little kids — they’re cavemen,” explains Karp. “They’re uncivilized, and they are unyielding.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Those spices came with luxury prices.
Johnny Depp shelled out more than $62,000 (£50,000) for a special celebratory curry dinner with his pals on Sunday evening in Birmingham, England.
Depp, 58, indulged in a feast of “authentic Indian cuisine,” cocktails and rosé Champagne at the Varanasi restaurant, which serves “heavenly recipes and soothing ambience,” according to its website.
The actor — declared a “down-to-earth bloke” by restaurant staff — famously scored a big victory Wednesday when he was awarded a $10.35 million judgment in his brutal defamation trial against ex-wife Amber Heard, 36.
The “Edward Scissorhands” star was hanging out with his musician friend and collaborator Jeff Beck, 77, and 20 other people in their party at what’s billed as “Birmingham’s largest Indian restaurant.”
Depp has been staying in the United Kingdom to join Beck on his tour. He even appeared onstage at several of the guitarist’s shows, including one at London’s Royal Albert Hall late last month.
The father of two traveled to Birmingham to perform with Beck onstage for his show in the city’s Symphony Hall. Depp and his entourage had arrived to the trendy eatery by 7 p.m. and posed for photos with fans, the Daily Mail reported.
The 20,000-square-foot restaurant was closed so Depp and his friends could eat in private, and they left around midnight.
Mohammed Hussain, operations director of Varanasi, told the outlet: “We had a call out of the blue on Sunday afternoon saying that Johnny Depp wanted to come to eat with a group of people.”
“I was shocked, and at first, I thought it might have been a wind up [joke]. But then his security team arrived [and] checked out the restaurant, and we let them have the whole place because we were concerned that he might be bothered by other diners,” he continued.
Hussain described how the chefs prepared a feast for the “Pirates of the Caribbean” star that included delicacies such as shish kebabs, chicken tikka, paneer tikka masala, lamb karahi and tandoori king prawns.
The Independent reported that they also dined on tomato chutney, caramelized pineapple chutney, pickled okra masala, Himalaya mustard crushed potato and black stone flower heeran.
The executive also shed some light on the evening, noting that Depp was a “very lovely, down-to-earth bloke.”
“[He] spent a lot of time speaking with the staff, our friends and family and was happy to pose for pictures with them. You would never have thought that he was such a big star. He had a lot of time for us all,” Hussain gushed.
Hussain also stated that he promised he wouldn’t reveal the full bill total, but said that “money was no issue, and it was easily in five figures.”
He added, “We made more money from Depp’s visit than we did from our busiest night of the week, which is a Saturday when we have around 400 diners.” The feast ended with simple cheesecake and panna cotta for dessert.
Hussain then recalled the most surprising moment of the night, when Depp “wanted a little break from everybody” for about 20 minutes and sat with him in his office.
Hussain said the A-lister wanted to people-watch on CCTV in his office and was interested in how the cameras worked.
He explained that he didn’t ask the Kentucky native about the court case. “It was just a nice conversation with a very humble man. I’m still pinching myself, because I never dreamt that Johnny Depp would be in my office having a chat about how the CCTV in the restaurant works,” Hussain said. “It was a real honor to have him here.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A two-bedroom, 1.5-bathroom loft located on the “most Instagrammable street in Brooklyn” has hit the market for $2.6 million.
Unit 3 at 31 Washington St. has been pegged as a “classic Dumbo loft” with “timeless quality that feels uniquely old school New York,” with features that include exposed brick, large timber beams and columns, large windows and soaring 12-foot ceilings.
Completed with a chef’s kitchen, expansive living rooms with built-in bookshelves and two built-in desks, the residence is situated right on the waterfront — on the corner of Washington and Water streets in the trendy neighborhood. And the signature street view is a portal into New York City’s past.
Framed by two historic red-brick buildings that have been mostly unchanged since 1909, the view famously shows a distance shot of the Empire State Building through a support arch under the Manhattan Bridge.
The cobblestoned street, plus that view portal, attracts swarms of visitors and influencers from around the world annually for that perfect Instagram shot.
“One of Brooklyn’s most iconic views greets you every day at the entrance to this sprawling, second story authentic Dumbo loft located inside an elevator building less a half block from the lush greenery of Main Street Park, Brooklyn Bridge Park and the Dumbo waterfront,” the listing adds.
Newly renovated, the long entryway passes a powder room decorated with pink wallpaper and a pedestal sink.
A combined pantry and laundry room are discreetly tucked behind a classic and distinctive barn door.
31 Washington St. was originally built as the Tubal Cain Iron Works factory in the late 1800’s. Converted into condos in 2001, the building features 13 unique residences.
Heather McMaster, Statia Grossman, and Kerry Sullivan of The Corcoran Group hold the listing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
NBC’s “Today” show purportedly blocked a member of Macy Gray’s band from wearing a “Free Brittney Griner” T-shirt during a live performance this week to protest the WNBA star’s incarceration in Russia, according to the singer.
Gray’s keyboardist, Billy Wes, was spotted wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with the slogan ahead of the group’s performance on Thursday’s edition of Today. However, the message was nowhere to be found once Gray’s act got underway – with Wes later confirming that he was told not to display it.
“They made me turn it inside out. They said I couldn’t wear it, so I had to turn it outside out. But y’all know what time it is: free Brittney,” Wes told TMZ.
Gray later personally addressed the situation in her own interview with TMZ, saying the apparent drama over the “Free Brittney Griner” T-shirt “really bummed me out.”
“We wanted to wear them on the show and they said no, because I guess something happened,” Gray said.
“I don’t think it’s too political. It’s a human being that’s in a really horrible situation and there’s people that have power to do something about it. That’s what they should do,” she added.
Today representatives did not immediately return a request for comment.
Griner, 31, was initially detained by Russian authorities in February after police said they found vape canisters containing cannabis oil in her possession. Her arrest occurred just days before the Kremlin launched its brutal invasion of Ukraine.
She pleaded guilty to drug possession charges this week and faces up to 10 years in a Russian prison. The White House said President Biden called Griner’s wife, Cherelle, to assure her he was doing everything he can to secure her release.
Gray’s appearance on the Today show included a sit-down interview in which she addressed the backlash she faced regarding remarks she made to Piers Morgan about transgender people. Gray said “just because you go change your parts doesn’t make you a woman.”
Gray told Today that the incident was a “huge learning experience.”
“I think it takes a lot of courage to be yourself, to go out in the world and be honest about who you are. And so I think anyone who is in the LGBT community is a hero and sets an example for all of us,” Gray said. “I said some things that didn’t go over well, but my intention was never to hurt anybody. I feel bad that I did hurt some people.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The family of the author whose article inspired the 1986 Tom Cruise movie “Top Gun” on Monday sued Paramount Pictures for copyright infringement over this year’s blockbuster sequel “Top Gun: Maverick.”
According to a complaint filed in Los Angeles federal court, the Paramount Global unit failed to reacquire the rights to Ehud Yonay’s 1983 article “Top Guns” from his family before releasing the “derivative” sequel.
Shosh Yonay and Yuval Yonay, who live in Israel and are respectively Ehud’s widow and son, said Paramount deliberately ignored that the copyright reverted to them in January 2020, “thumbing its nose” at federal copyright law.
Paramount did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
The lawsuit seeks unspecified damages, including some profits from “Top Gun: Maverick,” and to block Paramount from distributing the movie or further sequels.
“Top Gun: Maverick” is this year’s biggest box office hit, generating $291 million in North America and $548.6 million globally in its first 10 days of release.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Kim Kardashian is a natural beauty, or so she claims in Allure magazine‘s August cover story.
The 41-year-old reality star says she is free of fillers and false lashes.
“No. I’ve never had eyelash extensions. I’ve never done anything. I have a drop of mascara on today. I’ve never filled my cheeks. I’ve never filled my lips,” she told Allure.
At the moment, Kardashian admitted she has “a little bit of Botox” between her brows. “But I’ve chilled, actually.”
However, Kardashian admits that she cares deeply about her looks “probably more than 90% of the people on this planet.” To keep up appearances, the mother of four tends to her skin after dark — and she’s not using affordable drug-store potions.
“After everyone’s in bed, I’m doing laser treatments,” the billionaire said without elaborating on which machine she uses. But popular at-home laser devices can start around $300 and pricier ones, like the LYMA laser, go for $2,695.
Regardless of her fussy routine, she still insists she has become easier on herself with age.
“I’m at peace with not being perfect and I wasn’t like that before.”
That doesn’t mean she plays it safe. Kardashian famously dyed her hair blond for the Met Gala where she wore Marilyn Monroe’s “Happy Birthday Mr. President” dress. She says the new hair color was more than skin deep.
“I have different energy when I’m blond. I’m a totally different person. I’m sassier. I’m more confident,” she said, adding, “As soon as I go back to brunette, I’m a boss. I’m also a totally different person when I have long, fake nails on. I have so much confidence — and I hate long nails! Every once in a while, I need that bitchy-boss energy.”
In addition to busting beauty rumors, she claims that allegations swirling that Queen Elizabeth II denied Kardashian tickets to her Platinum Jubilee last month are false.
“I saw some stupid report today where it was like, ‘Kim’s rejected to come to the Jubilee by the queen.’ I was in London with my boyfriend who’s filming a movie and we’re only here two days. But [the headline] is, ‘Kim: Rejected!’ ” she said. “I think that’s also why I love doing the reality show — the chance to show people who I really am.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
We’re moving out of the frying pan but into the oven for this launch, making it even easier to cook and bake in 2022.
From the viral Always Pan to the coveted Perfect Pot, the folks at Our Place just keep cooking up one kitchen necessity after the other, and this launch is no different.
Beginning today, June 22, the brand now carries ovenware with all the thrills and perks typical of Our Place cookware.
The collection ($195) includes the Oven Pan, their version of a sheet pan, the Oven Mat, which is reusable parchment paper and the Bakers collection, which includes two sizes of pans called the Main Bake and the loaf-sized Tiny Bake.
The entire Ovenware Set is nontoxic and nonstick, making for easy cookie baking, lasagna creations and so much more. Plus, each item comes in the iconic Our Place colors, starting with Spice, Blue Salt, Steam, Sage, and Char for this inaugural launch.
If you think it couldn’t get any better, we have one more thing to share that may be the cherry on top of the freshly-baked cake. For those with limited space, you’ll be thrilled to find that the whole set easily nestles into each other, stacking three Bakers on top and the Oven Mat and Oven Pan on the bottom.
Like always — and seen with the viral Always Pan — these launches can sell out in no time, so we advise you to act fast while this bakeware is still fresh and hot out of the oven.
Check out New York Post Shopping for more content.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Three generations of Presley women stepped on stage at Graceland last weekend, the ghost of the King of rock ’n’ roll all around them, for a screening of the much-anticipated movie “Elvis.”
Priscilla Presley, daughter Lisa Marie Presley and granddaughter Riley Keough were at the Memphis mansion that Elvis called home, to introduce director Baz Luhrmann’s biopic starring Austin Butler as the icon.
As Riley, 33, has previously stated, she broke down in tears while watching the movie for the first time with her mom and grandma. “I started crying five minutes in and didn’t stop. There’s a lot of family trauma and generational trauma that started around then for our family.”
That multi-generational trauma has included addiction, divorce and tragic death.
For Lisa Marie, 54, the screening was her first public appearance since the devastating loss of her son Benjamin Keough, 27, who committed suicide in July 2020.
She had not joined her mom and daughter at the film’s official premiere at Cannes Film Festival in May. As she was introduced by Luhrmann, Lisa Marie was greeted by screams of “We love you, Lisa” from the audience. “I love you too,” she replied.
In a video seen by The Post, she told the crowd: “My life is a little bit kind of down right now. You’re pulling me up. so thank you.
“I’m so proud of this movie, I really am … To be honest, I haven’t really left my house for the last two years unless it has to do with my children, so to get me to leave like California and fly to Memphis and be here, aside from coming to visit my [son’s grave, at Graceland], it’s a big deal.”
The Post is told that Lisa Marie, who has been open over the years about her struggles with addiction, continues to be supported by her first husband, Danny Keough, the father of Benjamin and Riley. The couple, who were married from 1998 to 1994, are living together once again — albeit platonically.
The pair are residing with Lisa Marie’s 13-year-old twin daughters, Harper and Finley Lockwood — whose father is musician Michael Lockwood, her fourth husband — in the Calabasas area of Los Angeles. She sold the nearby house where Benjamin died for $2 million in March 2021.
“They’re friends. it’s nothing romantic,” a family source said told The Post. “They are two parents grieving.”
Over the years, Priscilla, now 77, has fiercely protected Elvis’ legacy and largely been the one responsible for running his estate. And she has given this movie her full support, telling the Graceland crowd: “I’ve never been so enthusiastic about a film, an Elvis film, as I am this.”
In May, Riley told Variety how Luhrmann sat down with her and her relatives for several hours before he started filming “Elvis.”
The family also gave the director inside access to Graceland, but they had no control over the finished product.  “At the end of the day, we’re not going to tell Baz Luhrmann how to make a movie,” Riley said.
The film follows Elvis from his dirt-poor childhood in Tupelo, Miss., and Memphis, to his chance meeting with controlling manager Colonel Tom Parker — played by Tom Hanks — through to his final shambolic years dressed in rhinestones on a Vegas stage.
Presley was already a superstar when he was sent to Germany as part of the Korean War, after being drafted into the Army in 1958.
It was there that he met Priscilla Beaulieu, who was only 14 years old to his 24. The young teen was living on a West German base with her mom and stepdad, a US Air Force captain, when she was invited to a party at the house Elvis had rented in Bad Nauheim.
As Priscilla told People magazine in 2021, she knew immediately she “had to keep him … I wanted to go places with him. I would cry if I couldn’t be around him.”
In 1963, three years after Elvis returned to the States, Priscilla’s parents let her move from Germany to Memphis — initially on the condition that she live with the singer’s father and stepmother in their home a mile away from Graceland. Four years later, when Elvis was 32 and Priscilla was 21, they married.
In a 1985 interview with Barbara Walters, Priscilla insisted that Elvis refused to sleep with her until they wed, saying: “There was an agreement he made with himself that the woman he decided to take for his wife he was going to keep her that way until he married her … Somewhere in his past, he said he wanted a virgin.”
Elvis controlled her looks, her clothes, her hair, even her makeup, Priscilla said. “I was definitely under a spell of what I thought was love.”
Almost nine months to the day after the couple’s 1967 wedding, Lisa Marie, their only child, was born.
But after the baby’s birth, Priscilla said, Elvis no longer wanted to have sex with her.
As he turned to pills — having become hooked on barbiturates and stimulants during his time in the military — Priscilla could no longer cope. They divorced in 1973.
On the night of Aug. 16, 1977, Lisa Marie, then 9 years old, saw her father for the last time, not long before he was found dead in a Graceland bathroom by his girlfriend Ginger Alden. (The official cause of death was heart failure, brought on by his pill addiction.) His body remained in the house for three days, which Lisa Marie later said she found “comforting.”
Before Elvis’s death, the Church of Scientology had come calling according to Scientology expert Tony Ortega, in a bid to recruit celebrities.
Ortega told The Post that Elvis had said “What the hell is this thing?” of the religion. “Elvis wanted nothing to do with it…but Priscilla got sucked in,” Ortega told The Post.
After Elvis died, former Scientologist Sylvia “Spanky” Taylor said John Travolta sent her over to see Priscilla, who had found books on Scientology among his belongings and was curious. She recruited Priscilla, who brought up Lisa Marie in the church, who then raised her two oldest children, Riley and Benjamin, in Scientology as well.
Lisa Marie, who has said that a boyfriend of Priscilla’s tried to seduce her when she was young, reportedly met musician Danny Keough through the church at age 17. She had dropped out of school.
Six years and two kids later, the couple divorced. In 1994, she wed Michael Jackson, just weeks after her divorce was finalized and he had settled a $23 million lawsuit with the family of a 13-year-old boy he was accused of abusing. This star-crossed union — which included public make-out sessions to convince a skeptical public of their love — lasted 20 months. It ended, she told Oprah Winfrey in an interview, over an ultimatum: He had to choose drugs or her.
Later, Lisa Marie also had a doomed marriage to actor Nicolas Cage from 2001 to 2004.
“We’re all going to screw up,” as she told Marie Claire magazine in 2007. “The important thing is, do you learn from it and not do it again? Can you make it better in the future? Can you change? Because, Lord knows, I’ve f–ked up many, many times.”
She said that leaving her first marriage to marry Jackson was “probably the biggest mistake of my life.”
Lisa Marie, who tried her hand at singing over the years, filed for divorce from her fourth husband, Lockwood, in 2016 after a decade of marriage. The couple share their twin daughters, who lived with Priscilla at the height of the divorce battle, and are still embroiled in a fight over money. At one point, Lisa Marie claimed she had found child pornography on Lockwood’s computer, which Lockwood said was untrue. They will meet again in court this summer.
In 2019, Lisa Marie opened up about her addiction to painkillers and opioids in the foreword for Harry Nelson’s book “The United States of Opioids: A Prescription for Liberating a Nation in Pain.”
“I was recovering after the [2008] birth of my daughters, Vivienne and Finley, when a doctor prescribed me opioids for pain,” she wrote. “It only took a short-term prescription of opioids in the hospital for me to feel the need to keep taking them.”
Lisa Marie also battled to leave Scientology, according to Ortega.
He believes that “You Aint Seen Nothing Yet,” a song on her 2012 album, “Storm & Grace,” is about that.
“It talked about getting away from these people who were holding her down,” Ortega said. “It was very clear to me that Lisa seemed to be breaking away.”
Lisa Marie also fell out with the church, Ortega asserted, after finding out that leader David Miscavige had considered his own father, Ron Miscavige, to be an enemy of the church after the older man left Scientology.
“In October 2014, Lisa Marie went to the Flag Land Base. She wanted to see David and tried to have a face-to-face showdown with him,” Ortega claimed. “But instead of David, his sisters Denise and Lori came in the room. They just started screaming at her and telling her that Ron was a piece of s–t.
“Lisa Marie walked out [and] said, ‘That’s it, I’m no longer a Scientologist.’ She pulled Priscilla and Riley out with her.”
A representative for Scientology did not respond to requests for comment.
Ortega also said that Lisa Marie has had a “hellish [past] five years.”
Following Benjamin’s death by self-inflicted gunshot, Ortega reported that a friend told him  how Benjamin, who bore a striking resemblance to his grandfather, had struggled with drink and drugs — and “had been talking about how f - - ked up kids get in Scientology.”
Another source, who was close to Benjamin as a boy, claimed, “His entire family was shaped by Scientology, and [they’re] paying the price.”
Despite rumors that Riley, who is married to Australian stuntman and actor Ben Smith-Peterson, is back in the church, multiple sources tell us that she is not.
Lisa Marie is “keeping Scientology at arm’s length. She’s not on the warpath like she was,” Ortega added.
For now, the Presley women are doing well. Riley recently won the Camera d’Or at Cannes Film Festival for her directorial debut, alongside co-director Gina Gammell, for “War Pony,” a film about two Oglala Lakota boys navigating life on the South Dakota reservation.
“Elvis” also premiered at the festival in France, earning a 12-minute standing ovation.
Lisa Marie, for one, has already predicted big things for the movie, writing on social media:  “If he doesn’t get an Oscar for this, I will eat my own foot … “
Still, she added, “It breaks my heart that my son isn’t here to see it … He would have absolutely loved it as well.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
This “haunted” hotel is only for guests who love things that go bump in the night.
Those brave enough can enjoy a stay at Ye Olde Kings Head in the UK — although those guests wishing for a spooky evening must sign a waiver upon arrival and agree to have the night filmed to air in a weekly episode on the “My Haunted Hotel” YouTube channel.
Built in 1622, the hotel in Chester has a long and colorful past, starting as a townhouse before moving on to a stint as a brothel and then being converted into an inn in 1714.
With footage showing chairs moving by themselves, guests being screamed at by supposed “entities” and “haunted” dolls flying at guests in the nursery, it’s certainly not for the faint of heart.
The UK hotel was sold to paranormal enthusiast Harry Achilleos in 2012 when it was operating as a fully working hotel.
Achilleos, who had his own paranormal group in 2011, knew of the Ye Olde Kings Head and got to know the landlord and started booking the hotel for private events.
“The place was so active that I asked the landlord if I could put cameras in the rooms to document any activity,” Achilleos told NeedToKnow.online. “He informed me that he was selling the building and I purchased it.”
However, Achilleos was unable to run investigations 24/7, as it might disturb paying guests, which lead to the hotel fully succumbing to its spooky reputation and opening as a designated ghost-hunting mecca named “My Haunted Hotel” — complete with its own team of paranormal investigators on-site.
However, if you stay, you are expected to fully “participate” and agree to be filmed — no matter how scared you get.
The eerie hotel got an even spookier makeover by designer and paranormal investigator Brett Jones, with Slender Man-like figures on one wall, satanic crosses, a ghostly nursery, a mirror room and a pentagram-clad floor.
According to Jones, after redecorating the hotel, the paranormal activity intensified.
“We have really disturbed something in this building and every night has been an incredible experience for our guests,” he revealed.
Brave guests who have booked a stay can check in at 8:30 p.m.; they are then fully briefed ahead of the investigation before going to their rooms.
There are 16 cameras that monitor the entire location from the six bedrooms, the old brothel section, the top corridor and even the cellars. Throughout the night, guests are contacted via radio by the “My Haunted Hotel” team, who oversee the entire investigation from the control room.
Typically, guests investigate and explore their rooms and are encouraged by the team to conduct “lone vigils and various experiments throughout the building.” Guests have the option to turn their room cameras off after 2 a.m. when the investigation ends and check-out is the following day at 12:30 p.m.
Danny Moss, a paranormal investigation team member and also a star of the spooky series “The Haunted Hunts,” said they’ve captured everything from “disembodied voices, footsteps and even poltergeist activity.
“Our most famous capture so far was in room 6 when the rocking chair was moving by itself at 3:28 p.m. on a Wednesday afternoon,” he recalled before opening up about a particularly disturbing piece of the property’s history.
“One of the biggest mysteries of the building is when it served as a brothel during the 17th century,” he said. “We believe that one of the ladies who worked there actually fell pregnant, which, of course, was forbidden. We believe the man who owned the brothel may have murdered her and her child and buried them in a part of the building.”
Stays start at $172 (£140) per room, with two people per room and three on special request.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Staten Island career criminal was back on the streets Saturday — one day after he was nabbed by cops with a loaded gun.
Bessam Camacho, 27, was arrested after patrol officers found he was carrying a gun with seven rounds in the magazine on Benjamin Place in Arlington Friday night, the NYPD said.
Camacho tried to flee from police and was charged with weapons possession, resisting arrest, obstruction and disorderly conduct, according to authorities.
It was the 11th time the suspect had been taken into NYPD custody. Camacho — an ex-con and gang member — had six previous unsealed arrests, including three for guns, police said. Four other arrests were sealed, according to sources.
Prosecutors had asked that Camacho be held on $250,000 bail, but he was granted unsupervised release by Judge Lisa Headley, sources said.
Neither the district attorney’s office nor courts officials immediately returned a request for comment from The Post.
Multiple law enforcement sources blasted the court’s leniency and blamed Albany’s bail reform law for the ruling.
“There is no way a person with his record should be allowed to freely walk the streets,” said a Staten Island cop. “You can’t say he is not a flight risk when he refused to be arrested.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Another polarizing season of “The View” is wrapping up this summer — and a bombshell “hot topic” about who the next conservative co-host will be is about to drop, The Post can exclusively report.
The daytime juggernaut, which celebrated 25 glorious, feather-ruffling years this week, is about to announce who will replace self-proclaimed “mountain mama” Meghan McCain after her “miserable” and abrupt exit last summer.
A bevy of right-sided guest hosts have been cycling through on-air audtions for the top spot — and an insider has revealed those repeat tryouts are the ones to watch out for when it comes to the permanent gig.
“You are starting to see familiar faces over and over,” the source told The Post. “I would expect an announcement before the season ends on August 5.”
The source added: “If you watch the show, you can see people who are coming back regularly to join the co-hosts at the table. It is an invaluable experience for the show. And it was always the plan to make sure they had a seat at the table.”
In other words — the informed guessing game is on, so pay attention!
The most frequent repeat guest co-hosts include Alyssa Farrah Griffin, the 33-year-old former communications director for President Donald Trump, and former GOP communications director Tara Setmayer, 46. Both are being considered for the permanent seat — with some sources hinting that Farrah is likely to be the frontrunner.
Note: In the two long, long-winded months since McCain’s exit, Griffin has been a mainstay every month — and even made an extended appearance in June. No other guest host racked up that tally this season.
A rep for ABC has not responded to The Post’s request for comment.
Meanwhile, conservative author and media pundit Ann Coulter previously told The Post she would be willing to take on the role.
“Yes, of course I would [take the job] but they will never pick me,” Coulter, 60, said. “[It seems] they don’t mean what they say. You might be exposing a double-secret requirement: Must be a dumb, easy-to-push-around Republican.”
The current ladies of the talk show —  Whoopi Goldberg, Joy Behar, Sunny Hostin, and Sara Haines — are set to go on hiatus next week and will return to finish out the rest of the season on July 11.
The 26th season will pick back up after Labor Day.
The new co-host announcement will come on the heels of several scandals and dramatic incidents that have plagued — or promoted, depending on your fan stance —  the show over the past season.
In February, the always controversial Goldberg, 66, was suspended from the ABC network after saying the Holocaust was “not about race.”
The next month, Behar, 79, suffered a dramatic fall, face-planting in front of the live studio audience — and the 2 million-plus viewers at home.
And while rumors have surfaced that it has been difficult to find a new conservative voice on the show, the insider revealed that there has been “no struggle to find a new co-host.”
Despite their nonstop parade of hoopla, it appears nothing can shake the ladies of “The View.” They remain the reigning daytime chat champs while others drop like flies.
While “The View” is renewed for a 26th season, other daytime talkers are struggling. “The Talk” hit a new ratings low three months after Sharon Osbourne’s dramatic exit, and “The Real” was canceled after eight seasons in April.
And in May, Ellen Degeneres said her goodbye after 19 years on the air.
The “conservative” slot comes with its own specific set of challenges, according to former stars who filled the coveted slot.
“Right now, we still do need a really conservative voice,” legal eagle co-host Hostin, 53, proclaimed as the hunt for a new conservative cast mate heated up. “I also believe it’s really important to not have someone on the panel who spreads misinformation, who adheres to the big lies, who is an anti-vaxxer, because I think that’s dangerous.”
The longest running right-wing host, Elizabeth Hasselbeck, survived on “The View” for 10 seasons, from 2003 to 2013. But it was not without struggles. On May 23, 2007, Hasselbeck got into an infamous on-air “split screen” argument with co-host Rosie O’Donnell concerning the war in Iraq, which she supported and O’Donnell opposed.
The heated moment was caught on camera and made waves nationwide at the time.
Meanwhile, McCain bailed on her “anthropological experiment at left-wing media” after four seasons, revealing that an infamous on-air clash with enduring face mask proponent Behar, a “toxic work environment” rife with behind-the-scenes drama, ultimately led to her exit from ABC’s long-running daytime show.
“We had a respectful understanding of each other’s roles. Whenever we got in a fight, she would talk it out,” McCain, 37, said of Behar in her audio memoir “Bad Republican.” “The thing that makes me really, really sad is there was a period of time that I got along really well with her.”
The two clashed countless times over politics concerning Joe Biden’s meeting with Russian President, Vladimir Putin, Donald Trump, the handling of mask mandates, etc. Things took a real turn in January 2021, when only two days after McCain returned from maternity leave, Behar told her she did not miss her at all.
“I had postpartum anxiety. When I was back, I was really nervous. It was like starting TV all over again. I felt unsteady. I was trying to make a joke, ‘You missed me so much.’ If you watch the clip, her reaction is very sharp,” McCain continued, adding that Behar didn’t apologize to her, even though she cried during the commercial break and had a panic attack in her office when the show ended.
John McCain’s proud daughter’s fellow conservative panelist pal — Abby Huntsman — preceded  McCain’s exit in January 2020. At the time, she said it was to help out her dad, Republican politician Jon Huntsman Jr., with his Utah gubernatorial campaign.
However, Huntsman, 36, later admitted the honest reason for her departure: The show’s workplace environment, she said, “did not reflect my values” and was “rewarding people for bad behavior.”
Welp: Good luck to the new hire — and take a little time to enjoy your possibly short-lived view!

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Many people dream of becoming a millionaire – but one girl became CEO of her own multi-million dollar business at the age of 11.
Despite her young age, Mikaila Ulmer, from Texas, created her own brand of lemonade and scored a sweet $ 11 million deal from Whole Foods back in 2016.
Mikaila, now 17, first thought up the idea for her company when she was four years old and received an old cookbook from her great-grandma.
Although the book was in tatters, the young girl found a 1940s recipe for flaxseed lemonade and decided to give it a go.
She started selling it on a stand outside her house and even added her own twist; honey.
The inspiration came after she was stung twice by bees and was left terrified, according to NBCBLK.
After doing some research into bees with her mum, Mikaila soon learned about their importance and the implications if they were to become extinct.
She decided to add honey to her 1940 recipe and also promote the protection of bees at the same time – and so Mikaila’s Me & the Bees Lemonade.
On her website, she wrote: “I decided to give her beloved lemonade a new twist by adding honey from bees, instead of only sugar.
“That’s how Be Sweet Lemonade was born!

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
One year before they separated, Google co-founder Sergey Brin and his estranged wife, Nicole Shanahan, quietly purchased a $13.5 million Malibu estate.
The transaction took place on Sept. 17, 2020, six months into the coronavirus pandemic — and according to court papers, the two separated on Dec. 15, 2021. Brin officially filed for divorce a few weeks later, in January of this year, citing “irreconcilable differences.”
Until now, the identity of the buyer had remained under wraps. But according to Dirt, the five-bedroom, seven-bathroom mansion had been purchased through a secret LLC managed by a San Francisco attorney well known for her very selective client list.
Singer Pink had previously owned the home in 2010. It was her primary residence until she sold it in 2016 to French investment banker Matthieu Pigasse for $11.9 million.
Located in Point Dume, Brin joined a long list of tech moguls invading the 90265 ZIP code. Marc Andreessen, WhatsApp co-founder Jan Koum and Laurene Powell Jobs are just a few who have purchased property in the area.
It is unclear at this point who will keep the roughly 6,300-square-foot structure amid their ongoing divorce. The Post has reached out for comment.
In the divorce filing, what assets Brin and Shanahan jointly own are not specified or how they will be divided. Instead, they affirm that some do exist and the details of which “are to be determined.”
“All issues as to the property rights or obligations of the parties will be determined by confidential binding arbitration in accordance with a written agreement between the parties,” Santa Clara County court records reveal.
Initially built in 2005, the previous listing notes “this is Riviera living at its best.”
The indoor-outdoor Asian-eque theme of the home gives off island vibes, with features that include tropical landscaping and a Balinese-style pool cabana. A walking path through the back gate leads to the beach at Zumeriez.
Other features include a chef’s kitchen with two islands, an expansive study a with wood-burning fireplace, a fitness room, a raised spa and a vegetable garden.
There is a separate guest house with a current recording studio and art studio.
Shen Shultz with Sotheby’s International Realty represented the seller. Farrah Brittany with The Agency represented Brin in the transaction.
Meanwhile, Brin also maintains a home in New York City’s West Village and two homes in Silicon Valley. He purchased the historic Pine Brook estate in Atherton, Calif. for $53 million in 2011. The estate is a 12-acre property originally built in 1911 by a Levi’s heiress, and is considered the most anyone has ever paid for a home in the neighborhood.
Additionally, he paid a whopping $80 million for a superyacht named “Dragonfly” in 2009.
It’s a significant real estate portfolio. Not bad for a guy who has been labeled as the 7th-richest man in the world, with a net worth to tune of nearly $100 billion.
Brin, 48, and Shanahan, 36, married in 2018 and share a daughter. Brin also has two children from his previous marriage to Anne Wojcicki, who co-founded and serves as CEO of the personal genomics company 23andMe.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Adam Sandler insists the shiner he debuted on “Good Morning America” Monday wasn’t the result of a fist fight. But I still gotta wonder: Did A.O. Scott finally slug the poor guy in the face?
After all, for years the funnyman has been movie critics’ favorite punching bag.
It’s harder to spot plump red fruits on his RottenTomatoes page than at an outdoor farmers market in January. Even the actor’s early career titles that regular audiences loved — “Billy Madison,” “Big Daddy” and “The Waterboy” — were called “moronic,” “disposable” and “witless” by my black turtleneck-wearing colleagues.
Now, as his new film “Hustle” — a feel-good, traditional sports comedy in which Sandler plays a talent scout — drops Wednesday on Netflix, some 32 years after he came to prominence on “Saturday Night Live,” a question nags: Why do the cultural elite hate Adam Sandler so much?
Perhaps, as “The Waterboy”’s Bobby Boucher once said, “You people drinkin’ the wrong water.”
More so than just about any other comic talent — including Jim Carrey, to whom he has long been disparagingly compared — Sandler actually embodies a buzzword that critics prize: danger.
Remember the scene from the fantastic 1998 comedy “The Wedding Singer,” which has held up incredibly well, in which the title character Robbie croons a song he wrote for his cruel fiancée who left him at the altar?
Sandler starts in a soft falsetto: “You don’t know how much I need you. When you’re near me I don’t feel blue.” And with nary a pause, he screams: “BUT IT ALL WAS BULLS–T! IT WAS A G-DDAMN JOKE!”
Do the lyrics sparkle with Cole Porter’s wit? No. But the belly laughs are big because his personality as uncontrollable as Flubber. How refreshing it is to have the loud, schlubby guy next door on-screen instead of an endless supply of soft-spoken savvy urbanites?
Honestly, I’d rather watch “50 First Dates” right now than half of this year’s Best Picture nominees.
One of Sandler’s problems, I suspect, was that he became famous too late for his extreme, lewd style. “Animal House” in 1978 and 1983’s “National Lampoon’s Vacation” weren’t bristling with intelligence and subtlety either, but tend to be spoken of more highly by film buffs than, say, “Happy Gilmore.” Back then, we still valued comedy alongside seriousness. Now, we shun it.
Sandler rose in esteem when he starred in Paul Thomas Anderson’s dark rom-com “Punch Drunk Love” in 2002, and even more so with his seismic and hysterical performance as a shady New York Diamond District seller in “Uncut Gems.”
However, even the role of a lifetime couldn’t snag him a Best Actor Oscar nomination. Leonardo DiCaprio snuck in that year for using a silly Southern accent in “Once Upon A Time In Hollywood,” and Joaquin Phoenix won for using a kooky voice in “Joker.” But God forbid Sandler be recognized — he always sounds so funny!
A word often slung at Sandler is “obnoxious.” Well, I think it’s obnoxious that Tom Cruise is getting early Oscar buzz for “Top Gun: Maverick” — a fun movie, sure, but not a film that anyone is walking out of raving about the acting. Just like your parents, Tinseltown plays favorites.
Will Sandler ever get his golden moment of affirmation onstage at the Dolby Theater on Academy Awards night? Or a critical rethink? In narrow-minded Hollywood, probably not. Just more metaphorical black eyes.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Harrison Ford’s childhood home in Park Ridge, Ill., is up for sale asking $749,000.
Located in the sought-after Park Ridge Country Club, Ford, who turns 80 on July 13, lived in the home with his family in the 1950s.
According to the listing, the home has since seen several remodels throughout the decades, “while retaining the original 1920s essence.”
The “Star Wars” and “Indiana Jones” actor lived in the three-bedroom, 1.5-bathroom self-described “Vintage Tudor” house when he was 10 years old alongside his parents, Dorothy and Christopher Ford, who respectively worked as a radio actress and an actor-turned advertising executive.
Many of the original touches that existed when Ford, who played the acclaimed role of Han Solo, lived in the home have since been ripped apart during renovations. But the original balcony still remains. It’s been reported that the bedroom situated off the balcony was Ford’s bedroom.
While Ford lived in Park Ridge, he attended Maine Township High School East.
Spanning across 2,100 square feet, the home has gone on and off the market since 2018.
Features include the updated kitchen, once an avocado-green color, with a butcher block center island. There is a breakfast nook, as well as a formal dining room that connects to the family room. The three bedrooms can be converted into fitting a fourth, the listing notes.
The original wallpaper throughout the home has been replaced by a neutral grey and white palette to suit modern sensibilities.
Other features include a furnished basement, a large recreational room and a wet bar.
Twenty miles from Chicago, the home is also a quick walk to the neighborhood country club, parks and downtown Park Ridge.
Peter Bellert of Park Ridge North Real Estate holds the listing.
Ford is considered one of the highest-grossing actors of all time, putting him seventh on the all-time list, with his movies having accumulated more than $9.3 billion worldwide.
Ford was picked by George Lucas to be Han Solo while working as a self-employed carpenter, having quit acting after becoming frustrated with the small roles he played.
He has since starred in more than 50 films, with dozens of documentaries and TV programs to his name.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Three people, including an off-duty correction officer, were shot during a party at a Queens motorcycle club on Sunday night.
The shooting happened during a BBQ and biker meet-up to honor a friend who had died outside of a Queens Village motorcycle club near Jamaica Avenue and 214th Place just after 8 p.m., according to police and the Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association.
The off-duty CO, David Donegan, allegedly spotted another man, Mark Gibbs, whip out a gun and shoot at a vehicle, according to police sources.
Donegan returned fire, striking Gibbs three times about the body. Another gunman then shot at Donegan and struck him once in the left leg, the sources told the Post.
A third victim was also shot in the exchange of gunfire, which happened outside the Square Biz motorcycle clubhouse on its annual “Spazz Day” ride and barbecue.
COBA President Benny Boscio said the shooters had fired at the crowd, and Donegan, and his quick response to the gunfire saved the lives of others.
“Thankfully, Officer Donegan, who was off duty at the time, immediately pulled out his weapon and engaged them, firing several shots. During the exchange of shots fired, our officer was hit in the leg and transferred to a nearby hospital,” Boscio said.
“While the police investigation remains ongoing, one thing is crystal clear, had our officer not exercised his training and made a split second decision, this incident could have cost many innocent people their lives, including his own. His actions were nothing short of heroic.”
Boscio thanked Mayor Eric Adams for later visiting Donegan in the hospital and prayed for his recovery.
Hours before gunfire erupted, the motorcycle club posted videos of the event which showed people dancing along to the “Cha Cha Slide,” a DJ playing music on the street and motorcycles lining Jamaica Avenue.
The joyous scene was replaced with the sound of gunfire, roaring ambulances and spent shell casings following the shooting. Police recovered three used casings from the scene.
The correction officer was taken to Manhasset Hospital and Gibbs was taken to Jamaica Hospital.
The third person shot is also being treated at an area hospital.
All three are expected to survive.
Correction Officers’ Benevolent Association President Benny Boscio released a statement Monday praising the Officer.
“Yesterday evening, as a crowd of people were observing an event remembering the passing of a friend, two individuals pulled out weapons and pointed them, firing at the crowd including our Correction Officer David Donegan,” Boscio said. “Thankfully, Officer Donegan, who was off duty at the time, immediately pulled out his weapon and engaged them, firing several shots. During the exchange of shots fired, our officer was hit in the leg and transferred to a nearby hospital. While the police investigation remains ongoing, one thing is crystal clear, had our officer not exercised his training and made a split second decision, this incident could have cost many innocent people their lives, including his own. His actions were nothing short of heroic.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Ripley’s Believe It or Not! has set the record straight on a viral Instagram post that claims Kim Kardashian damaged Marilyn Monroe’s 60-year-old dress when she wore it to the Met Gala.
According to the museum, a report on the dress’ condition in 2017 states “a number of the seams are pulled and worn. This is not surprising given how delicate the material is. There is puckering at the back by the hooks and eyes,” among other instances of damage.
“From the bottom of the Met steps, where Kim got into the dress, to the top where it was returned, the dress was in the same condition it started in,” said Ripley’s VP of Publishing and Licensing Amanda Joiner in a statement on Thursday.
The reality-star-turned-businesswoman only wore Monroe’s artifact for a matter of minutes. She slipped into the gown in a dressing room near the Met Gala carpet and changed into a replica gown as soon as she made it up the steps.
Kardashian reportedly went body-makeup-free to the event. In addition, a representative for Ripley’s told The Post that she showed “the utmost respect” for the garment.
Monroe originally wore the dress in 1962 to serenade then-President John F. Kennedy for his birthday.
Ripley’s received backlash for letting the Skims founder take the dress out on the town in the first place.
A post shared by The Marilyn Monroe Collection (@marilynmonroecollection)
“Our mission is to both entertain and educate visitors and fans, and sparking conversations like the discourse around Marilyn Monroe’s dress does just that,” Ripley’s rebutted. “No matter which side of the debate you are on, the historical importance of the dress has not been negated, but rather highlighted. An entirely new group of young people have now been introduced to the legacy of Marilyn Monroe.”
On Monday, the Marilyn Monroe Collection Instagram account posted photos showing alleged new damage to a few “missing” crystals and others “hanging on by a thread.”
Kardashian, 41, vowed to not make any alterations to the dress — declared a “national treasure” to The Post by one noted Monroe expert — and altered herself instead. She infamously admitted that she lost 16 pounds in three weeks in order to squeeze into the dress.
She was finally able to fit it over her famous derriere but was unable to zip it — hence why she draped herself with a white fur shawl while on the carpet.
“I tried it on and it didn’t fit me,” Kardashian recalled on the red carpet as she retold the tale of her first fitting. “It was such a challenge. It was like a role, I was determined to fit in it.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A distant galaxy with a black hole at its center has spit out radio emissions picked up by an astronomy team in Japan.
Challenges with telescoping technologies make this discovery unique.
Called 3C273, the oddity is a quasar at the center of its host galaxy.
A quasar is a black hole anchored in a galaxy, swallowing all matter and even light – but 3C273 is still extremely luminous.
The quasar is 2.4 billion lightyears away from Earth and it’s the most-studied quasar in the night sky.
The quasar was first observed in 1963 and was the first quasar ever discovered.
Radio telescopes face challenges when focusing on bright objects like 3C273.
Phys.org writes “When you see a car’s headlight, the dazzling brightness makes it challenging to see the darker surroundings. The same thing happens to telescopes when you observe bright objects.”
Researchers at the ALMA Observatory developed techniques to study the darkened host galaxy.
They found that a structure of radio waves is layered over the galaxy for tens of thousands of lightyears – this is the first discovery of its kind.
The radio waves are, in part, powered by hydrogen gas.
Hydrogen gas is a key ingredient in forming stars.
The researchers assessed that the quasar is doing little to prevent the formation of stars.
“By applying the same technique to other quasars, we expect to understand how a galaxy evolves through its interaction with the central nucleus,” a researcher leading the study said.
Deep space observations are on the cusp of a significant improvement.
The James Webb Telescope was launched in 2021, recently nestled into its position in space, and will be sending colorized images of space back to researchers by July of this year.
This story originally appeared on The Sun and was reproduced here with permission.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Hours before President Biden taped a late-night comedy interview with ABC host Jimmy Kimmel, he attempted a pratfall of his own — tripping up the steps of Air Force One as he embarked on another day without a one-on-one interview with a journalist.
Biden began his fraught ascension of the plane’s stairs after declining to take questions from reporters, who grumbled during the flight to Los Angeles about Biden’s lack of press availability.
The commander-in-chief’s stagger went largely unnoticed, in part because footage was not immediately published by TV outlets such as C-SPAN, which have access to unfiltered pool feeds.
Biden’s interview with Kimmel, a comedian, was booked despite the fact that the president hasn’t given a reporter an on-the-record sit-down interview in about four months.
Just before his fall, Biden delivered a statement responding to Tuesday night primary elections that featured the recall of far-left San Francisco District Attorney Chesa Boudin.
“I think the voters sent a clear message last night,” he said. “Both parties have to step up and do something about crime, as well as gun violence.”
Biden, 79, then boarded the plane without further engagement with the press. He also did not stop to speak to reporters as he departed the White House Wednesday morning.
The president, whose detractors frequently accuse him of being in mental decline, previously appeared to lose his balance navigating Air Force One’s steps last month as he traveled to Illinois. In March 2021, Biden fell repeatedly on the steps. The White House blamed that episode on windy weather at the airport.
Biden will spend the next three days in Los Angeles as host of the Summit of the Americas, the run-up to which has been dominated by Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador’s announcement that he would boycott the event after the White House declined to invite the leftist authoritarian leaders of Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela.
Aboard Air Force One, a journalist pressed White House national security adviser Jake Sullivan for an explanation of why Biden did not schedule a press conference while in Los Angeles, which he has done while attending other summits overseas.
“I think it’d be hard to argue that he hasn’t taken many, many questions from the press,” Sullivan replied — despite the fact that Biden has done fewer interviews and press conferences than his predecessors, and it seemed unlikely that he would be pressed too hard by the reliably liberal Kimmel, the onetime co-host of Comedy Central’s bawdy “The Man Show.”
Sullivan’s attempt to soothe frustrated journalists did little good.
White House Correspondents’ Association president Steven Portnoy of CBS News Radio tweeted that Biden chose to forgo a press conference despite Secretary of State Antony Blinken pressuring Latin American countries this week to do more to promote press freedom.
Mike Memoli, a White House reporter for NBC, added, “The U.S. is usually the one pressing foreign allies to hold news conferences at summits abroad. Biden not doing one on home soil as he hosts summit.”
Ruffled feathers extended to the Kimmel taping itself, where the White House press office allowed only still photographers into a pool spray with the president — meaning reporters, audio recording equipment and video cameras were banned.
“For the 2nd time this week, the [White House] will only allow still cameras into a Biden event – no video. Tonight, only stills for a spray of the Biden/Kimmel taping,” tweeted Fox News reporter Jacqui Heinrich. “Earlier this week, only stills were brought to the South Lawn for his [meeting] with Sen [Chris] Murphy – TV was told about it afterward.'”
Biden’s handlers previously outraged the White House press corps on April 7 when they allowed only still photographers to observe Biden and Ketanji Brown Jackson celebrate her Supreme Court confirmation vote. At the time, it was a rare deviation from standard press pool coverage of the president and Biden’s team afterward released a heavily edited reel.
Biden’s most recent known on-the-record sit-down interview with a professional journalist was on Feb. 10 with Lester Holt of NBC. The sit-down was recorded and aired three days later during the network’s Super Bowl pregame coverage.
On Feb. 25, Biden taped two separate podcasts — a roughly 13-minute talk with Democratic activist Brian Cohen and a nearly 30-minute conversation with left-leaning Boston College professor Heather Richardson. Cohen said afterward that “I’m not a journalist … I have my agenda and I think this White House is doing a good job trying to enact some of it. Our goals are aligned.”
On March 1, Biden hosted a traditional off-the-record lunch with TV anchors ahead of his first State of the Union address to Congress. He allowed attendees to report his remarks on the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Biden also hosted New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman for an off-the-record lunch on May 16, but Friedman wrote about a week later that the ground rules allowed him to report only “what I ate and how I felt after.”
Biden also gave a two-word reply to CNN reporter Kaitlan Collins on March 18, saying as he passed her in the West Wing that his call that day with Chinese President Xi Jinping “went well.”
The president sat for just 28 interviews during his first year in office. By contrast, Donald Trump gave 95 interviews, Barack Obama did 162 and George W. Bush granted 50 interviews during their respective first years as president, according to records kept by White House Transition Project director Martha Kumar.
There’s no official repository of presidential interviews — leaving the tabulations to informal record-keepers such as Kumar, former CBS News reporter Mark Knoller and the platform Factba.se. The counts can vary due to different standards for what counts as an interview and differing visibility of local or off-the-record interviews.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Wednesday Addams is looking a little different these days.
A teaser for Netflix and Tim Burton’s upcoming Addams family TV series, “Wednesday,”  featuring Jenna Ortega in the eponymous role, dropped Monday.
“Netflix woefully presents a twisted new series from the mind of Tim Burton,” text in the trailer reads, noting that the show would be “coming soon” to the streamer.
Ortega’s take on the only daughter of the iconic macabre fam appears as a stern, cold-faced teen. However, her outfit is more pop-punk than goth and her dark makeup and braids both have a modern flair.
Thing — the ominous severed hand in the Addams family mansion — also makes an appearance in the trailer alongside the 19-year-old “Scream 5” star.
The footage features Wednesday snapping her fingers and twirling her jet-black hair into braids as the hand rests on her shoulder.
She also sports ink-colored lipstick and a black polka-dot dress. A release date has yet to be set for the coming-of-age horror series.
The new series will follow the teen during her years at Nevermore Academy as she tries to control her psychic powers.
She also encounters a serial killer who is terrorizing the local town, and the show will chronicle her attempts to uncover a supernatural mystery that involved her parents Gomez and Morticia Addams 25 years ago.
Catherine Zeta-Jones and Luis Guzmán will portray her parents, while Gwendoline Christie, Hunter Doohan, Thora Birch, Percy Hynes White, Joy Sunday, Emma Myers, Riki Lindhome, Jamie McShane and Georgie Farmer round out the main cast.
Christina Ricci will also make an appearance in the new show, having famously portrayed Wednesday in the 1991 Barry Sonnenfeld-directed comedy “The Addams Family.”
“Smallville” creators Alfred Gough and Miles Millar penned the script for the eight-episode series, with Burton directing.
Ricci, 42, praised Ortega’s iteration of the character in April during a panel at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania’s Steel City Con.
The “Pan Am” star noted, “I just finished it two weeks ago, and it was great. It was great working with Tim [Burton], and Jenna is amazing. I think people are going to absolutely love her as Wednesday.”
She then stated that Christie, 43, of “Game of Thrones” fame is “incredible,” also adding that “all the kids in it are really fantastic, so I think it’s gonna be great.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Uvalde school district police Chief Pete Arredondo was placed on leave Wednesday, nearly a month after his department botched the response to the Robb Elementary School shooting that left 19 students and two teachers dead.
Arredondo was excused of his duties by Superintendent Dr. Hal Harrell after it was found that cops under his command waited 77 minutes to confront gunman Salvador Ramos on May 24.
“From the beginning of this horrible event, I shared that the district would wait until the investigation was complete before making personnel decisions,” Harrell wrote in a press release.
“Today, I am still without details of the investigations being conducted by various agencies. Because of the lack of clarity that remains and the unknown timing of when I will receive the results of the investigations, I have made the decision to place Chief Arredondo on administrative leave effective this date.”
The director of the Texas Department of Public Safety testified Tuesday that Arredondo’s response was an “abject failure” and said the chief put the lives of cops “before the lives of children.”
“Mistakes were made and it should have never happened that way and we can’t allow that to ever happen … this set our profession back a decade,” DPS Director Steve McCraw told state senators.
Ramos had entered an unlocked door and gained access to two adjoining classrooms where he murdered fourth graders for well over an hour. Arredondo and his officers did not even attempt to enter the rooms until a tactical team arrived 77 minutes after the violence began, security footage showed.
McCraw told lawmakers that the nine officers that were present three minutes after the shooting began had enough strength in numbers to “isolate, distract and neutralize the subject.”
“The officers had weapons, the children had none. The officers had body armor, the children had none. The officers had training, the subject had none,” McCraw testified.
Investigators said Arredondo mistakenly treated the shooting as a barricaded suspect incident instead of an active shooter situation, where the top priority is for cops to confront the suspect to stop the violence.
Ramos was eventually killed by police.
UCISD Lieutenant Mike Hernandez was slated to temporarily assume Arredondo’s duties, Harrell said.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
In 1985, English singer-songwriter Kate Bush released a song called “Running Up That Hill.” It did pretty well — reaching No. 30 on the Billboard Hot 100 in the US.
But 37 years after its release, the tune — featured in last week’s episode of Netflix’s “Stranger Things” — bumped Harry Styles’ “As It Was” to No. 2 on the US Billboard Top 10.
The unexpected success also makes her both the oldest and the youngest woman to have a self-written No. 1 in the United Kingdom, Billboard reported.
In a rare interview with BBC Radio 4’s “Woman’s Hour” podcast on Wednesday, Bush shared her “exciting” thoughts on the song’s resurgence.
“It’s just extraordinary. It’s such a great series, I thought that the track would get some attention, but I just never imagined that it would be anything like this,” Bush said, noting she was a fan of the series even before her song was included in Max’s fight for survival scene.
“It’s so exciting, it’s quite shocking really, isn’t it? The whole world’s gone mad. I think they put it in a really special place … I thought what a lovely way for the song to be used in such a positive way, as a kind of talisman for Max. It’s very touching actually.”
Bush, 63, said she hadn’t heard the song in a long time because she doesn’t usually listen to her “old stuff,” but is happy that the track was introduced to a new generation of fans.
“What’s really wonderful I think is that it’s this whole new audience who in a lot of cases, they’ve never heard of me, and I love that,” she said. “The thought of all these really young people hearing the song for the first time and discovering it, I think it’s very special.”
The songstress told podcast host Emma Barnett that she has seen every episode of “Stranger Things” after a friend’s recommendation.
“It’s lovely because, in a similar way to ‘Harry Potter,’ where in those early films they were just little kids, and then as the film has progressed, it becomes heavier and darker,” she said.
“And those little kids turn into really talented, young adult actors. And you have a different connection with something that’s moved through years really of watching them grow.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
WNBA star Brittney Griner pleaded Monday with President Biden for help getting released from Russia — saying, “I’m terrified I might be here forever.”
In excerpts from a Fourth of July letter shared on social media, Griner told Biden, “I realize you are dealing with so much, but please don’t forget about me and the other American Detainees.”
“Please do all you can to bring us home,” she reportedly wrote in a hand-written message.
“I voted for the first time in 2020 and I voted for you. I believe in you.”
Griner, 31, also said that “as I sit here in a Russian prison, alone with my thoughts and without the protection of my wife, family, friends, Olympic jersey, or any accomplishments, I’m terrified I might be here forever.”
“On the 4th of July, our family normally honors the service of those who fought for our freedom, including my father who is a Vietnam War Veteran,” she wrote.
“It hurts thinking about how I usually celebrate this day because freedom means something completely different to me this year.”
The excerpts were released by a public-relations firm that said the entire letter was delivered to the White House on Monday.
Griner’s wife, Cherelle, has previously called on Biden to get her released and last month said that “it’s starting to feel like a no.”
The 6-foot-9 center for the Phoenix Mercury was arrested at a Moscow airport on Feb. 17 — one week before Russia invaded Ukraine — on suspicion of drug smuggling for allegedly carrying two cannabis oil vape cartridges in her luggage.
On Friday, Griner appeared in court for the start of her trial in Khimki, a Moscow suburb, where the prosecution alleged that she knew the cannabis oil was illegal in Russia before she entered the country to play for a Russian team during the WNBA’s off-season.
The seven-time WNBA All-Star wore a white Jimi Hendrix T-shirt and sneakers without laces as she sat in a cage for defendants, a standard procedure in Russian courts where more than 99 percent of criminal trials end in convictions.
Griner’s trial is set to resume Thursday and she faces up to 10 years in prison if found guilty.
In a  prepared statement, White House National Security Council spokesperson Adrienne Watson said, “President Biden has been clear about the need to see all U.S. nationals who are held hostage or wrongfully detained abroad released, including Brittney Griner.”“The U.S. government continues to work aggressively – using every available means – to bring her home,” Watson added.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Florida woman accused of a pepper-spraying four women while launching into an anti-Asian tirade in Manhattan was called a possible flight risk at her first court appearance Saturday, and ordered held on $20,000 bail.
Madeline Barker, 47, is facing hate charges of assault as a hate crime after she was caught on camera June 11 in Chelsea, wearing a loud Fuschia outfit and outsized sunglasses as she tells four women to “go back to where you came from” and unleashes the spray attack.
Prosecutors said Barker was a flight risk because she’s a resident of Merritt Island in the Sunshine State. She didn’t turn herself in and was only caught after an eyewitness recognized her on the street and called the cops, an assistant district attorney said in Manhattan Criminal Court.
Judge Eric Schumacher agreed and set bail at $20,000 cash, $20,000 partially secure bond.
Barker’s legal aid counsel told the judge the situation was “amplified by media sensation.”
One of the victims told The Post in an interview that she and three friends had left the L.E.A.F. Flower Show in the Meatpacking District at around 6 p.m. when the confrontation ensured. One of the group realized she had lost a bag and the friends stopped at a corner, before Barker complained the women were “harassing her,” the victim said.
Video shows the woman and the group arguing before Barker walks over and sprays them. She allegedly yelled “Go back where you came from! Go back to your country!”
The accused then left the scene, cops and the victim said.
Barker is due back in court Thursday.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Queen Elizabeth II made multiple appearances Sunday at her Platinum Jubilee Pageant — first as a hologram waving from inside a golden carriage on the streets of London, then on the balcony of Buckingham Palace for a rendition of “God Save the Queen.”
The startling digitized younger version of the 96-year-old monarch surfaced ahead of her in-person appearance.
The hologram was part of a carnivalesque parade celebrating the beloved queen’s 70-year reign. Her image was beamed into the 260-year golden carriage, which she had ridden to and from her coronation in 1953, as it was pulled by a team of royal white horses through the street, according to Sky News.
The coach led a 3-mile parade that was set to include some 6,000 performers, including pop singer Ed Sheeran.
At the pageant’s conclusion, Elizabeth briefly appeared on the balcony of Buckingham Palace alongside Prince Charles, Camilla, Prince William and Kate Middleton and their three kids.
The crowd sang “God Save the Queen” before the monarch and her family retired back into the palace.
Elizabeth, who had spent all of Saturday at home watching the celebrations, tweeted in a statement after the festivities that she was “humbled and deeply touched that so many people have taken to the streets to celebrate my Platinum Jubilee.
“While I may not have attended every event in person, my heart has been with you all,” the monarch said.
“When it comes to how to mark seventy years as your Queen, there is no guidebook to follow. It really is a first,” she said.
“I remain committed to serving you to the best of my ability, supported by my family.”
Additional reporting by Sara Nathan

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Following his bombshell defamation trial, Johnny Depp’s next act will be in a docuseries.
Premiering July 22 on streaming site Fandor, “Boston George” follows drug trafficker and smuggler George Jacob Jung, who Depp portrayed in the 2001 film “Blow.”
The five-part docuseries will feature interviews from Depp, 58, marking his first on-screen content since his courtroom battle with ex-spouse Amber Heard — unless you count his TikTok videos. The upcoming program is produced by Georgette Angelos and Chris Chesson and directed by Clint Choate.
Jung, described by Depp as “one of my favorite people instantly” and “a very charming outlaw,” lived a prolific life of “sex, drugs, rock ‘n’ roll and lawbreaking,” per the series’ IMDb page.
While Jung filmed the series prior to passing away last year, characters from his life came together to tell his story, including the author of the New York Times bestseller “Blow: How a Small Town Boy Made $100 Million with the Medellín Cocaine Cartel and Lost It All.”
Also featured will be his partner Ronda Clay Spinello, friend Waino “Tuna” Tuominen and two DEA agents, undercover agent Tom Tinnerington and Special Agent Mike McManus, who caught Jung in 1994.
Jung — who was also known as Boston George or El Americano — played a vital role in the US cocaine trade in the ’70s and ’80s, during which he and his partner Carlos Leader smuggled the drug into the country from Colombia’s Medellin Cartel. Upon being busted, Jung was sentenced to 70 years in prison but only served 20 before being released in 2014.
Fandor plans to premiere a new episode every Friday following the docuseries’ premiere, while Cinedigm will make each episode available on TVOD the following day.
Depp has more reported gigs in the future, including a musical stint with Jeff Beck and a potential role in the “Beetlejuice” sequel directed by Tim Burton. On Monday, a former Disney executive speculated Depp could even return as Jack Sparrow, despite not playing the character since 2017’s “Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Kanye West performs at a release party for his first album, "The College Dropout," in San Francisco in 2004.
Just after the release of "The College Dropout," Kanye West opened for Usher when the R&B star emarked on his "The Truth Tour" in 2004.
Kanye West performs "Jesus Walks" with a church choir at the 2005 Grammy Awards. "Jesus Walks" won the Grammy for Best Rap Song, one of 3 Grammies Kanye took home that night after being nominated for 15.
Kanye West performs with a live orchestra during the Live 8 benefit concert in Philadelphia in 2005.
Kanye West performs with Jay-Z at Hot 97's Summer Jam in 2005. The duo would continue collaborating throughout their careers, and eventually released an album together in 2011.
Kanye West performs with Pharrell Williams at Bryant Park for the Good Morning America Summer Concert Series in 2006.
Kanye West performs at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards, in support of his upcoming album "808s and Heartbreak."
Kanye West performs "American Boy" with Estelle at the 2009 Grammy Awards. The song won the duo a Grammy for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration and was nominated for Song of the Year.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
This year’s Fourth of July weekend festivities were made much sweeter for Quentin Tarantino and his wife, Daniella Pick Tarantino.
The pair — who wed in 2018 — confirmed to People they welcomed their second child together on Saturday.
“Daniella and Quentin Tarantino are happy to announce that Daniella gave birth to their baby girl on 2 July, 2022, a little sister to Leo, their first child,” their rep said in a statement to the outlet.
The baby girl’s name has not yet been revealed.
Quentin, 59, and 38-year-old singer and model Daniella — who is the daughter of Israeli singer-songwriter Tzvika Pick — got engaged in 2017 before tying the knot in a lavish Beverly Hills ceremony the following year.
They have been residing in Tel Aviv, Israel, since welcoming their firstborn child, son Leo, in 2020.
The “Pulp Fiction” director last year opened up about naming his son Leo, telling the show’s host Jimmy Kimmel that he and his wife almost didn’t name him that “because people would assume I named him after Leonardo DiCaprio.”
“There’s nothing wrong with that, but … he’s named after my wife’s grandfather, but also because, just in our hearts, he was our little lion,” the multi-Oscar-winning director added.
News that Daniella, who met the celebrated director in 2009 when the filmmaker was in Israel promoting his film “Inglourious Basterds,” was pregnant again came to light in February.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The niece of an elderly man viciously beaten to death by seven teens in Philadelphia last month said on Saturday she and her large extended family are still in shock over losing the man they called “Simmie.”
“I’m sick to my stomach over this,” said Tania Stephens, 63, about the killing of her 73-year-old uncle, James Lambert, who was attacked by teenaged thugs who hit him repeatedly with traffic cones just after 3 a.m. on June 14 as he was walking across Cecil B. Moore Avenue.
“We all can’t stop crying. Who does this? Anyone normal doesn’t beat up and kill a senior citizen walking down the street. Simmie didn’t deserve this.”
Disturbing video of the incident, released by police Friday, shows Lambert trying to walk away from the teens as they follow him and knock him to the ground with a cone. He tries to pick himself up and flee but gets knocked down again while some of the teens smile and laugh.
Lambert, who lived his entire life in Philadelphia, was taken to a local hospital where he died the following day from his injuries, police said.
Stephens told The Post that she grew up with several generations of her family including her uncle in a big house in the Fairmount section of the city. Many family members still live within blocks of each other.
Stephens said her uncle, who was retired from construction work, “stepped up” to help her mother care for her and her 10 siblings when Stephens was 12 and her father died.
He and his sister, Tania’s mother, Elsie Lambert Stephens, 85, were still so close that “Simmie” often went to her house for dinner. The family gathered every Thanksgiving at Elsie’s house, as well.
“Everyone would always ask, where’s Simmie, has Simmie got here yet?” Stephens recalled. “He just had this swagger, this cool. And he always dressed like he was out of GQ.”
Lambert never married and had two daughters and three grandsons, Stephens said. He overcame a heroin addiction in the 1960s.
Lambert was at his sister Elsie’s house for dinner just hours before he was attacked.
“My mom gave him his platter,” Stephens said. “She gave him barbecued chicken, some mac and cheese and a dinner roll. She told him, you’re late, there’s no sides left.”
Stephens doesn’t know why her uncle was out so late but she said his walk was on a route he often took.
None of the teenagers seen on video attacking Lambert had been arrested as of Friday. The Philadelphia Police Department is offering a $20,000 reward for information leading them to the culprits. A police spokesman told The Post Saturday that there were no new developments in the case.
“These kids should come forward,” Stephens said. “Their parents should come forward. Something is very wrong when kids are out at 2 a.m. beating and killing an old man. We’ve lost God, we’ve lost family, what’s happened to us?”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
American preppy fashion is swinging back into style.
In honor of the 50th anniversary of Ralph Lauren’s iconic Polo shirt — and a new book celebrating that evergreen garment — we’ve rounded up the summer wares certain to add some prep to your step.
The mix includes a colorblocked, cropped top (complete with popped collar), a baseball hat from the buzziest collection of the summer and, yes, a strand of pearls (by a brand coveted by style icons Bella Hadid and Justin Bieber). Secure the vibe with a swipe of Hermès lipstick (the striped packaging is as pretty as the product), a picnic-inspired purse and a stainless-steel wine glass, all perfect for a night on the beach under a glittering array of fireworks. It’s a party in the USA.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A man charged with threatening to kill Texas Senator Ted Cruz and other Republican congressmen is on the loose after failing to return to court.
A warrant has been issued for the arrest of Isaac Nformangum, 22, who allegedly called Cruz’s office and threatened to kill the senator “be it by a bullet to the face or by the smashing of a brick in your skull,” according to a transcript of the message released by the local District Attorney’s office, Fox News reported.
Nformangum, who accused Republicans of taking away his right to vote, was due in court Friday after being released on bond July 3. His current whereabouts are unknown.
“Hello and good afternoon Senator Rafael. This is one of the many Afro-American constituents of whom you are representative of here in Texas, as you currently serve from the Senate,” Nformangum said in the phone call, according to the report.
“I have just read the, uh, Texas Republican Party’s platform for this current 2022 year, uh, wherein it is apparent that your many colleagues intend … intend to have the voting right acts repealed and not reauthorized?”
“Every last one of your Republican colleagues to have signed off on that platform is to be found, and is to be found and killed,” Nformangum allegedly threatened.
“It is a civic duty of every American citizen or resident to see to it that every last one of your colleagues is to be killed. Killed. Be it by finding you in a public space or by trailing you to your very, by your very public homes.”
The June 26 call ended with 30 seconds of silence, according to KPRC TV. US Capitol Police reported the incident to the Harris County Sheriff’s Office in Texas the next day, court documents obtained by the outlet show.
Investigators tracked the phone number to a woman with the same last name as Nformangum. They later found an Instagram account belonging to Isaac Nformangum in which a Youtube clip showed a recording of his voice that matched the speaker of the threatening call, according to court documents.
Nformangum was arrested and charged with terroristic threat for threatening violence and murder against Cruz and members of the Texas Republican Party.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Massachusetts professor has been charged with murder for allegedly mowing down her Boston cop boyfriend and leaving him for dead during a nor’easter after a night of bar-hopping.
Karen Read, 42, was indicted by a Norfolk County grand jury Thursday on three charges, including motor vehicle manslaughter and leaving the scene of a collision causing death, news station WCVB reported.
Read was initially arrested in February on a manslaughter warrant stemming from the death of Boston police officer John O’Keefe. She was released from jail after pleading not guilty and posting $50,000 bail.
A police affidavit stated that on Jan. 29, Read, an adjunct professor at Bentley University, struck O’Keefe with her SUV outside a friend’s house in Canton, where she was dropping him off after a boozy outing.
Read headed home and did not remember what had happened. She became concerned for O’Keefe’s safety after learning the next morning that her boyfriend had not made it back from a party at his friend’s house, and noticing damage to her SUV.
The cop, a 16-year veteran of the Boston Police Department, was found unresponsive in a snowbank by his girlfriend, who tried to revive him.
“I hit him, I hit him, I hit him, I hit him,” Read reportedly told a paramedic at the scene, according to NBC 10.
O’Keefe was rushed to a hospital, where he succumbed to his injuries. Police said at the time that the 46-year-old had been acting as a guardian to his niece and nephew after both their parents died.
Read was re-arrested Thursday evening at her home in Mansfield after being indicted on the upgraded charges.
During her arraignment in Dedham Friday, Read pleaded not guilty to the new counts. Her defense attorney, who previously called O’Keefe’s death an accident, suggested that there are “grave reasons to be concerned about the ethics of the police investigation.”
A judge set Read’s new bail at $100,000, which she paid and was released from jail.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Instead of going on a once-in-a-lifetime safari in South Africa, there’s now an opportunity to experience one on your own property. The cost? A colossal $36 million.
Pegged as a “rare opportunity,”  a private reserve in Karoo in South Africa’s Eastern Cape province, one that spans over 41,260 acres, has hit the market for that sum.
The grounds, otherwise known as Magic Hills, are home to the world’s most endangered wildlife species, the listing notes. Also known as the iSanti Big-5 reserve, the animals on the land include lions, leopards, rhinos, elephants, giraffes and the African buffalo.
The world’s largest living black rhino is among the animals on the reserve.
“Magic Hills is unlike anything I have ever experienced, which, as a travel writer is saying a lot. The silence, the views, the sheer amount of space – and the stars, oh the stars! There is definitely a different energy at play here… something supernatural,” Lynette Botha, International Travel Editor at LookBook Studio, said. “Besides the natural beauty, the luxurious lodges make falling in love with the place inevitable.”
Vast horizons, vistas and plains make up the landscape and is situated near Addo Elephant Park — a South African national park that you can frequent.
The Magic Hills Private Collection consists of three lodges, and one camp for a “deeply-rejuvenating safari experience,” the listing says.
In one lodge known as Sky Villa, seven suites are laid out on top of the highest mountains on the reserve. “It is not unusual to awake amongst the clouds,” the listing adds.
A second lodge, known as the ILanga Manor House, features 10 suites styled in Cape Dutch architecture.
The third lodge, called “Elsa’s Farmhouse,” is a traditional four-bedroom home that has been restored and solar-powered.
KaKhulu Karoo, the camp, offers seven suites.
In total, the combined properties on the reserve features 28 bedrooms and 28 full bathrooms.
Despite its vastness, the property is a 30-minute private charter to the ocean and 90 minutes to Cape Town. Additionally, there are three national parks within a two-hour drive, including the Valley of Desolation.
Kim Cooper of Sotheby’s International Realty holds the listing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Stanford law professor has been blasted for writing “offensive and disparaging” tweets about Johnny Depp’s lawyer, Camille Vasquez.
Michele Dauber took to Twitter last Thursday, sharing a screenshot of Vasquez and accusing the superstar attorney of “sucking up to male power.”
“Of all the women who suck up to male power, women lawyers are the absolute worst of the bunch,” Dauber wrote. “Desperate to prove they are ‘real lawyers’ and understanding that being a woman undermines their identity as lawyers, they throw women under the bus as hard and fast as they can.”
The Post has reached out to Dauber and the Stanford Law School for comment.
During Johnny Depp’s blockbuster defamation trial against ex-wife Amber Heard, Vasquez became a household name. Footage of the glamorous lawyer grilling Heard on the stand — calling her a liar and voraciously defending Depp against claims of abuse — went viral on social media.
Of all the women who suck up to male power, women lawyers are the absolute worst of the bunch. Desperate to prove they are "real lawyers" and understanding that being a woman undermines their identity as lawyers, they throw women under the bus as hard and fast as they can. pic.twitter.com/zI79rMKDWU
Vasquez was widely praised for her cross-examination of Heard and was even promoted to partner at her law firm last week following Depp’s decisive victory in the case.
However, Dauber — who teaches at the prestigious Stanford Law School — clearly found Vasquez’s performance persuasive, tweeting out her scathing criticism last Thursday.
The professor was promptly criticized for her harsh words about Vasquez, with one follower replying: “If your son was falsely accused of domestic violence, I bet you would love for that woman to help vindicate him.”
Dauber subsequently snapped back: “If my son was accused of DV [domestic violence] he would have a lot more to worry about than some Pick Me Girl lawyer. But that isn’t going to happen because I didn’t raise a f–king rapist wife beater.”
Dauber also shared several other screenshots showing female lawyers pictured with male celebrities who have been accused of abuse, including Harvey Weinstein’s defense attorney, Donna Rotunno.
Many people objected to Dauber’s inflammatory tweets, with several mocking the Stanford academic, saying she seemed self-important.
“Obviously women need to get approval from Michele before they decide who to represent. Michele is the person who gets to decide all the choices for all other women, apparently,” one quipped.
“I’m sorry, Michele, I thought we understood that everyone is entitled to quality counsel in matters of the law. Unless you believe women can’t provide quality counsel. Maybe that’s what you’re complaining about?” another wisecracked.
Meanwhile, a British lawyer told the Daily Mail that Dauber’s tweets regarding Vasquez could actually be defamatory — ironic as Vasquez just helped Depp win his defamation case.
However, Dauber is doubling down on her tweets, which are still up on her Twitter page as of Thursday afternoon.
The professor has repeatedly tweeted out the hashtag “#IStandWithAmberHeard” multiple times and says she’s received death threats after criticizing Vasquez on social media.
Dauber tweeted her disdain for Depp over the course of his six-week defamation trial, even hitting headlines for claiming Depp’s famous film franchise “Pirates of the Caribbean” was racist.
Meanwhile, Vasquez hasn’t responded to Dauber’s remarks.
The legal eagle is likely to be too busy grappling with her new celebrity status.
Vasquez — who put on an affectionate display with Depp in the courtroom, which prompted some to fantasize they would start dating — says her newfound fame is “overwhelming.”
Meanwhile, it was revealed Thursday that the telegenic attorney will appear in an upcoming docuseries about the Depp v. Heard case, cementing her star status.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Apple TV+ dropped the trailer for one of late actor Ray Liotta’s final roles.
The six-episode drama “Black Bird” streams on the platform July 8. The miniseries follows the son of a police officer, Jimmy Keene (Taron Egerton), who is sentenced to serve 10 years in a minimum-security prison. But he has a choice: he can stay or transfer to a maximum-security facility and befriend a suspected serial killer (Paul Walter Hauser) in hopes of getting him to confess to more crimes.
Liotta, who plays Keene’s dad, is seen at the start of the trailer. “I never wanted this for you,” he says. “I wanted a totally different life — a steady paycheck, kids, a family.”
Last month, “Black Bird” creator Dennis Lehane wrote a tribute to Liotta, saying working with the actor was a “culmination of a lifelong dream.”
Lehane also said he penned Liotta’s role with the actor in mind and was “humbled, honored, fist-pump elated” when he quickly signed on to the project.
The 67-year-old “Goodfellas” alum died last month in his sleep while filming the movie “Dangerous Waters” in the Dominican Republic.
“Goodfellas” director Martin Scorsese was “absolutely shocked and devastated” by Liotta’s death.
“He was so uniquely gifted, so adventurous, so courageous as an actor,” Scorsese said in a statement.
On Tuesday, Scorsese said he “regrets” not being able to work with Liotta again before his untimely death.
“I wish I’d had the chance to see him just once more, too — to tell him just how much the work we did together meant to me. But maybe he knew that. I hope so,” the Oscar-winning director, 79, wrote in an op-ed for the Guardian.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The raddest, baddest dad America ever had will soon be honored with his very own Netflix special.
Premiering Friday, “Dirty Daddy: The Bob Saget Tribute” will feature the late comedian’s famous friends and family celebrating his legacy in the most joking — and yet touching — ways possible.
Saget’s widow Kelly Rizzo-Saget, his daughters Lara and Aubrey and “Full House” castmates John Stamos, Dave Coulier and Candace Cameron Bure will all appear in the special, which was filmed on Jan. 30 at The Comedy Store in West Hollywood.
“Keep it short,” comedian Jim Carrey jokes to Rizzo-Saget when it’s her time to speak in a trailer released on Wednesday.
The star-studded bill also includes Tim Allen, Mike Binder, Jackson Browne, Dave Chappelle, Darren Criss, Seth Green, Michael Keaton, Jon Lovitz, John Mayer, Chris Rock, Paul Rodriguez, Jeff Ross and Mike Young.
“I hope everybody here either had Bob as a friend … or someday has a friend like Bob,” Ross said.
“Welcome to the Bob superspreader,” Ross continued as an allusion to the coronavirus pandemic.
“We’re comin’ to see ya, Bob,” responded Carrey, looking up to the heavens with a fake cough.
Binder even joked that the “How I Met Your Mother” narrator once told him he was going to donate his penis to science.
“And actually, last week, Kelly got a letter,” Binder said in the trailer. “And it said, ‘Dear Mrs. Saget, we think you could do better.'”
But it will be more than just laughs, as famous friend Carey saluted him: “You created a cathedral of f–king love, Bob Saget.”
In March, the comedian appeared on “Dystopia Tonight With John Poveromo” to promote the special, revealing that he’d pitched the idea to use footage of January’s memorial to Netflix.
“It was a magical night,” Binder said on the podcast. “And we filmed it. And I showed it to Netflix. I said, ‘Look at this! Just look at 16 minutes of this.’ And Robbie Praw, the head of comedy at Netflix, he just said, ‘This is remarkable.’ And they bought it as a special.
“It’s just an amazing special,” he added. “Music — Jackson Brown and John Mayer play this song, a version of ‘These Days,’ together that’s just beautiful. And then everybody gets up and sings, ‘A Dog Licked My Balls,’ which was Bob’s closing song.”
In a newly released interview conducted just before his death, Saget reiterated the love he and his friends had for each other.
“[Age] 60 hit me very hard, but a friend of mine threw a big party for me that I didn’t expect it to be. It was Stamos,” he said on Radio Rahim’s “Til This Day” podcast. “I found out how much love that I had given to receive so much love from people.
“It’s like ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ when George Bailey, James Stewart, that’s a movie, everybody … an angel takes him through his life and shows him what would’ve happened had he not existed,” Saget said of Frank Capra’s 1946 classic. “And I know for a fact that I have helped people. I know that I have given a lot of love to people because I have a lot.”
Saget died unexpectedly on Jan. 9 of head trauma inside a hotel room in Orlando, Florida, where was on a stand-up comedy tour. He was 65.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The “person of interest” arrested in the deadly mass shooting at a Fourth of July parade outside Chicago on Monday has been identified as a 22-year-old local amateur rapper with a history of disturbing online posts.
Robert E. “Bobby” Crimo III, who performs as “Awake the Rapper,” was taken into custody Monday shortly after FBI agents visited his family’s home in Highwood, Ill., about a mile from the scene of the shooting in Highland Park, WGN-TV ­reported.
An IMDb page under Crimo’s name identifies him as a “rapper, singer, songwriter, actor and director” from the Chicago area. The page boasts one of his songs released in 2018 amassed “millions of plays.”
“The hip hop phenom is mostly known for his hit song ‘On My Mind’ which was released on Oct. 8, 2018. The track has amassed millions of plays so far across online streaming platforms,” boasts one user-written bio on the page.
Crimo began uploading music when he was 11, according to the IMDb page. The page claims his net worth is $100,000.
“The six foot Hip hop phenom Awake The Rapper was born Robert Eugene Crimo III on September 20, 2000 in Chicago, Il,” according to the page. “He’s the middle child of three and of Italian descent.”
Crimo had posted a video to his since-deleted YouTube page that included a drawing of someone who appeared to have been shot dead by police, screenshots posted online indicated.
He released a music video titled “Are You Awake” in October 2021 that included drawings of a man aiming a rifle at a person.
The video also showed an image of a newspaper clipping about Lee Harvey Oswald, who shot and killed President John F. Kennedy, and another image that shows a drawing with blood spurting from a person’s body.
A later frame shows police cars arriving as the shooter holds his hands up.
In another video, in which Crimo appears in a classroom wearing a black bicycle helmet, he says he is “like a sleepwalker … I know what I have to do.”
“Everything has led up to this. Nothing can stop me, even myself,” he adds.
According to his Spotify page, he put together three albums, in 2017, 2018 and then last year. The page says he’s averaged 16,466 monthly listeners.
His father, also named Robert Crimo, ran for mayor of Highland Park in 2019. He lost to Highland Park Mayor Nancy Rotering in 2019, WGN 9 reported. When the news station reached out to him for comment, he reportedly hung up.
Crimo also posted at least twice about former President Donald Trump, according to an NBC News report.
He was seen with a Trump flag draped over him in a Twitter post from June 27, 2021, according to the outlet. The caption on the post only read “spam.”
Another video reportedly posted on his YouTube page appears to show Crimo with other people cheering Trump’s presidential motorcade outside an airport on Jan. 2, 2021. He later flipped the phone’s orientation to show his face at the end of the video.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A Los Angeles Supreme Court judge declared a mistrial in the wrongful death suit lawsuit against hip hop mogul Suge Knight in connection with the death of Terry Carter.
A jury deadlocked after they deliberated the suit, which was filed in 2015 by Carter’s wife Lillian after Knight ran over her husband on the set of the N.W.A. biopic “Straight Outta Compton” in 2015, the LA Times reported.
Jurors were deadlocked at 7-5 in favor of Carter, according to court documents obtained by the paper.
While jury deliberations began last Tuesday, the jurors determined after less than a half-hour of meeting on Wednesday that a “mistrial should be declared.”
Nine votes in favor of a plaintiff are required for a determination.
“The Court and Counsel confer regarding declaring a mistrial. Both sides agree that a mistrial should be declared,” court records obtained by the paper said.
Carter’s widow filed the wrongful death lawsuit against Knight, Universal Studios Inc., and rappers Dr. Dre and Ice Cube, who were also portrayed in the film.
The suit alleged Universal was negligent by continuing filming in Compton after Dre warned the production to keep Knight, the co-founder of Death Row Records, away from the filming location due to a years-long beef.
The suit claimed production knew of the tension between Dre and Knight, but moved forward with filming anyway.
The complaint also alleged Universal negligently hired Cle “Bone” Sloan — a longtime rival of Knight whose fight with hip hop exec led to Carter being run over. Sloan had been working as an adviser on the film and helped broker deals with gang members so that it could shoot in Compton.
Knight, who is played in the film by actor R. Marcus Taylor was upset with the way he was portrayed.
He was out on bail for a 2014 robbery when he was caught on video repeatedly driving his pickup truck over Sloan at a Tam’s Burger parking lot in Compton and then fatally knocking into Carter, 55, before peeling off.
In 2018, Knight was sentenced to 28 years in prison after he dodged a trial on murder and attempted murder charges by pleading no contest to voluntary manslaughter.
In a letter read aloud at the emotional sentencing hearing, Lillian Carter said “her children have been robbed of the only father they know. By God’s grace I am surviving. Not living, surviving. This is a nightmare,” the widow wrote.
“I am no longer the mother, sister, wife I once was. I am no longer a wife because of the defendant’s senseless actions.”
The lengthy prison sentence shut the book on a long career decline for Knight, who founded Death Row records with Dre and helped launch the careers of Snoop Dogg and Tupac Shakur.
He lost control of Death Row after it was forced into bankruptcy and has felony convictions for armed robbery and assault.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Paris and Prince Jackson — the children of the late Michael Jackson — honored their father Sunday during the 2022 Tony Awards.
The pair took the stage at Radio City Music Hall to present a performance by the cast of “MJ: The Musical,” which depicts a major part of their father’s life and was nominated for the top award.
Prince, 25, and Paris, 24, reaffirmed the late King of Pop’s love of musicals in a rare appearance celebrating their dad.
“A lot of people seem to think our dad Michael Jackson changed popular music forever,” Prince Jackson said. “And who are we to disagree?”
“But what people may not know is he loved musicals, on film and on the stage. That’s why we are so incredibly honored to introduce the night’s first nominee for best musical, ‘MJ,’ which, using many of his iconic hits, looks at the complexities and brilliance of our father’s process.”
“MJ: The Musical” shows Jackson’s life during his “Dangerous” tour has been nominated for 10 Tony Awards including Best Musical and Actor.
Paris Jackson recently revealed that King of Pop instilled a s strong work ethic and eclectic music taste in his kids.
“My dad was really good about making sure we were cultured, making sure we were educated, and not just showing us like the glitz and glam, like hotel hopping, five-star places,” Jackson said in an interview.
“Growing up, it was about earning stuff. If we wanted five toys from FAO Schwarz or Toys R Us, we had to read five books,” she said.”
“It’s earning it, not just being entitled to certain things or thinking, ‘Oh, I got this.’ It’s like working for it, working hard for it — it’s, it’s something else entirely. It’s an accomplishment.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
In an eerie interview that was recorded just months before his death, Bob Saget shared that he came to accept his own mortality after watching so many of his family members die.
Saget told Radio Rahim last year that his aunts, uncles, cousins and sisters died at a rate of almost every two years as he grew up.
“We had so many deaths growing up that my dad would just instill [the notion of enjoying life] in me,” Saget said on Rahim’s “Til This Day” podcast. “He didn’t teach it to me, I just saw how he reacted.”
The “Full House” star watched his father bury four brothers and one sister, and came to accept the finality of life.
“I’m proud of myself because I’m onto a new thing. At 65, I’m different than I was,” the late comedian said.
Saget died at 65 on January 9, 2022, of head trauma inside a hotel room in Orlando, Florida, where was on a stand-up comedy tour.
“I just don’t have the same way of doing humor or conversation,” Saget added in the interview. “I guess therapy, having three kids, watching people pass away in the past few years, mortality, all that stuff has fortunately changed me.”
“My kids tell me, ‘Dad, you’re different. It’s so nice to watch you grow.'”
“The [deaths] started when I was like 7, and then every two years somebody died,” he shared. “[I had] a cousin die — she died at 23 of cancer after giving birth to her child — and then a lot of cousins went through a lot of hardships, so I was like 9, 10, 11, 12, 14” when he lost people, he said. “It was a lot.”
The comedian opened up about how he leaned into the arts as a way to cope with death and loss.
When his sister, Gay, died of scleroderma in 1994, Saget had already been involved with the Scleroderma Research Foundation. Though the actor was “not really successful yet” at the time of his sister’s death, he was able to use his connections at ABC to create a television movie about the condition.
“I was working with ABC, so they let me make this TV movie with Dana Delany starring in it, playing my sister,” he explained of the film, titled “For Hope.”
“I’ve done over 30 years of benefits and we’ve raised over $50 million for the Scleroderma Research Foundation,” he added.
The interview with Radio Rahim was recorded on May 29, 2021, and the first part was made public Monday. The conversation is being released in three parts, with the other two coming out this week.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
He’s quick to nip it in the bud.
Famed director Tim Burton slammed the entire Batman franchise 30 years after departing the DC Comic universe with his movie “Batman Returns.”
In a new interview with Empire Magazine, the Oscar nominee recalled being told the film was “too dark” three decades ago. Now, looking at Matt Reeves’ “The Batman” makes him “laugh a little bit,” Burton said.
“[Back then] they went the other way. That’s the funny thing about it,” Burton said about the iconic movies. “But then I was like, ‘Wait a minute. Okay. Hold on a second here. You complain about me, I’m too weird, I’m too dark, and then you put nipples on the costume? Go f- -k yourself.’”
Burton, known for his eerily dark films, vowed to never direct another Batman film after the 1992 piece of cinema. But following his adaptation of the infamous DC Comic hero, Joel Schumacher’s nipple-enhanced 1995 “Batman Forever” took a more colorful turn.
“I’m not just overly dark. That represents me in the sense that … that’s how I see things. It’s not meant as pure darkness. There’s a mixture,” he said. “I feel really fondly about it because of the weird experiment that it felt like.”
But stepping away from Batman films hasn’t slowed Burton down. He now directs an upcoming Netflix spin-off of “Addams Family” titled “Wednesday,” which dropped a teaser clip on Monday. Leading its star-studded cast is Jenna Ortega, with Catherine Zeta-Jones and Luis Guzmán as Wednesday’s parents, Morticia and Gomez. Christina Ricci, who memorably played the titular part in previous franchise films, reportedly has also joined the show in another role.
Meanwhile, “Batman Returns” star Michael Keaton will reprise his version of the Caped Crusader in “The Flash” from Warner Bros. with embattled Ezra Miller in the spotlight Justice League role – despite fans’ opposition. While Keaton was originally slated to continue to be the infamous Dark Knight, he quit due to Burton’s absence and not seeing Schumacher’s creative vision.
“I kept trying to rationalize doing it,” Keaton once revealed in an interview with Backstage, indicating that Schumacher planned to go in a different “direction” from which “he wasn’t going to budge,” according to the actor.
“I walked away going, ‘Oh boy, I can’t do this,’” Keaton revealed. “[Joel Schumacher] asked me, ‘I don’t understand why everything has to be so dark and everything so sad,’ and I went, ‘Wait a minute. Do you know how this guy got to be Batman?’ I mean, it’s pretty simple!”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A general view of the Glastonbury sign during day one of Glastonbury Festival at Worthy Farm, Pilton on June 22, 2022 in Glastonbury, England.
The festival returns for its 50th anniversary after a three-year hiatus due to COVID-19. Michael Eavis, co-creator of the Glastonbury Festival, reacts as he opens the gate for Glastonbury Festival at Worthy Farm in Somerset, Britain June 22, 2022.
A woman reacts next to Michael Eavis as revellers arrive for the Glastonbury Festival.
Revelers arrive for the Glastonbury Festival at Worthy Farm in Somerset.
A man sleeps in his tent  during day one of Glastonbury Festival.
A general view of festival goers by the Glastonbury sign during day one of Glastonbury Festival at Worthy Farm, Pilton on June 22, 2022.
Revelers arrive at the Glastonbury Festival.
Festivalgoers arrive at the Glastonbury Festival.
A general view of the festival site during day one of Glastonbury Festival.
A general view of festival goers during day one.
A general view of festival goers during day one.
People queue for entry on the first day of the Glastonbury Festival.
A general view of the festival site during day one of Glastonbury Festival.
A woman poses for a photo, on the first day of the Glastonbury Festival at Worthy Farm in Somerset, England, Wednesday June 22, 2022.
A general view of the festival site during day one of Glastonbury Festival.
Ed proposes to Chelsea as the sun begins to set on day one of Glastonbury Festival at Worthy Farm, Pilton on June 22, 2022.
Revelers line up as they arrive for the Glastonbury Festival
Festivalgoers enjoy the sun and warm weather as they attend the Glastonbury Festival.
A general view of the festival site during day one of Glastonbury Festival.
A dressed-up festivalgoer poses for pictures as she attends the Glastonbury Festival.
Revelers arrive for the five-day Glastonbury Festival.
Revelers arrive for the Glastonbury Festival, which includes dance, comedy and theatre, on top of music.
Revelers arrive for the Glastonbury Festival, which runs until Sunday, June 26.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Talk about some face-melting metal!
Metallica had a hardcore response to the “Stranger Things” season 4 finale, and fans on social media are loving it.
On Friday, the heavy metal band — whose albums dominated the charts in the 1980s — gave “Stranger Things” fans something to pound their heads to on TikTok.
Metallica bandmates James Hetfield, Lars Ulrich, Kirk Hammett, and Robert Trujillo posted a TikTok video rocking out to the “Master of Puppets” scene with the caption “Eddie, this is for you!”
If that wasn’t enough of a treat in itself, the band was rocking the show’s iconic “Hell Fire Club” T-shirts while thrashing out.
#duet with @netflix Eddie, this is for you! #StrangerThings #StrangerThings4 #MasterOfPuppets #EddieMunson #Netflix
Since the video was posted to TikTok it has already reached 2 million views and is closing in on 1.5 million likes.
While in the show Eddie Munson (Joseph Quinn) saves the day with an amazingly well-produced, thrashing tribute to the critically acclaimed song.
Metallica seemingly has done so as well with their TikTok duet.
It was something the world didn’t know it needed but is much appreciated.
One can only hope that Kate Bush follows suit.
While the band has never really left the public eye, still selling out arenas worldwide, their song “Master of Puppets” off the 1986 album of the same name, has got a new lease on life with a younger generation. Toping the iTunes rock charts at No. 1 last week.
The album itself is a six-time platinum record, most recently in 2003.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Zosia Mamet, the actress and daughter of playwright royal David Mamet and actress Lindsay Crouse, has sold her Upper West Side apartment for $1.2 million.
Mamet killed it in “The Flight Attendant,“ where she played Kaley Cuoco’s best friend on and off screen in a more grown-up version of her starring role in Lena Dunham’s often-maligned “Girls.”
The two- or flexible three-bedroom maisonette-style apartment is in a prewar building designed by Rosario Candela at 522 West End Ave.
Listed most recently for $1.25 million in February, this deal comes at a bit of a loss for Mamet, who purchased the spread in 2015 for $1.22 million.
An entry foyer opens to a large living area between two bedrooms — and a windowed, wood-paneled dining room. Both bedrooms overlook the building’s rear garden.
The unit also features a kitchen with lots of storage and details like restored solid hardwood floors, original wainscoting, high ceilings and large windows. The building comes with a shared back patio garden and bike storage.
The listing broker was Colin Montgomery of Sotheby’s International Realty.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
At least three people were killed and a number of semi-trailer trucks erupted into flames on I-30 in Arkansas on Wednesday after a horrific crash involving three separate pile-ups with at least a dozen vehicles, cops said.
Photo and video from the scene near Friendship, Arkansas showed no less than four eighteen-wheelers piled up on the westbound side of the highway.
Two of the vehicles appeared to be engulfed in flames — while the two others had lost their cargo, according to the images, which showed one truck’s trailer split open in the highway’s grassy median.
Other images showed huge amounts of smoke billowing up into the sky above the interstate.
Officials on the scene told a reporter from KARK-TV that at least three people have died due to the crash.
Troopers had yet to account for all individuals at the scene as of 3 p.m. Wednesday, the Fayetteville Flyer reported.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The ’80s are back — at least according to the music charts.
Metallica’s heavy metal epic “Master of Puppets” topped global charts this week after it was played in an episode of Netflix’s “Stranger Things,” which is set in the 1980s.
The 8-minute-and-38-second-long title song from the band’s 1986 album is currently at the top spot on the iTunes rock chart and at the No. 29 overall spot on iTunes alongside many newly released hits.
The guitar-heavy single was used during a pivotal scene involving the character Eddie in the season four finale.
The show creators Matt and Ross Duffer wrote the scene with the exact song in mind, the show’s music supervisor Nora Felder said in an interview with Variety.
“It was another one of those ‘it has to be this song,’ moments,” Felder said. “This part of the story was anticipated to be a pivotal and especially hair-raising scene in which Eddie heroically stood tall for the fight of his life. I believe the Duffer Brothers felt that playing ‘Master of Puppets’ throughout the extended scene was the clear choice.”
The headbanger is the second ’80s song to skyrocket up music charts after making it to the soundtrack of the show’s fourth season.
Over on Spotify, Kate Bush’s 1985 hit “Running Up That Hill” is at the coveted No. 1 spot on the USA Top 50 list after it was featured on “Stranger Things” season four. “Master of Puppets” is not far behind. It’s currently clocking in at No. 12.
Bush’s hit was featured prominently in the first episode of season four as the angsty character Max listens to the British singer on her portable cassette player.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Strap yourself in for a wild ride: “The Boys” returns for a third season of head-popping gore, dark humor and psychotic superheroes — and it’s a rollicking ride.
Nearly two years have passed since Season 2 of “The Boys” dropped on Prime Video and ended with Nazi superhero Stormfront (Aya Cash) fried to a cinder and narcissistic, murderous Homelander (Antony Starr) — leader of The Seven — spiraling further into his unbridled madness.
There’s a quick catch-up tutorial in the opening episode of Season 3 and, once that’s dispensed with, it’s right back into the fire with our “Supes” and the mere mortals plotting their downfall — starting with a clip from “Dawn of The Seven,” Vaught’s big-budget movie rewriting Homelander’s history with Stormfront (portrayed by Charlize Theron in a meta twist) in an effort to boost his sagging public ratings.
He’s also on an apology talk show in which he goes full-on-smarm, but he’s further thrown for a loop once Starlight (Erin Moriarty) is named co-captain of The Seven. It’s a “touché” moment, not just for Starlight but for evil Vought boss Stan Edgar (Giancarlo Esposito), who’s tired of Homelander and the whole shebang.
It’s now a year later, and Hughie (Jack Quaid), who’s still in a relationship with Starlight, is wearing a suit and heading the Federal Bureau of Superhuman Affairs alongside Congresswoman Victoria Neuman (Claudia Doumit) — who’s not who or what she appears to be.
The take-no-prisoners Butcher (Karl Urban) remains unrelenting in his quest for justice and the rest of the team is scattered to the wind: Mother’s Milk (Laz Alonso) is trying to adjust to life as a single dad (his ex-wife, Monique, dates the nebbishy “Dawn of The Seven” director) but he can’t shake his visceral obsession with hunting Supes. Frenchie (Tomer Kapon) and Kimiko (Karen Fukuhara) are still together and communicating via sign language, but otherwise hanging around waiting for something to happen.
They don’t have to wait for long.
I could go on, but that would ruin many of the surprises in store for fans of “The Boys.” Jensen Ackles joins the cast as Soldier Boy — thought to have been killed in a nuclear-reactor meltdown in the ’80s — but that’s only the tip of the surrealistic iceberg. Trust me.
The series hews closely to its mission of outrageous entertainment via tongue-in-cheek pop-culture references and allusions: Vaught’s Lifetime-y VTV network has the tagline “Television for Women,” there are shout-outs to Dame Judi Dench (!) and the cast of “Riverdale” and Starlight hosts a reality TV competition series, “American Hero,” to choose the next member of The Seven.
It’s that weird and spot-on, with some of the sharpest writing on television that leaves virtually no strange stone unturned. It’s riveting, with the show’s stock-in-trade cartoonish violence that’s more humorous than disturbing.
Fans of “The Boys” will get it; if you’re watching for the first time, you will soon understand what all the fuss is about.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Newly released video captured the horrifying moment a man violently tossed a 52-year-old woman onto the subway tracks in the Bronx on Sunday.
The footage, provided Monday by the NYPD, shows the still-at-large suspect’s random attack on the victim at the Jackson Avenue station at about 4:45 p.m.
The man, wearing a backwards baseball cap and white tank top, approached the woman from behind, grabbed her with both hands and threw her towards the tracks, the video shows.
The woman hit the platform pavement before tumbling onto the roadbed.
Bystanders helped pick the woman up from the track and onto the platform, an MTA spokesperson said. No train was approaching when she was tossed onto the tracks.
The victim was taken to Lincoln Hospital in stable condition, police said.
The MTA said she suffered cuts to her head and arm.
Anyone with information on the identity of the man is asked to call the NYPD’s Crime Stoppers Hotline at 1-800-577-TIPS (8477) or for Spanish, 1-888-57-PISTA (74782). The public can also submit their tips by logging onto the CrimeStoppers website at https://crimestoppers.nypdonline.org/ or on Twitter @NYPDTips.
All calls and messages are confidential.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Ghislaine Maxwell should spend at least 30 years behind bars for her role in recruiting young girls for Jeffrey Epstein to sexually abuse, prosecutors said in newly filed written arguments.
Federal prosecutors said the former gal pal and notorious right-hand woman of Epstein deserves a sentence between 30 and 55 years in prison in paperwork filed ahead of her sentencing hearing on Tuesday.
They said Maxwell — who was convicted in December of sex trafficking and other crimes  — played an “instrumental role in the horrific sexual abuse of multiple young teenage girls” between 1994 and 2004.
“As part of a disturbing agreement with Jeffrey Epstein, Maxwell identified, groomed, and abused multiple victims, while she enjoyed a life of extraordinary luxury and privilege,” the prosecutors wrote.
They scoffed at Maxwell’s lawyers’ pleas for a lighter sentence last week. The defense attorneys had said the former British socialite deserves to serve no more than five years in prison.
But prosecutors argued Wednesday that Maxwell’s victims deserve to see justice withheld through an adequate prison sentence in accordance with federal sentencing guidelines — which recommend about 24 to 30 years.
“In her wake, Maxwell left her victims permanently scarred with emotional and psychological injuries,” prosecutors wrote. “That damage can never be undone, but it can be accounted for in crafting a just sentence for Maxwell’s crimes.”
They called the defense lawyers’ claims that Maxwell, 60, is being punished as a proxy for Epstein — who killed himself while awaiting trial in 2019 — in his absence “absurd and offensive.”
The prosecutors said the one-time girlfriend of Epstein hasn’t taken “even a hint of acceptance of responsibility,” instead casting blame wherever possible.
Last week, Maxwell’s lawyers blamed the alleged childhood trauma and abuse she suffered at the hands of her father as the reason she was vulnerable to Epstein’s grip.
“Maxwell was an adult who made her own choices,” prosecutors said in response. “She made the choice to sexually exploit numerous underage girls. She made the choice to conspire with Epstein for years, working as partners in crime and causing devastating harm to vulnerable victims.”
The prosecutors said she has further shown an “utter lack of remorse” for knowingly sending young girls to be sexually abused.
They also dismissed defense attorney’s claims that Maxwell deserves leniency because she has suffered a worse imprisonment than typical pretrial detainees — including multiple death threats.
“The defendant has enjoyed remarkable privileges as a high-profile inmate that vastly exceed the benefits accorded to the average inmate,” prosecutors said in their written arguments.
“It is unsurprising that a woman who had led a life of incredible luxury should complain about her life as a prisoner, but that fact does not come close to meriting leniency at sentencing, much less the extraordinary degree of leniency the defendant seeks.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
These pampered pooches certainly aren’t living the ruff life.
Style mavens hoping to add a dash of couture to the lives of their spoiled brats now can turn their fur babies into fashionistas with Gucci’s pet collection — if not bowled over by the barking mad prices.
The 2022 Gucci Pet Collection offers a $7,500 made-to-order pet bed for the fleabag who prefers to lounge in a French-inspired chaise, a $460 poop bag holder and $500 leash.
Other items include $220 embellished AirTag holders, $895 bowl covers, $4,050 pet carriers with the iconic Gucci house monogram and a “travel bowl set” with a hard-sided case emblazoned with the “GG” logo and priced at $4,250.
Studded, bedazzled and adorned with plumage, there’s also a whole line of apparel from T-shirts to hats for animal fanatics to mix and match.
The Italian luxury house headed by Alessandro Michele released a whimsical ad campaign this week with a wide range of domesticated cutie-patootie pups — basset hounds, corgis and dachshunds make cameos — rocking the new line, offered in a variety of materials including plain leather, canvas, web stripe and herbarium print.
Not to be outdone by the canines, some fancy felines even sport their Gucci best in the video, captured by Max Siedentopf.
In fact, Siedentopf was so smitten with one of the pups in the campaign that he gave it a fur-ever home.
“Very happy to share on my birthday the new campaign for Gucci’s first pet collection where I got to meet little Lucio who changed my life forever,” the artist wrote on Instagram, with photos showing his new cuddle buddy dachshund.
“Continuing the narrative of surprise and delight that defines the Gucci Lifestyle selection, the Gucci Pet Collection infuses the everyday with a magical aura,” the products’ landing page description reads. “Unveiled in a colorful, retro-inspired campaign, the pieces allow each animal’s personality to shine as an ode to the Creative Director’s vision of individuality.”
Along with the craftmanship expected with Gucci’s high-end luxury goods offerings, the pet collection is “crafted from animal-free raw materials that are primarily from sustainable, renewable and bio-based sources” — so you know Fido won’t feel sheepish about his eco-conscious duds.
The foray into the pet market is a first for Gucci — but not a first in fashion. Other high-end luxury brands, from Prada to Valentino to Louis Vuitton, have played with pet collections in the past — which means for brand snobs drooling over designers, you can have your pick of the litter.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Razzle dazzle returned to Broadway for the Tony Awards 2022.
The much-heralded “A Strange Loop” landed the top award for Best Musical, while Best Play went to the big banking drama and British import “The Lehman Trilogy.”
Of note: Multi-hyphenate Jennifer Hudson, a co-producer on “A Strange Loop,” reached rare EGOT status with that show’s win. The 40-year-old performer previously won a 2021 Daytime Emmy for “Baba Yaga,” two Grammy Awards (in 2017 and 2015) and a 2007 Oscar for her role in the film “Dreamgirls.” She became one of only 17 artists who can claim that title.
Joaquina Kalukango, who earlier wowed the Tony Awards audience with a rousing, tear-filled performance with the company of “Paradise Square,” nabbed the trophy for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Musical. Myles Frost, meanwhile, landed his first Tony nomination and win for Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Musical with the Michael Jackson story “MJ.”
Theater fave and eight-time nominee Patti LuPone won her third Tony Award — this time for Best Performance by an Actress in a Featured Role in a Musical, for “Company,” which also won for Best Revival of a Musical.
In her acceptance speech, LuPone noted that she started pondering the revival way back in 2018 and expressed relief for the theater community somehow making it through the “endless and vulnerable lockdown” started by the coronavirus pandemic. LuPone, 73, specifically offered “huge gratitude” to both Broadway understudies and “COVID safety people.”
After the coronavirus pandemic pushed the 2021 ceremony to the Winter Garden Theatre last fall, the red carpet and glittery statuettes were at  New York’s Radio City Music Hall.
Meanwhile, the Tonys bestowed Best Revival of a Play on “Take Me Out” — which featured some steamy, full-frontal nudity that shone a particular spotlight on its 40-year-old star, Jesse Williams.
Hugh Jackman and Sutton Foster’s big, high-profile revival of “The Music Man,” however, was shut out, despite six nominations.
Oscar-winner Ariana DeBose (“West Side Story”) hosted the 75th main ceremony on CBS.
“A Strange Loop” led the nominations with 11 total, while the Michael Jackson musical “MJ” and the play “Paradise Square” each had 10 nods. “Company” and “The Lehman Trilogy” follow with nine and eight nods, respectively, while “for colored girls who have considered suicide when the rainbow is enuf” garnered five.
See below for the complete list of winners.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Bruno Falcon, the trailblazing hip-hop dancer and choreographer known as “Pop N Taco,” died Saturday at his Long Beach, California, home. He was 58.
The pop-and-lock legend of the early ’80s cult film “Breakin’ ” passed away of natural causes, his sister Diana Wolgamott confirmed to local news outlets. No official cause of death has been confirmed, but she said she believes he might have died of a heart attack.
The East LA native was a mainstay in the street dance scene throughout the ’80s and ’90s.
“People couldn’t believe there was a Mexican who could pop,” Falcon once told Soc!ety Dance Academy magazine. “They would challenge me in front of the school or a party or a high school dance. They’d come out, right at you, right in front of your face.”
He got his big mainstream break as Electro Rock 1 in the 1984 breakdancing hit “Breakin,’ ” starring alongside rapper and future “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit” star Ice-T and dancer Adolfo “Shabba Doo” Quinones, who preceded Falcon in death at 65 in 2020.
“Yep, just got a text,”  Ice-T, 64, tweeted when fans asked him if he had heard the news of Falcon’s death. “He was way to [sic] young. Smh.”
Falcon also collaborated with Michael Jackson and danced in the King of Pop’s classic “Smooth Criminal” music video, for which he reportedly choreographed the now-signature “anti-gravity lean” move.
In addition to dancing for Janet Jackson, Lionel Richie and Chaka Khan, Falcon also appeared in a pair of Jackson’s short film projects: “Captain EO,” directed by “Godfather” Oscar winner Francis Ford Coppola in 1986, followed by 1988’s “Moonwalker.”
After co-starring in the lackluster sequel “Breakin’ 2: Electric Boogaloo,”  Falcon appeared in 1991’s “Bill & Ted’s Bogus Journey,” opposite Keanu Reeves, and he choreographed live-action sequences for Don Bluth’s “Thumbelina” in 1994.
Veteran actress-singer-choreographer Toni Basil — who starred alongside Jack Nicholson in 1969’s “Easy Rider,” choreographed 1979’s “The Rose” and belted out the iconic ’80s dance track “Mickey” — also shared her condolences via social media.
Rest In Peace My long time dear beautiful friend and collaborator over many years- the legendary ground breaking brilliant dancer Pop-n-Taco Bruno Falcon. June 10, 1964-July 2, 2022. #popping #breakin #legendary #popntaco #tonibasil #streetdancer #electricboogaloos #brunofalcon pic.twitter.com/Vy2rL7jyRc
“Rest In Peace My long time dear beautiful friend and collaborator over many years — the legendary ground breaking brilliant dancer Pop-n-Taco Bruno Falcon. June 10, 1964-July 2, 2022,” Basil, 78, tweeted along with a classic clip introduced by the Smothers Brothers, Thomas and Richard.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
We are putting on pedestals unprincipled people who preach one particular gospel while hypocritically choosing otherwise for themselves.
They are the self-appointed progressive saviors who know what’s best for everyone less fortunate than themselves but would never choose to live the life they are preaching for the “underclass.” For them, poverty is a word on a piece of paper, or a slogan you can occasionally toss around while pretending to care about the dynamics of the people who are merely surviving within it.
Left-wing Assemblywoman Yuh-Line Niou’s brush with reality came back in 2016, when she explained to a local publication her reasoning for leaving Harlem for the wealthier Financial District. While living in Harlem, she, unfortunately, had been robbed and witnessed a number of disturbing crimes.
It goes without saying that no one should have to endure living in a situation where they are in constant danger or, at minimum, questioning their safety. There should also be no shame for Niou having the opportunity to leave this high-crime area for a safer place; none of this is in question.
But when you advocate for policy positions that hurt the people you left behind — who can’t just up and leave their homes on a whim — well, there’s a special circle of hell.
Niou pushes for the massive defunding of the NYPD, which would make Harlem less safe.
Keep in mind that the black residents Niou claims to represent don’t agree with that. A USA Today poll from last year found that only 28% of African Americans want to defund the police, and recent surveys suggest that number has fallen even further.
Worse, even as Niou fled for the comfort of the Financial District, she’s doing everything possible to make sure the predatory wolves of New York City get cashless bail, all in the name of “justice.” It is progressives like her that have more empathy for the violators of our society than the working-class who are trying to do everything possible to survive and thrive.
You see this across the country. Do you think the progressive district attorneys of Chicago, Philadelphia and Los Angeles live in neighborhoods with high crime? Hey, not their problem!
Why would someone who has seen the danger firsthand do everything possible policy-wise to ensure the people she left behind remain defenseless? It’s because Niou, and progressives like Niou, are predators as well.
Progressive predators prey upon the outcomes of the vulnerable and are indifferent to their suffering. What matters to progressive predators like her is prestige, power, and domination; damn whoever gets run over or left behind in the process.
If you care about a community or a city, you wouldn’t do everything possible to make them more vulnerable. Now that she resides in luxury, being vulnerable is no longer her priority and neither are you.
Adam B. Coleman is the author of “Black Victim To Black Victor” and founder of Wrong Speak Publishing.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Federal prosecutors want R&B singer and convicted sex offender R. Kelly to sit in prison for more than 25 years, according to a Thursday legal filing.
Kelly, who is scheduled to be sentenced June 29, was found guilty last September of sexually abusing women, boys and girls for decades. He was convicted of all nine counts against him in the sex trafficking trial.
“In light of the seriousness of the offenses, the need for specific deterrence and the need to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant … the government respectfully submits that a sentence in excess of 25 years is warranted,” the US Attorney’s Office for the Eastern District of New York wrote to the judge on the case.
The US Attorney’s Office blasted the “I Believe I Can Fly” singer for “relying on his fame, money and popularity as an R&B recording star… to both carry and conceal his crimes” as he got immense help from his large network of associates.
“He continued his crimes and avoided punishment for them for almost 30 years and must now be held to account.”
The 31-page filing delves into the “callous disregard” he showed his victims during his decades of abuse and sexual exploitation, warning that Kelly “is unlikely to be deterred from further sexually abusing and exploiting children and others.”
The feds noted if they get their wish, Kelly would be in his 70s when released from prison.
During the trial, the government called 45 witnesses to detail the horrors Kelly, whose full name is Robert Kelly, subjected his victims to.
The feds also said the artist behind the hit song “Ignition” has shown “no remorse for any of his conduct.
“Indeed, the defendant’s decades of crime appear to have been fueled by narcissism and a belief that his musical talent absolved him of any need to conform his conduct — no matter how predatory, harmful, humiliating or abuse to other — to the strictures of the law,” the US Attorney’s office stated.
Kelly faces more criminal charges outside of New York.
Minnesota state prosecutors charged him with engaging in prostitution with a minor and federal prosecutors in Illinois charged him for child pornography and obstruction.
Jennifer Bonjean, a lawyer for Kelly, has argued he should be sentenced to fewer than 14 years in prison. She plans to explain why his “history and characteristics” justify the shorter sentence in a filing next Monday.
Bonjean, in April, attempted to delay the sentencing until he is tried in Illinois, which is set for August.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
What should be an easy question to answer is now considered a “gotcha” on the left. Conservative writer Matt Walsh has produced a documentary with the question as its title, hoping to get to the bottom of it.
The film is a cross between Michael Moore’s 1989 documentary “Roger & Me,” where the filmmaker pursued General Motor’s CEO Roger Smith, and the Borat movies in which Sacha Baron Cohen pretends to be clueless journalist Borat Sagdiyev from Kazakhstan making films about American culture.
Watching Walsh engage with various experts as they make abject fools of themselves has the same cringe-inducing, face-covering sensation as Borat getting a bar to sing along with “throw the Jew down the well.”
Except Walsh’s subjects haven’t been tricked into anything. They really believe what they are saying.
Dr. Michelle Forcier, a dean at Brown University medical school, refuses to concede that there is such a thing as reality and ends up talking about suicidal chickens when Walsh asks her whether we are assigning a gender to a chicken laying an egg.
She’s not alone. Walsh leaves medical professionals arguing that Santa Claus is real because he is real to children and that what we believe is true is true even when it’s not.
One therapist in Tennessee argues that she can’t answer “what a woman” is because she’s not a woman. The twist is that she clearly is a woman.
I asked Walsh how he got these people to talk to him on the record. He told me, “They didn’t expect to be challenged. It is inconceivable to them that anyone would expect real answers.”
One of the few medical professionals in the film who doesn’t come off as completely looney tunes is Dr. Miriam Grossman. She believes that some number of the population is indeed gender dysphoric and transgender, putting that number in the “1 in 30,000-110,000 range” — and says it’s important to separate those people, who have genuine, deep discomfort with their bodies, from the recent spike in pubescent kids suddenly coming out as genderfluid or trans.
It makes no statistical sense if your middle schooler has three or five or 10 friends who’ve suddenly become gender nonbinary. The numbers don’t add up.
Yet so much about the current gender-bending push makes no sense. If there is nothing special about the two sexes, if gender is meaningless, what are trans people transitioning to?
At a Women’s March, Walsh chats with some women holding a sign that reads “if men could get pregnant we wouldn’t even be having this conversation.” When he asks what a woman actually is, they get flustered and end up arguing that men can, indeed, get pregnant — rendering their sign pointless.
One of the most powerful scenes is Walsh’s interview with Scott (Kellie) Newgent, who transitioned from female to male after being convinced that she was “in the wrong body.” She describes her many surgeries and how much is deeply physically wrong with her today. “I will never be a man,” Newgent admits. And, after the procedures, “I’m probably not going to live very long.”
Yet, she adds, there were few discussions about side effects though “medical transition is experimental.”
Many us are “live and let live,” believing there is indeed a tiny segment of the population who are transgender; we’d happily let adults live however makes them happy.
But the current moment simply won’t allow for that. You will be made to care and conform. And if you don’t like leftist gender ideology pushed on children, you’ll be deemed a bigot.
As Walsh’s film shows, this extends far beyond allowing drag queens to (for some reason) read books to children. The Biden administration removed the word “mother” from health agency communications in favor of “birthing person.” Women are being erased from culture. Medical professionals won’t definitively answer what a woman is.
Walsh told me “most of what we’re told from academia and media is vacuous and not grounded in science or reality.” It was scary to watch him prove that right.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Former Yankees All-Star Gary Sánchez has reportedly been busting “his ass” with the Twins, according to The Athletic’s Dan Hayes.
Sánchez, who started his career catching for New York, joined Minnesota in a blockbuster trade this past off-season that brought Josh Donaldson and Isiah Kiner-Falefa to the Yankees.
The former Yankee, who once deemed to have a lousy work ethic, has impressed the Twins with his growth at 29.
Sánchez will face his former team starting Tuesday in a three-game series at home in Minnesota.
Now on the Twins, Sánchez may be coming into full-form with improvements on his defense through honing his pitch framing – one of his biggest areas of struggle while playing in The Bronx. He’s also hitting better than he has in his two previous seasons with the Yankees, owning a .229 average compared to the paltry .178 he posted during his last two.
“We had no judgment because it’s not fair to judge someone, just in life,” Twins pitcher Chris Archer told The Athletic. “We see how he busts his ass every day… You see the level of work he puts in and you respect it.”
Hank Conger, the Twins’ catching and first base coach, said Sánchez has been working on his defense through watching tape and looking at statistical analysis of his previous performances, according to the report.
Sánchez was listed as one of the worst catchers in the MLB last season by Baseball Savant when it came to framing pitches. This season, though, he’s above half of the league’s catchers.
“Hank and I work on different things every single day,” Sánchez said. “Every day you learn something new. You just have to prepare for what you’re doing.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Luxury shopping in the Hamptons was once relegated to real estate and farm stands. You could score a home with a water view, a highly coveted beach pass, locally-grown organic tomatoes in the height of season or a freshly-baked pie. But high fashion? Not so much.
Now, however, luxury fashion and home-decor stores abound, popping up all over the East End.
Here’s our guide to the latest spots to shop ’til you drop during the summer season — and beyond.
Clare V. welcomes pop-ups from two of her friends this summer at 249 Main St.: Dôen’s modern feminine styles will be in-store from June 30 to July 11, followed by Heather Taylor Home’s cheery hand-woven linens, home goods and accessories from July 15 to 24. Sunshine Amagansett, a new shop at 303 Main St., will host an event on June 11 to benefit the Ali Forney Center, a safe haven for LGBTQ+ youth.
Rebecca Taylor’s “romanticism redefined” summer fashion, as well as the label’s collab with eco-friendly brand Fisch, whose swimsuits are designed in St. Barts and made in Italy from regenerated fishing nets and ocean waste, can be shopped at Topping Rose House (1 Bridgehampton-Sag Harbor Turnpike) from July 1 to 3. The husband-and-wife team of Lynn Levoy and Dejan Milosavljević are fashion veterans whose highly curated retail concept, A Wild Dove, makes brands like Rick Owens, Comme des Garçons, R13 and Yohji Yamamoto available in the Hamptons. The retailer will pop up at Bridgehampton polo matches, at 900 Lumber Lane, July 23 and 30.
Valentino returns to the beach, albeit in a new location at 53 Main St., offering crocheted hats, bags, slides and colorful Escape totes. Alison Lou reopens for the season at 38 Newtown Lane, with a selection of playful jewelry perfect for accenting a tan, including Loucite, the latest fine jewelry collection, Groovy, and personalized pieces that make great gifts. Just down the block, at 66 Newtown Lane, The Westside and Everafter are side-by-side destinations (from the founders of Intermix) for California-inspired fashions, accessories and gifts for women, kids and teens. Celeb-favorite artist Hunt Slonem, whose work has attracted Hollywood collectors such as J.Lo, Mandy Moore, Brooke Shields, Kate Hudson and Sharon Stone, will have a “Hop Up” shop at The Barn at East Hampton Gardens (16 Gingerbread Lane), chock full of home decor designs featuring his ever-popular bunnies, butterflies and parrots, through Labor Day. Joanna Buchanan will also be at the Gardens the weekend of June 25 with everything you need to throw a summer party, including melamine dishware, crochet place mats and other coastal decor. The EHP Resort & Marina is the dreamy setting for Dolce & Gabbana’s pop-up, from July 1 to Sept. 5, featuring exclusive pieces inspired by the brand’s Blu Mediterraneo collection.
Lingua Franca reopens at the Crow’s Nest at 4 Old West Lake Drive for the season, showing off its iconic, hand-stitched fashions emblazoned with playful phrases and this year’s exclusive styles from Edie Parker (colorful acrylic bags with the words “ditch,” “the end” and “mtk” on them). The Surf Lodge has turned 183 Edgemere St. into a certifiable shopping destination; this year it kicks off with a “Brazil Edit” store, featuring brands like Adriana Degreas and Serpui, followed by a series of pop-ups from Maje, Bloomingdale’s x Studio 189, Andie swimwear, Helmut Lang, Amanda Uprichard, Rails and even home retailer Arhaus, who will take over from Sept. 20 to Oct. 2 with a focus on autumn decor.
Attention Loewe fans, your beloved Spanish brand will set up at Ryland Life Equipment (155 Main St.), spotlighting its Paula’s Ibiza capsule of festive Balearic summer staples (for party people who might sport platform sandals, on-trend basket totes and fringed tops). Up your glam factor with jewels by Sorellina, Emily P. Wheeler, Jenna Blake and others, found at The Seven’s pretty and very pink pop-up, designed by Blake Brunson, through Sept. 13 at 8 Main St. Palm Beach newcomer Via Coquina has ventured north with a plethora of artisanal fashion and home designs — everything from one-of-a-kind vintage pieces, jewelry, caftans, woven beach bags and home accessories to an apothecary of artisanal soaps, candles and olive oils from the Mediterranean — now ensconced at 26 Madison St.
Object & Thing will present new collage-like textile designs (coverlets, table runners and the like) by artist Megumi Shauna Arai, along with ceramics from Insta-favorite gardener, photographer and potter Frances Palmer, at the enchanting Madoo Conservancy (a garden with historic structures at 618 Sagg Main St., established in 1967 by the artist and writer Robert Dash) from May 27 to June 25.
Alfredo Paredes Shelter Island Shop at Ram Design Home, 181 N. Ferry Road, features an American-made collection of timeless and exceedingly elegant furniture from the design darling and former Ralph Lauren exec. Alongside Paredes’ own pieces, the shop features a curated selection of art and objects for the home, including photography from Robin Rice Gallery, ceramics by island local Lily Hoffman and textiles from Rogers & Goffigon. Meanwhile, Marni returns to the Sunset Beach Hotel (35 Shore Road) from May 27 to Sept. 15, with the cheery Marni Marine boutique featuring one-of-a-kind pieces, Marni Market furniture as well as current spring-summer 2022 collection items for men, women and kids.
Homenature, a haven of high-end home furnishings in soothing neutral shades, hosts the Tina Frey Summer Shop, a super-colorful pop-up of the San Francisco-based designer’s modern resin tableware and accessories, which make for excellent hostess gifts, at 6 Main St. from June through September.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Think your life is busy? A woman has revealed how she is a mom to 34 kids at the age of 23.
TikTok user Tusayiwe Mkhondya uploaded a video showing her morning routine in the home she runs in Malawi for orphans, street kids and teen mothers.
Tusayiwe found herself as a homeless single mom at the age of 18 but opened her organization You Are Not Alone (Yana) shortly after.
The kids in her shelter range from five months up to the age of 16 and she has a very grueling routine when it comes to taking care of them.
On her @tusaiweyana account, she said: “All the kids are not abandoned. Some are orphans, some have only one parent, some have both parents but they have been abandoned by those parents.
Her day begins at 4 a.m., and she showed how she prepares all the food for the kids – including sandwiches, hot dinners and juice boxes.
She added: “ I am the only one who cooks for the under 5 children and every child has his/her own morning chores.”
The kids go to bed at 7 p.m. but her night shift really starts then as lots of the babies will wake up to feed.
She said: “I have to feed them and also change their diapers and I also have to prepare for work and the next day.”
Many people praised her efforts, with one saying: “You are doing an amazing thing for all of them! Keep it up!!”
Another added: “may God reward you abundantly.”
This story originally appeared on The Sun and was reproduced here with permission.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Steve Fickinger, a Broadway producer on shows including “Dear Evan Hansen,” “Newsies” and “The Lion King,” has died.
The 62-year-old passed away suddenly on June 17 in Laguna Beach, California, according to his niece, Jessica Roy.
Fickinger worked on the development of six different Broadway shows during his career.
In addition, he worked at Walt Disney Studios for 20 years, where he served as Vice President of Development.
During his time there, he worked on films including Mulan, Tarzan, and Lilo and Stitch, Deadline reports.
He then moved on to become the Vice President of Creative Development for Disney Theatrical Productions.
There, he oversaw the Broadway production of Aida as well as the national tour of “High School Musical,” among others.
He left Disney in 2013 and went on to begin his own production company, FickStern Productions.
One of the first shows he produced was the Tony Award-winning revival of “Dear Evan Hansen.”
At the time of his passing, he was working on animated and hybrid films for Warner Brothers Studios, according to reports.
Fickinger also served as Executive Producer of the production of “Rock of Ages” at The Bourbon Room in Hollywood.
He was also working on developing a handful of shows for Broadway as well as touring productions.
A cause of death has not been released.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The Army suspended a three-star general after he appeared to make fun of First Lady Jill Biden.
Retired lieutenant general Gary Volesky, a former spokesman for the Army, responded to a tweet from Biden about the Supreme Court decision overturning Roe v. Wade, in which the First Lady remarked that women’s rights had been “stolen.”
Biden tweeted that “for nearly 50 years, women have had the right to make our own decisions about our bodies. Today, that right was stolen from us.”
Volesky responded, “Glad to see you finally know what a woman is.”
Volesky’s tweet has since been taken down.
The Army suspended Volesky, who had signed a $92 an hour contract to advise active duty officers as a mentor, while it conducts an investigation, according to USA TODAY. Volesky was formerly in charge of the Army’s 101st Airborne Division.
Volesky, who retired in 2020, earned a silver star for valor while serving in Iraq.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Country music star Toby Keith shared with fans on Sunday that he’s battling stomach cancer.
The 60-year-old, award-winning musician gave a quick update about his medical issues with posts on Instagram and Twitter.
“Last fall I was diagnosed with stomach cancer,” he wrote. “I’ve spent the last 6 months receiving chemo, radiation and surgery. So far, so good. I need time to breathe, recover and relax.”
He added: “I am looking forward to spending this time with my family. But I will see the fans sooner than later. I can’t wait.”
Fox News Digital contacted Keith’s representatives for comment.
Following his announcement, the Ohio State Fair reported Keith’s scheduled performance on July 28 had been canceled. It’s unclear any additional show on his tour will be rescheduled or postponed, but Keith has been performing throughout his diagnosis, treatment and recovery process.
The “Red Solo Cup” singer amassed thousands of likes and supportive comments within minutes of the posts going live on his platforms.
“Hang in there,” John Rich, of the country duo Big & Rich, wrote with a thumbs up emoji. The sports world stepped in to show some love, with legendary quarterback Troy Aikman and professional soccer player Chris Frederick offering support to the longtime musician.
Stay up on the very latest with Evening Update.
Please provide a valid email address.
By clicking above you agree to the 						Terms of Use
Keith is a longtime advocate for families facing cancer diagnoses, and helped found Ally’s House in 2004, a nonprofit group that assists Oklahoma children with cancer and their families.
The nonprofit was named after Allison Webb, the two-year-old daughter of Keith’s original band member’s Scott Webb and wife Lisa. Allison died in 2003 of kidney cancer before her third birthday.
Following in the footsteps of Ally’s House, he established the Toby Keith Foundation in 2006 “to encourage the health and happiness of pediatric cancer patients.”
“In 2014, the foundation opened OK Kids Korral, a cost-free, convenient and comfortable home for pediatric cancer patients receiving treatment at The Children’s Hospital at OU Medical Center, Stephenson Cancer Center and other nearby facilities,” the foundation’s mission statement said.
“There is no greater gift than keeping families strong and together during a difficult time. If we can alleviate stress on a family, encourage a brother or sister and comfort a sick child, then we will make a difference in the fight against cancer.”
His 18th annual “Toby Keith & Friends Golf Classic” raised more than $1.3 million – the third-highest total ever – May 20-21 in Oklahoma City and Norman. Through the years, the event has “raised more than $16 million for OK Kids Korral, the cost-free home for families of children being treated at The Children’s Hospital at OU Medical Center,” Keith’s site listed.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A career shoplifter who allegedly smashed a news photographer’s camera moments after he was released on a robbery charge was quickly arrested again — and set free just as fast.
Laron Mack, a homeless man who has previously told The Post “I steal for a living,” was back in Manhattan Criminal Court Saturday on a criminal mischief charge for allegedly breaking lensman Steven Hirsch’s camera a day earlier outside the same building.
Mack is accused of damaging the equipment in an encounter outside the Centre Street building which unfolded just after he was granted supervised release in a robbery case.
On Saturday he held his head down, with his nose nearly touching the desk as he tried to keep a Post photographer from snapping his picture.  His lawyer also held up a sheet of paper blocking Mack’s face from the camera.
Mack has an extensive rap sheet, including: six felony arrests, 65 misdemeanors, 31 failures to appear and two parole violations, said Assistant District Attorney Chelsea Eret. Most of his arrests are for low-level offenses such as petty larceny, which is not eligible for bail under New York state law.
Though he’s already on supervised release in the robbery case, Eret asked again for the same conditional discharge for Mack in the criminal mischief case, to which Judge Eric Schumacher agreed.
Eret also requested $250 for the damaged camera. Mack’s defense attorney Rob Harold told the judge his client “would be unable to pay restitution.”
Video taken by Hirsch shows the moment Mack suddenly lunged at him and swatted his camera out of his hand.
“How are you doing, Mr. Mack?” the photographer asked Mack in the clip, as he followed him outside of the courthouse.
Mack turns and begins walking away from Hirsch when he suddenly spins around and knocks the camera from his hands before the video cuts out.
“He punched me in the arm and ripped the flash off the camera and threw it against the wall and smashed it to pieces,” Hirsch told The Post.
The Post spoke with Mack back in March, after he was released on petty larceny and criminal possession of stolen property charges for stealing Bud Light, breakfast sausages and oatmeal from a Duane Reade on the Upper East Side.
“I’m broke, I’m homeless and I steal for a living,” the 50-year-old told The Post.
When asked what he stole, he bluntly responded “Beer.”
Mack is due back in Manhattan court on July 7. He has an additional appearance in Bronx criminal court on June 22.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Kevin Bacon in 1984 at the premiere of the classic film "Footloose", which Bacon starred in.
Kevin Bacon striking an iconic pose in the 1984 coming-of-age film, "Footloose".
Kevin Bacon (right) with co-star Lori Singer (left) in the 1984 film, "Footloose".
Kevin Bacon and co-star Fred Ward in the 1990 science-fiction film, "Tremors".
Kevin Bacon (left) and his co-stars of "Tremors", which was part of AMC's annual Halloween movie festival in 2005.
Kevin Bacon and his wife Kyra Sedgwick, an award-winning actress, at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards on Aug. 29, 2010.
Kevin Bacon performing alongside his brother, Michael Bacon, at KAABOO Del Mar on Sept. 15, 2019.
Kevin Bacon at the GQ Men of the Year celebration alongside Al Pacino (left), Edi Gathegi (second to right) and Will Welch (right) on Dec. 5, 2019.
Getty Images for GQ Men of the Year
Kevin Bacon (right) and Michael Bacon (left) of The Bacon Brothers perform during a concert benefitting Ukraine at the Navy Yard on April 10, 2022.
Kevin Bacon and other cast members of the "Space Oddity" attend the premiere at the Tribeca Festival on June 12, 2022 in New York City.
Getty Images for Tribeca Festival

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
The Princess of Pop and her Prince rode off into the sunset in a white Rolls Royce and lived happily ever after.
After Britney Spears and longtime boyfriend Sam Asghari tied the knot at her California mansion Thursday evening, the newly married couple drove away with a “Just Married” sign taped to their vehicle.
The automobile was also adorned with bouquets of pink and white roses attached to the back.
After the lavish bash, Asghari, 28, and Spears, 40, were spotted getting into the Rolls-Royce to jet off to their next destination.
The Iranian-born actor donned a black-sequined T-shirt that said “Britney and Sam.” The car had a soft buttery red interior and gold stamping.
The “Toxic” singer’s full ensemble was not visible. However, she sported chunky black boots to leave the party. The duo departed the soirée around 10:15 p.m. with their guests blasting sparklers as they trailed away.
The two married in an intimate ceremony at Spears’ Thousand Oaks pad alongside a slew of celebrity guests.
Friends such as Madonna — who even gave Spears a smooch at the reception — as well as Selena Gomez, Maria Menounos, Ansel Elgort, will.i.am, Drew Barrymore, Paris Hilton with her husband Carter Reum and mom Kathy Hilton all attended the party.
Celebrity party producer Jeffrey Best of Best Events helped the “Me Against the Music” songstress and her man plan their special day.
“We really wanted to make this a small and beautiful moment with family and friends,” Spears told Vogue about her magical evening. “We wanted warm and feminine colors including blush, white, cream and gold, and a lot of various shades of pinks, blush and reds.”
Designer Donatella Versace created the “Crossroads” star’s dream wedding gown and was also in attendance. The famed fashion icon also designed Ashgari’s sleek tux.
The off-the-shoulder wedding dress contained a high slit and a classic white veil with satin edging.
Flower arrangements were constructed by Marks Garden and made the ambiance look magical and fairytale-esque.
Charlotte and Sofia Tilbury were on hand to generate a natural beauty look for Spears. “I was so thrilled and honored to be asked to design Britney’s bridal beauty look!” Charlotte told Vogue. “Britney is an icon of our time who has inspired and empowered us all with her joy and positive energy. She’s such a natural beauty and has the most mesmerizing big, brown eyes.”
The home was transformed into a wedding venue fit for the best of brides. Pink and white roses embellish the area, with a white horse with gold hooves pulling a carriage.
Shortly after the 10-minute ceremony, the mother of two and three donned more outfit changes (courtesy of Versace), including a black minidress, a two-toned look and then a red cocktail dress.
DJ Albert got the guests dancing and shaking their groove thangs when he spun iconic tracks such as Spear’s 2003 single “Toxic.”
Hilton and Spears showed off their famous singing chops by belting out the hotel heiress’ song, “Stars Are Blind.”
Spears’ older brother Bryan also made an appearance during the evening’s festivities.
Several members of Spears’ estranged family were not at the celebrations, such as her parents Jamie Spears and Lynne Spears, and her sister, Jamie Lynn Spears because, according to E! News, they were not invited.
Her sons, Sean Preston, 16, and Jayden James, 15, also opted to miss out on the wedding. Their father and Spears’ ex-husband Kevin Federline’s attorney, Mark Vincent Kaplan, told Page Six yesterday, “They think the focus of this day should be on Britney and Sam, and they are very happy for her moving forward.”
Things went haywire just before the ceremony began, with the Grammy winner’s other ex, Jason Alexander, attempting to crash the nuptials and livestreaming the incident on social media.
“Britney is shaken but doesn’t want to let this get her down,” a source shared to Page Six ahead of the wedding.
“Everyone is thankfully safe, and Jason is no longer on the property,” the insider added. Ventura County police then arrested Alexander, 40, who was charged with trespassing, vandalism and battery charges.
Spears and Ashgari got engaged in September 2021 after meeting on the set of her 2016 music video, “Slumber Party.” The pop icon became pregnant earlier this year and sadly suffered a miscarriage.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A homeless man who shoved a woman onto Manhattan subway tracks as a train pulled into the station pleaded guilty to attempted murder for the unprovoked attack, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office said Friday.
Aditya Vemulapati will likely be sentenced to eight years in prison followed by five years of supervised release as part of the plea deal over the November 2020 attack, a DA spokesperson said in a statement.
Vemulapati, 26, was pacing on the Union Square No. 4/5/6 platform at about 8:30 a.m. on Nov. 19, 2020, before he randomly shoved 40-year-old Liliana Sagbaicela onto the tracks as a train pulled into the station.
Miraculously, Sagbaicela landed between the tracks and escaped with minor injuries after a number of train cars passed over her, police said at the time.
“She fell, fortunately for her, between the row bed and the rails,” then-Transit Chief Kathleen O’Reilly said after the attack. “Very minor injuries but for the grace of God.”
After the the attack, Sagbaicela told 1010 WINS she viewed footage of the shove – and understood how lucky she was to be alive.
“I saw in the video, the man — oh my, God, I can’t believe it,” Sagbaicela, a married mom of two daughters, told the radio station. “Is this happening? Now I understand why everybody and the police say to me, ‘You are alive for the miracles. You are a miracle.”
On Friday, District Attorney Alvin Bragg praised Vemulapati’s guilty plea.
“New Yorkers deserve to feel safe traveling on the subway. Aditya Vemulapati attempted to kill a stranger for no apparent reason, pushing her onto the subway tracks. Today, he is being held accountable for his actions,” Bragg said in a statement.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Sean McVay is adding even more hardware to his growing collection this year.
The Rams’ Super Bowl-winning head coach married longtime fiancée Veronika Khomyn on Saturday, according to social media posts that featured the caption, “Mr and Mrs Mcvay.”
In one video, the newlyweds are seen dancing on stage alongside the band, while Khomyn is seen walking down the aisle in a separate clip.
Ahead of the couple’s glamorous nuptials, McVay, 36, was asked Wednesday by the Los Angeles Times if strategizing for the Super Bowl is easier than narrowing down the wedding guest list.
“Definitely the first one,” McVay said. “Because I have a boss that can override me on the second one.”
McVay and Khomyn have been together for several years, with the coach making an appearance on her Instagram page as early as 2016. They got engaged three years later.
In February, Khomyn celebrated the moment McVay hoisted the Lombardi Trophy following the Rams’ 23-20 Super Bowl win over the Bengals in Los Angeles.
“I’ve seen this guy grind nonstop. Day in and day out. No breaks. He always puts everyone else first, and winning this Lombardi trophy for his team, his family, his friends… is a dream come true!!! I love you babe, you deserve this times a million. Victory tastes pretty damn good!” she gushed on Instagram at the time.
In the weeks following the Rams’ Super Bowl victory, McVay and Khomyn expressed their support for her native Ukraine amid Russia’s invasion.
“I proudly stand with my fellow Ukrainians and I admire their strength. They have faced unimaginable adversity with such profound grace and bravery, their fight and the way they have united the world is truly inspiring. There is no place in our world for this kind of violence and our prayers go out to all the lives that have been lost,” Khomyn said during an appearance at the Critics Choice Awards in March, per People.
McVay also praised his then-future wife that month during a virtual press conference.
“Just watching the grace with which she’s handled this, how strong her family’s been in the midst of this, I’m just so proud to be associated with that culture,” he said, according to the OC Register.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
After a series of failed high-profile attempts over the last decade, it’s finally time to free the nip.
A-list babes are ditching bras as part of the latest fashion statement, in which baring some – or a lot – of cleavage becomes trendy once again.
Julia Fox, Dua Lipa and Kristen Stewart are amongst the ladies bearing it all for the paparazzi recently, being snapped while living fully liberated.
They’re opting for plunging necklines, barely there crop tops, unbuttoned suit jackets and even totally sheer numbers, stripping down as the season heats up.
They may be following actress Gillian Anderson’s lead, who last year vowed to never wear a bra again.
“I don’t care if my breasts reach my belly button. I’m not wearing a bra, it’s just too f – – king uncomfortable,” the “Sex Education” actress said in an Instagram Live clip.
Despite celebrities’ gung-ho attitudes towards ditching brassieres, women with bigger chests have declared the trend a bust.
“For those of us who are a tad bit bigger it is actually MORE comfortable to wear a bra (as much as I hate to admit it),” wrote one woman on Twitter in response to Anderson’s comments.
Some fashion enthusiasts praise the extra support, with one writing she’s in favor of bras due to her E-cup chest.
“[My] body requires some extra reinforcement here and there,” Charlotte Dallison wrote for Fashion Journal.
Other writers have noticed women with larger-sized breasts are often left out entirely as idealized fashion trends are more suitable for the itty-bitty committee.
“A perfect example is Jacquemus‘ micro cardigan top that had celebrities in a chokehold,” writes Gigi Fong for HypeBae. “The top became controversial because it didn’t provide any support for breasts, making it exclusive to women with smaller chests.”
But even a few well-endowed celebrities are leaving the underwire at home, leaving onlookers wondering: Won’t they sag?
We’ve all heard the tale that bras supposedly ward off sagging with age, but the theory isn’t backed by experts.
“Wearing a bra doesn’t affect the risk of breast sagging, or what is called ‘breast ptosis,’ ” breast health specialist Cassann Blake, MD, told the Cleveland Clinic, adding that bras won’t change the shape either.
“It’s OK to do whatever is comfortable for you. If not wearing a bra feels good to you, that’s fine,” said Blake. “If you feel that some support is needed, then maybe a bralette or a wire-free bra would be a happy medium at home. It all depends on what you’re comfortable with.”
She also assured that wearing a bra or opting not to wouldn’t impact breast-cancer risks – so a little extra cleavage won’t kill anyone.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Grammy-winning rapper Roddy Ricch was busted with a gun and large-capacity magazine outside the Governors Ball festival Saturday night, but the charges against him were dropped a day later, cops and law-enforcement sources said.
The 23-year-old rapper, whose real name is Rodrick Moore, was arrested at a security checkpoint before he was set to perform at the Citi Field event, cops said.
Moore and two other men were inside a 2020 black Cadillac Escalade when a security guard with a private firm hired for the Queens concert spotted a Canik 9mm under a seat inside the car around 6:20 p.m. — just hours before the event was set to begin, according to police.
Authorities also found a large-capacity magazine that contained nine rounds of ammunition, a police spokesman said.
“The reason we do these checkpoints is for expressly this purpose,” an NYPD official told The Post on Sunday. “We don’t want people introducing guns in this venue.”
Moore of Los Angeles and the two other men — Carlos Collins, 57, of New Jersey, and Michael Figueroa, 46, of Brooklyn — were all arrested for gun possession.
But the charges against Moore and Collins were later dropped, according to law-enforcement sources.
Meanwhile, Figueroa was arraigned on a felony charge of criminal possession of a loaded firearm in Queens Criminal Court on Sunday.
The security guard who stopped the vehicle told police he asked Figueroa to get out of the car and that as the employee attempted to open the front passenger door, the suspect told the worker, “I am not ready to get out yet,” a criminal complaint states.
The guard then allegedly witnessed Figueroa got into the left side of his waistband, pull out an object and then reach toward his feet, the court record states.
When Figueroa got out of the car and the guard was able to search the vehicle, he found the gun underneath the front passenger floor mat, the criminal complaint says.
A law-enforcement source said the charges against Moore and Collins were dropped because Figueroa allegedly had the firearm in his possession and then hid it under the seat.
A rep for the Queens District Attorney’s Office declined to comment on the case other than to say there were no public records available for Moore and Collins and that Figueroa is being prosecuted for firearm charges.
Figueroa was held Sunday night after his arraignment on a $10,000 bail. It’s not clear if he’s still behind bars.
Ricch won a Grammy for Best Rap Performance in 2020 and has been nominated for a top music award 10 times.
He rose to fame with his 2018 single “Die Young,” which landed the rapper on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for the first time. He released his first album “Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial” — which debuted atop the Billboard 200 — a year later. His second studio album, “Live Life Fast,” was released in December 2021.
Representatives for the rapper, his record label, Atlantic Records, and Founders Entertainment, the organizer of Governors Ball, did not respond to requests for comment from The Post.
Additional reporting by Allie Griffin and Gabrielle Fonrouge

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Maryse, wife of WWE wrestler The Miz and a former women’s champion in the wrestling promotion, revealed the harrowing circumstances surrounding the death of her father, Guy, when she was 15 years old.
On the season premiere Monday of “Miz and Mrs.,” the couple’s reality show on USA Network, one of the storylines was that the two were finding a new home in the Los Angeles area for Maryse’s mother, Marjo, who had been living with them for the last eight years.
While explaining the respective family relationships, Maryse shared the unfortunate circumstances of her father’s passing.
“My dad passed in 1998. When I was 15, he was up in the mountains biking,” she said. “We could really never find out exactly what he passed of because we found his body in July 2003. Someone was biking and left the trail and saw the bones, so they called the Canadian version of the FBI. We assumed he had a heart attack.”
Maryse said of her mother that it was not about coldly kicking her out of the house, but allowing her to spread her own wings.
“My mom just really ended up on her own with three kids, and she made it work,” Maryse said. “But that was a very challenging time, and she’s been dragging that baggage for 20 years. She’s been with my brother, she’s lived with my sister, she’s lived with me, and she lives her life through our lives. So she needs to have her own place and her own life.”
On the show, Marjo explained that she still mourns her late husband.
“Every day, not one day I don’t think of your dad. I sit outside at night and every night I watch the moon and I think of your dad,” she told Maryse.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Last July, a homeless person followed my wife and 4-year-old daughter inside my building in lower Tribeca and up to our apartment door. Though I turned up just moments later and scared him away, the episode left us shaken.
A few weeks later, I saw the same man leaving a nearby homeless shelter. I’ve lived here for 15 years and always felt safe, but suddenly, like many others, I felt disconcerted and weirdly abandoned by this city which has enabled crime and fear to proliferate, partly driven by an out-of-control homeless population housed by shelters in our neighborhoods.
My feelings gave way to a sense of purpose. I decided it was time to sell my business, Churchill Credit Solutions in the Financial District, and run for office as a Democrat serving New York’s 10th Congressional District. No longer do I wish to remain a passive observer to our city’s dysfunction.
Every day, urban disorder is unfolding before our eyes. Between the decarceration movement and bail reform, we are seeing far more violent incidents on our streets. From the death of Michelle Go in front of a Times Square subway train in January to the brutal stabbing of Christina Yuna Lee inside her own Chinatown apartment in February, assaults committed by mentally-ill homeless people are now a common occurrence.
Meanwhile, the $2.2 billion “homeless industrial complex” continues to expand while doing little to separate the majority of harmless homeless people from the 17% who have a “severe mental illness” and could pose a risk to others.
Public safety concerns are preventing workers from returning to their Manhattan offices, according to an online Morning Consult poll commissioned by the Partnership for The City of New York. Forty-three percent said safety was their No. 1 concern, followed by 27% who cited exposure to COVID-19.
When New Yorkers don’t feel safe, they tend to stay at home, eating out less and shopping online more. The lack of foot traffic only compounds the problem, as there are fewer witnesses to deter criminal incidents.
The last few years have proven that many of us can work from home just fine, but there’s very little proof it’s safe to return to the office. Meanwhile, small businesses dependent on large office buildings being full of employees are struggling, as people continue to stay home.
If the local government won’t solve this problem, it’s up to a congressional representative to be the adult in the room. If I am elected, I will introduce a federal oversight bill to address this issue directly.
The bill will subject homeless shelters to a rigorous set of performance metrics, including financial audits, employee hiring practices, and enhanced record keeping of those who claim the right to shelter. Under this plan, a physician will be on site to examine the mental state of those who are already flagged as being involved with the criminal justice system. The doctor will have the ability to refer those considered dangerous to a state facility for customized treatment in order to prevent further violence inside and outside the shelters.
Furthermore, I will introduce a federal tax reduction for small businesses to promote growth and prosperity. After all, why should the homeless industrial complex be the only booming “business” in our city?
New Yorkers will tolerate and even have empathy for the homeless, but they will not tolerate violence or aggression. The same Morning Consult poll showed that 40% of employees who reside in Manhattan said they’re thinking of leaving the city altogether. I’ve spoken to countless residents in District 10 — which comprises all of lower Manhattan and much of Brooklyn, from Prospect Heights to Bay Ridge — who have lived here for decades, many of whom are self-professed liberals. They tell me they are waiting to see who wins the Aug. 23 primary to decide whether they will remain in the city or leave it.
I tell them that once we fix the homeless crisis, we can begin to heal our neighborhoods. The streets will become safer and foot traffic will charge up again. Combine this with a sincere effort to reestablish a mutual respect between our communities and the NYPD, and we will restore confidence in our city once again.
Brian Robinson, 39, is a former small business owner running for Congress NY District 10

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Elie Tahari now lords over a fashion empire, but his first job in New York City was washing cars for 50 cents an hour.
He happily accepted the gig. In the early ’70s, the Israeli had flown to the Big Apple with less than $100 in his pocket. He first slept at the YMCA for $2 a night. When he ran out of money, he slept on a bench in Central Park.
“I didn’t feel it was dangerous — nobody attacks a little homeless kid,” Tahari says in “The United States of Elie Tahari,” premiering at the Brklyn Film Festival this weekend.
The new doc traces his journey from poverty-stricken kid to self-made fashion mogul who built a business off a humble tube top. The film features interviews with New York style stalwarts such as Fern Mallis and Melissa Rivers as well as designers Nicole Miller and Dennis Basso.
“No one gave him anything. He did this on his own,” Basso says of his friend.
Tahari, who has dressed Hillary Clinton and Joan Rivers, had a fraught childhood in Israel, where his parents settled after fleeing Iran. He was born in a refugee camp and lived in a metal-sheet house with no electricity, running water or indoor bathroom.
“The other kids used to make jokes out of me because my clothes were dirty and wrinkled,” Tahari, 70, says in the movie.
But clothing was in his blood. His father was a fabric salesman, and his mother sewed his outfits. As a teen, Tahari entered the Israeli Air Force, where he became a mechanic.
When he returned home in his uniform, his father told him, “We don’t have room for you — we are too many,” Tahari recalls. He went to his one-bedroom apartment and “cried for two days.”
His brother worked for El Al Air and flew free, so Tahari fudged the first initial on a ticket — from his brother’s first initial of “A” to an “E” — and set off for the Big Apple.
After scrubbing cars, he landed a gig in the Garment District changing light bulbs in fashion houses. Tahari, looking down from the ladder at the action swirling below noted: “I’m in the wrong job.”
He started working at a boutique owned by an Israeli man who also manufactured clothing. One day, Tahari had an apparel epiphany: an elastic, one-size-fits-all, strapless top that a woman could wear outside at the pool or beach.
“With the tube top, it was a natural thing,” Tahari says of his now ubiquitous invention. “Women in the ’70s, when the hippie movement started, they let it all hang out. They didn’t want to wear bra.”
He brought about a dozen tube tops to his boss. “I put [them] on the counter and a couple of customers came and started fighting over them.” Soon, the budding designer had his own business. “It just took off.”
A self-proclaimed “night owl” and avid roller skater, he held his first fashion show at Studio 54. Naturally, it featured flowy disco-inspired clothes. In the 1980s, as women entered the work force in droves, Tahari pivoted to the power suit, pioneering tailored, feminine versions of the men’s office staple. In 1989, he opened a shop in Bloomingdale’s on the designer floor; more followed.
In the movie, Miller notes that Tahari is a “master tailor.”
“His jackets were exquisite,” she says, recalling one she bought in the 1980s. “It was plaid with puff shoulders . . . I always got tons of compliments on it. I wore it forever.”
Later, Tahari helped launch Theory and created a lower-priced line of suits that made his clothing available to a wider audience. In 2014, he designed a capsule collection for Kohl’s.
The married father of two still shows at New York Fashion Week — in 2019, Christie Brinkley and her daughter Sailor Brinkley-Cook walked his runway — and he credits the United States for allowing him to fulfill his dreams.
“[The American flag] is a symbol of the free world. It’s a symbol of freedom. It’s a symbol that we can express ourself,” he says. “I’m very grateful to this country.”
For all of his accomplishments in the fashion realm, Tahari remains most proud of bringing his family to America from Israel.
“I only thought about my family and how I could support them and help them. In the end, I brought everybody here,” he says. “So that was my biggest trophy. My biggest success.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
After publicly going through the stages of grief, Chris Evans is finally moving on after the death of a good “pal.”
The “Captain America” star, 41, has gone viral with a relatable “in memoriam” tweet about the passing of his beloved iPhone 6.
“RIP iPhone 6s We had a good run,” the Marvel star tweeted.
He went on to joke about how outdated and difficult the old iPhone iteration had become.
“I’ll miss your home button. I won’t miss the nightly battle of trying to get you to charge. Or your grainy pictures. Or your sudden drops from 100% battery, to 15%, to completely dead all within minutes.”
“It was a wild ride. Rest easy, pal,” he wrote.
Within days, the funny tweet went viral, gathering more than 40,500 retweets and more than a 533,000 likes.
“Chris, you’re telling me you have had the iPhone 6s this WHOLE time?” one Twit wit @lileuforia asked the “Knives Out” heartthrob.
RIP iPhone 6sWe had a good run. I’ll miss your home button. I won’t miss the nightly battle of trying to get you to charge. Or your grainy pictures. Or your sudden drops from 100% battery, to 15%, to completely dead all within minutes. It was a wild ride. Rest easy, pal.
“He’s a 10, but he has an iPhone 6s,” fellow Twitter user @riyaarahman chimed in, taking inspiration from the recent social media trend of ranking what does and does not make a person hot or not.
“I like how you wrote this whole tweet to commemorate your iphone 6 that we (lightheartedly) bullied you for,” commenter @cev4n5 added.
Not to be outdone, @CaptiveGiant joked: “Took the Captain America role a little too serious with the ancient phone.”
But @brandalynmk said what everyone was really thinking, “THANK GOD. HIGH QUALITY SELFIES.”
The iPhone 6 and 7 does still run with the latest version of iOS, but not for long. Apple plans to drop the first-generation iPhone SE, iPhone 6s and iPhone 7 this fall when it releases its newest operating system.
Meanwhile, Evans upgraded just in time to share the same sarcastic message on Instagram with a photo of his new and improved iPhone 13. The post already has nearly 2 million likes as of Friday afternoon.
A post shared by Chris Evans (@chrisevans)
Fellow celebrities and fans jumped in on the fun on Instagram, too.
“Why does this bring me so much joy?” Lizze Broadway asked.
“I mean… it was time,” Vas J Morgan wrote.
“Not the grainy pictures,” Kate Beckinsale commented.
But Octavia Spencer consoled Evans saying, “OMG! I just gave up my home button last week. Transitioning to the 13 has been easier than I thought. So…. #IFeelYouBuddy.”

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
A young Phillies fan’s prayer was answered when Bryson Stott belted a walk-off homer against the Angels on Sunday.
With it being the bottom of the ninth, a 3-2 count, and two outs, the youngster was shown on the broadcast clasping his hands together in search of an answer. He got one when Scott’s three-run home run lifted the Phillies 9-7 over Los Angeles.
The fan, who sported an inside-out rally cap, jumped for joy when the ball crossed over the right-field fence of Citizens Bank Park.
The thrilling Phillies win accounted for their fourth in a row.
It was also the third game under interim manager Rob Thomson, who has an undefeated record of 3-0 after taking over for the fired Joe Girardi Friday.
Los Angeles blew a 6-2 lead in the eighth inning before going back ahead in the top of the ninth thanks to a Matt Duffy single that drove in Tyler Wade.
Forget the walk-off three run homer, watching this kid's day get made is what it's all about. pic.twitter.com/mhlY77gFnb
With the score at 7-6, two Phillies, Alec Bohm and Didi Gregorius, got on-base by singling in the bottom of the ninth before Stott hit the game-deciding dinger.
The Angels suffered their 11th loss in a row. And to make matters worse, Angels star Mike Trout extended his hitless streak to a career-worst 26 at-bats.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Dyson Daniels’ mom stole the spotlight at the 2022 NBA Draft on Thursday night.
Before Daniels was selected by the Pelicans with the No. 8 pick in the draft, he hit the stage with mom Brikitta Kool-Daniels on his arm — a family moment that has since gone viral.
“Dyson Daniels is going to be a trending topic tonight,” reporter Troy Machir tweeted, including a photo of Daniels and his mom, who was dressed in a white slit dress and open-toe heels.
“NBA twitter gonna blow up after seeing Dyson Daniels mom,” one person tweeted.
“Dyson Daniel’s mom a generational prospect,” a separate fan tweeted.
A post shared by Brikitta Kool-Daniels (@brikittakool)
A post shared by Brikitta Kool-Daniels (@brikittakool)
Follow the New York Post’s live tracker for up-to-the-minute coverage and analysis of the 2022 NBA Draft picks.
Another person asked if Daniels would be a trending topic due to his mother or his silver metallic suit — which one fan compared to a “foil paper.”
Throughout the night, Daniels’ mom also shared a number of photos on Instagram from inside the Barclays Center in Brooklyn.
Daniels previously played with the NBA G League Ignite. The Australian product made his debut for the Australian senior national team at FIBA Asia Cup qualification in 2021. His father, Ricky Daniels, began a professional basketball career after playing for NC State.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Details about Josh Duggar’s alleged sexual proclivities keep getting worse.
OnlyFans model and viral star Karlie Brooks has reportedly come forward to claim that she was paid by the disgraced reality TV star — and convicted sex offender — to dress up like a child during sex.
In a since-deleted clip first apparently shared on TikTok, Brooks, 26, claimed she had her first meeting with Duggar, 34, back in 2015 — around the same time he was exposed for having cheated on his wife, Anna Duggar, on the Ashley Madison website.
“Speaking of Josh Duggar, I am ashamed to say this, but I have slept with him a few years ago when the whole Ashley Madison scandal came out,” she began in footage that later reappeared on YouTube, according to the Sun.
Brooks is the second woman to claim she hooked up with Duggar via Ashley Madison after Danica Dillon came forward with allegations soon after the 2015 reveal.
“I was one of the women that slept with Josh during that time and just hearing everything that has gone down with him makes me absolutely sick,” Brooks said.
“[Duggar] paid me a generous — a really good amount of money,” she claimed without disclosing an exact amount in the clip. “But, yeah, I slept with Josh Duggar.”
Brooks also described the bizarre requests he reportedly made of her, according to the Sun, such as wearing pigtails and children’s underwear, shaving her body and concealing her tattoos. She inferred that they had gotten together more than once, according to the Sun.
At the time, she claimed she thought the requests were standard among clientele — but, in hindsight, Brooks said, “I am so disgusted that I’ve been with him.”
The Post has reached out to Duggar’s attorney for comment.
Duggar was recently sentenced to 12 years in prison, plus an additional 20 years’ probation upon release, and charged $50,000 in fines, on charges of child pornography possession — for which he filed an appeal on Friday, having maintained his innocence throughout.
He was previously accused of molesting multiple underage girls, including one victim under 5 years old, when he was between 14 and 15 years old.
On top of prison time, the sexual predator is also now prohibited from owning a computer or viewing pornography, and barred from interacting with children while unsupervised.
Arkansas Judge Timothy L. Brooks, who presided over Duggar’s case, called his crimes “the sickest of the sick” during his sentencing hearing in May, the Sun reported.
Duggar starred with his parents, siblings, in-laws, wife and the seven children they share on TLC’s “19 Kids and Counting,” about a big Baptist family who were painted as the pinnacle of religious purity and faith.
Meanwhile, this was not Brooks’ first embarrassing reveal. In January, she shocked social media after claiming that her uncle had stumbled across her profile on OnlyFans — and congratulated her on her “very nice” account — before asking for a favor from a so-called “friend.”
“Hey kiddo! This is your uncle. I think I might have stumbled across a video of you today…very nice. Do you happen to know Riley Reid?” he allegedly wrote, mentioning another porn star. “Also, do you have an OnlyFans? My friend wants to know.”
The creepy message left her “cringing,” she said.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Everybody’s got a camera. So everybody’s taking pictures. So everybody’s making movies. More people now make movies than see them. Shove producers and directors. Today the actors are making the movies.
Dakota Johnson’s newie is “Cha Cha Real Smooth.” With that name you shouldn’t figure it’s another “Casablanca.” Could maybe be “A Wizard of Odds”? They all want to produce. She produced it. Surprise surprise! She also stars in it. The film premiered at Tribeca Film Festival.
Dakota: “Crazy to have a premiere for a movie my company made. I’m really proud. But I’ve learned it’s OK not to have everything figured out all the time. That’s also kind of what the movie is all about. It’s a coming-of-age movie.”
“Whatever age you’re at. It’s set in New Jersey so this is the closest festival unless there’s one in Jersey I don’t know about.”
This has “Cha-Cha’d” into theaters and onto ­AppleTV+.
JUNE. Month of I Do’s.
Pierce Brosnan: “My Irish wedding made me cringe. I sold the saga to ‘Hello’ magazine . . . Downside was worrying about looking foolish which we probably did except this made it comfortable money-wise. If I hadn’t done that deal I’d have had to pay for the lot of it myself.”
Pamela Anderson on ex-husband Tommy Lee: “We met New Year’s Eve 1994. He came up, grabbed me and licked my face. I thought he was a nice guy and gave him my phone number.” Three years later when he stopped licking her face she left him and that old phone number.
Wonderbra model Eva Herzigova didn’t recognize Bon Jovi drummer Tico Torres when they first met. “He told me he was a roofer. Also he upholstered chairs. I believed him until in his office days later I saw these Bon Jovi posters and said, ‘One of these guys looks like you.’ ” Later she must’ve said other things because he’s now her ex-husband.
Antonio Banderas about Melanie Griffith: “It was the giggle. I’d heard her laugh and it always made me smile. She even giggles in big moments like when I proposed!” That laugh may have stopped because they’re now unmarried.
On their first date Warren Beatty invited Annette Bening to make a baby with him. He said: “We didn’t even date before we married. At the end of seeing a movie I asked if she wanted to have dinner and make a baby. She said yes — and we did that night.” And they’re still married. It’s 30 years.
JUDGE Judy, CBS-TV’s top star and earner for 25 years, just won her eighth Emmy. Now on Amazon’s network “because I’ll never retire and my legs are too short to be a ballet dancer” is still the same Judge Judy. Changed only is the hair and robe. Unchanged is her mouth, brain and stardom. Last week for her very first season on Amazon she won another Emmy. And what was TV’s No. 1 major attraction doing at exactly that moment when she heard the news?
NYC ladies handbook: Two kinds of men exist — foreign and domestic. The company you keep should be franchise, corporate or subsidiary. The standard? The gold standard. Entertainment? A man and his money make a nice party. The husband? One who’s tall, dark, has a bank account — and a strong will — made out to you.
Only in New York, kids, only in New York.

Thanks for contacting us. We've received your submission.
Beyoncé is back in her BeyHive.
The 40-year-old entertainer is set to deliver her newest single, “Break My Soul,” at midnight ET Monday.
The single is the first song from her upcoming album, “Renaissance.”
The news was announced via Beyoncé’s Twitter and Instagram bios — where she simply wrote the words “BREAK MY SOUL” and “midnight, ET.”
The “Run the World (Girls)” singer’s highly anticipated seventh album is due for release July 29.
“Break My Soul” is the former Destiny’s Child member’s first single since 2021’s “Be Alive” from the “King Richard” soundtrack.
Beyoncé last dropped music in honor of Juneteenth on June 19, 2020, as part of the soundtrack “The Lion King: The Gift.”
The tune, entitled “Black Parade,” scored the musician the Grammy award for Best R&B Performance in 2021.
Queen Bey’s new album will contain 16 tracks and was announced in a tweet on June 16 by the music streaming platform Tidal. “Renaissance” also appears to be a double record, as the post described the album as “Act I.”
The mother of three last dropped a full-length record in 2016 with her explosive R&B project “Lemonade.”
She subtly alluded to her album in an interview with Harper’s Bazaar last year, saying, “I feel a renaissance emerging,” which was deemed to be a clue to the album’s title.
“With all the isolation and injustice over the past year, I think we are all ready to escape, travel, love, and laugh again,” she told the publication at the time.
“I feel a renaissance emerging, and I want to be part of nurturing that escape in any way possible,” Beyoncé explained further.
She also discussed how the inspiration for her music comes to her and noted how it often takes a long time for her songs to reach fruition.
“Still, there’s nothing like the amount of love, passion and healing that I feel in the recording studio,” she said.

Beyoncé, Drake, Lizzo, Burna Boy, Bad Bunny and more offer sizzling tunes that make you want to move.
The 25-square-mile project is the Kingdom’s latest effort to become an international art hub, with art installations by artists like Michael Heizer and James Turrell.
Baz Luhrmann’s new biopic stars Austin Butler, a charismatic heartthrob who channels Elvis Presley and could even eclipse him.
John Jurgensen and Corinne Dorsey
On this new record jazz great Charles Lloyd explores the power of three with Bill Frisell and Thomas Morgan
A display of 175 black-and-white prints at the National Gallery of Art does not shy away from asking hard questions about America’s treatment of the environment.
Fact: Lots of guys like to talk about their clothes. So why not wear things worth talking about? Here, six pieces with stories that deserve to be told.
A new exhibition at Amsterdam’s Rijksmuseum focuses on oversize works, some up to 75 feet long.
Director Christos Nikou’s surreal new movie, in which amnesia goes viral, has a memorable range of allegorical implications.
The new Elvis Presley biopic, with Tom Hanks as “Colonel” Tom Parker, is just what you would expect from the film’s hyperactive director.
A viral Instagram post from the 2022 Met Gala has some visitors looking for a marble statue of the pop singer among Greek and Roman gods. However, the statue doesn’t exist.
Inspiring buoyant summer dresses, these billowing invertebrates are the season’s most unlikely style icons. Here, how you can dress like a free-swimming ocean dweller, too.
Major gems look effortlessly chic styled with a simple summer wardrobe of white tanks, cotton poplin and light cashmere layers.
Henrik Purienne, photographer, and Alexander Fisher, stylist | Text by Jenny Hartman
From invisible sunscreen to jade-colored nail polish, the new essentials to stock up on this season.
The Paul Cezanne exhibit at the Art Institute of Chicago includes 80 paintings, 40 works on paper, and two sketchbooks of an artist who defied norms and inspired his contemporaries.
In its debut recording, the group showcases new scores highlighting the unusual sound of its two-piano, two-percussionist configuration.
From Gucci and Prada to American Eagle, fashion has re-embraced the risqué style. But are these itsy-bitsy, teenie-weenie bottoms still shocking this time around? Here, a look at their history—plus four styles to try.
Hulu’s new dramedy turns a top chef’s takeover of his family’s struggling Italian sandwich place into something special.
This HBO documentary provides chilling, recently unearthed video of the progress of a Soviet disaster.
There’s nothing staid about this show of Victorian ceramics at the Walters Collection in Baltimore.
Music from two very different composers—one unjustly neglected, one a rightful success.

The 25-square-mile project is the Kingdom’s latest effort to become an international art hub, with art installations by artists like Michael Heizer and James Turrell.
Anna Weyant, a new art star whose work evokes a millennial Botticelli, was discovered on Instagram. She’s also dating her dealer, Larry Gagosian.
The auction continued the art market’s hot streak over two weeks of sales that has seen record prices for works like the “Shot Sage Blue Marilyn” and an iconic Man Ray photograph
Divorced real-estate mogul Harry Macklowe and his ex-wife, Linda Macklowe, will divvy the proceeds as buyers win art trophies by Mark Rothko, Andy Warhol and Gerhard Richter.
The sale of “Le Violon d’Ingres”—a new high for any photograph at auction—caps a strong, $1.3 billion week for auction house that smashed records for Andy Warhol and Ernie Barnes.
Hector was the type of dinosaur that inspired the raptors who terrorize “Jurassic Park” visitors in the 1993 film.
The record-high sale for an American artwork at auction signals a strong start to New York’s major spring auctions
Chinese collectors under 40 are reshaping the art market by pushing up prices for sneakers, cartoon-like art, luxury watches and vintage cigars—as all eyes turn to New York’s estimated $2 billion sales this week.
Christie’s will sell “Shot Sage Blue Marilyn” for a record asking price at auction in May.
Curators and artists distance themselves from wealthy Russians, and collectors recently spent nearly $700 million on art in London
Yusaku Maezawa, the billionaire who recently rocketed to the International Space Station, is sending one of his prized paintings by Jean-Michel Basquiat to auction this spring for an estimated $70 million.
The asking price would set a record for any photograph, meaning the sale of the nude “Le Violon d’Ingres” could test collectors’ appetite for the surreal in an already hot art market.
Head study by Nelson Shanks was part of American artist’s preparation for a full portrait that now hangs in ancestral home of late princess.
Meanwhile, Phillips reports $1.2 billion in sales as major auction houses credit an influx of millennials and first-time buyers with propelling art sales.
The auction house said millennials drove an art market rebound by bidding up everything from luxury goods to NFTs.
The 53-year-old billionaire paid $43.2 million for the historic document, which he plans to lend to a museum in Arkansas.
Collectors splurged on everything from classic paintings of windswept fields by Vincent Van Gogh to spray-painted images by street artists like Banksy to a rare edition of the U.S. Constitution.
The private collector beat out a group of cryptocurrency investors who raised more than $40 million to buy the historic document.
Kelly Crow and Omar Abdel-Baqui
The 1949 self-portrait, ‘Diego y yo,’ by the Mexican artist sold for an auction record for any Latin American artist.
Christie’s, Sotheby’s and Phillips get ready to sell off at least $1.6 billion worth of art, including works that could sell for 15 times their asking prices.
Kelly Crow | Photographs by Bess Adler for The Wall Street Journal

Opera Theatre of Saint Louis’s spring season includes Tobias Picker’s new opera about neurologist Oliver Sacks’s patients suffering from sleeping sickness.
The festival returns to a full performance schedule after two years with works including ‘Omar’ by Rhiannon Giddens and Michael Abels and Yuval Sharon’s production of ‘La Bohème.’
Anthony Davis’s opera about the iconic Black Power figure starts a nationwide series of engagements in Detroit.
Brett Dean’s interpretation of Shakespeare’s tragedy has its North American premiere at the Met.
György Kurtág’s first opera, adapted from Samuel Beckett’s one-act play and completed at age 91, is filled with compassion for its four aged characters
The Met’s new production of the Donizetti work, by Simon Stone and dubbed ‘Lucia: Closeups of a Cursed Life,’ transports the tragic tale to a dying American Rust Belt community in the present day.
In Los Angeles, Du Yun’s solo opera about a father’s struggles has its premiere and the Los Angeles Philharmonic teams with Deaf West Theatre for a unique take on Beethoven’s work.
Michel van der Aa’s film opera imagines what it would be like to leave your body behind to have your mind preserved in the digital world.
The U.S. premiere of a show, delayed by Covid-19, drawn from a Chinese compilation of myths that was first transcribed in the fourth century B.C.
To celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy Center and the 10th anniversary of the American Opera Initiative, monument-inspired premieres from diverse creators.
Composer Christopher Cerrone and librettist Stephanie Fleischmann offer an updated, Americanized take on the Japanese director’s ‘Rashomon.’
A jazz cabaret take on the final hours of Socrates’ life.
The operatic adaptation of Lynn Nottage’s play marries the best of its love-and-loss narrative to Ricky Ian Gordon’s musical talents in Bartlett Sher’s production.
Boston Lyric Opera and Opera Philadelphia collaborate on a film of Ana Sokolović’s work, about a group of women preparing their friend for her wedding day.
Verdi’s opera gets a new staging from Bartlett Sher that moves the action to Weimar Germany in the 1920s.
Wayne Shorter and Esperanza Spalding team up for an operatic retelling of Euripides’ play.
The Metropolitan Opera’s new staging of the work by composer Matthew Aucoin and librettist Sarah Ruhl refreshes the familiar.
San Francisco Opera new production of Beethoven’s work, set in a detention facility, might leave some hoping for an early release.
While companies slowly return to in-person performances, online videos like ‘La Voix Humaine’ and ‘In Song’ continue to bring the opera house to your home.
Monday night’s performance, the first in 18 months, featured the Met’s first-ever opera by a Black composer: a stage adaptation of the memoir by Charles M. Blow.

Premieres, rarities and an old favorite mix in this inventive showcase that features some designs by Robert Rauschenberg.
The troupe’s new season has rewarded dance fans with Pam Tanowitz’s new ‘Law of Mosaics’ and Jerome Robbins’s ‘The Goldberg Variations’ (1971)
The first dance troupe in the inaugural season at Chelsea Factory is no match for the well-appointed setting
The inaugural event at the historic venue features four troupes returning to its stage after the Covid-19 pandemic, and early performances by the Paul Taylor Dance Company offer plenty to celebrate.
His detailed staging of the work, which uses the 1895 revised Tchaikovsky score, is based on handwritten notations documenting the choreography of Petipa and Ivanov.
In the winter season, freshly promoted dancers seize their opportunities to shine.
The Troupe’s current run at City Center includes two live premieres and four newly staged productions.
New York City Ballet’s holiday perennial returns after a Covid-19-induced absence, with a few pandemic tweaks in place.
The iconic choreographer, now age 80, creates a four-part, two-hour show for City Center.
In an online premiere, Miami City Ballet skillfully relocates George Balanchine’s adaptation of Shakespeare’s play to an underwater locale inspired by South Florida
New York City Ballet recently returned to the stage for in-person shows for the first time since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic.
A sculpture, sound and performance installation at Lincoln Center’s Hearst Plaza fuses professional dance with first-person storytelling from ‘civilians.’
The Jacob’s Pillow Dance Festival returns with in-person and digital programming, including this lengthy 2019 performance by Crystal Pite and the Paris Opera Ballet.
Danspace Project’s four Platform films are choreographic responses to the physical separation brought on by the pandemic.
As dance companies edge closer to normalcy, New York City Ballet’s virtual gala—filmed by Sofia Coppola at Lincoln Center—feels ebullient, while a streamed version of a live American Ballet Theatre performance falls a little flat.
In a program of works by the American Ballet Theatre’s esteemed artist in residence, an ebullient world premiere created in a ‘ballet bubble’ rose to the top.
A socially distanced performance in the East Village, now available to stream, marked a return to the stage for dancers, musicians and vocalists from the Metropolitan Opera and an ineffable audience experience.
Performance artist Elliot Reed and guest collaborators take on Covid-19 restrictions as a formal challenge in a series of improvised works at MoMA PS1.
New York City Ballet and Pacific Northwest Ballet offer filmed productions of George Balanchine’s staging of Tchaikovsky’s Christmas classic.
Four new, specially commissioned ballets from American Ballet Theatre work for at-home pandemic viewing, but are unlikely to translate well to in-person performance.

Joseph C. Sternberg and Mary Anastasia O'Grady discuss Brazilian voters' revolt against corruption and Angela Merkel's political decline.
Joseph C. Sternberg and Hugo Restall discuss Riyadh's inability to get its story straight on Jamal Khashoggi's murder and turmoil in global financial markets.
Joseph C. Sternberg and Hugo Restall discuss Bavarian voters' rebuke to Angela Merkel and Beijing's repression of its Muslim minority.
Mary Kissel is a former member of the editorial board of The Wall Street Journal. She contributed to the Journal’s opinion pages and hosted "Foreign Edition,” the editorial page’s foreign-policy podcast. Ms. Kissel joined the Journal in Hong Kong in 2004 as a financial columnist and served as Asia opinion editor from 2005 to 2010. Previously, she worked at Goldman Sachs in New York and London. Ms. Kissel is a Fox News contributor and a weekly co-host of the John Batchelor Show, a nationally syndicated radio talk show. She is a graduate of Harvard College and the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.

The British band repurposed disposable rock culture and wrapped it in American glamour.
The actress, who would have been 100 this year, is best known for her roles in ‘The Wizard of Oz’ and ‘Meet Me in St. Louis,’ but her range extended well beyond those classics.
While the longtime music director of the Minnesota Orchestra prepares to leave his post, he won’t be resting on his laurels.
‘Exile on Main Street,’ released 50 years ago after they’d left Britain for financial reasons, marked a more eclectic, edgier turn in the famous band’s music
At the National Yiddish Theatre Folksbiene, a work by Barry Manilow looks at the sextet made up of Jews and non-Jews that was a hit in Weimar Germany.
Francis Ford Coppola’s masterpiece, a movie he created with Mario Puzo, remains a gripping tale.
Born 100 years ago this month, bassist Charles Mingus created music that was singularly bold, beautiful and original.
Amid the horrid destruction of human life in Ukraine, cultural heritage is also at risk; there are ways to save it.
James Cuno and Thomas G. Weiss
A recent ruling that found Ed Sheeran hadn’t violated another musician’s copyright strikes a sweet note of justice.
The newly-restored 1978 film of The Band’s farewell concert has a strange grandeur
The album was the first to showcase the group’s fully formed hard-rock boogie blues.
A Criterion Channel retrospective serves as an approachable entry to the controversial director in the centenary year of his birth.
The show will pretape the award for that category, a snub that ignores its inherent importance to the art of moviemaking.
The Audrey Irmas Pavilion, an event space designed by Rem Koolhaas’s OMA for Los Angeles’ Wilshire Boulevard Temple, focuses on structural looks at the cost of human experience.
The single from the group’s ‘Machine Head’ album remains an iconic hard-rock pioneer.
The ceremony’s best days may be behind it, but remarkable movies continue to be made.
Among the many horrors of the Russian invasion is the danger posed to historic structures in Kyiv and beyond.
Their leaders fear a large-scale destruction of cultural heritage. It’s happened before.
The singer’s record, which deals with lost love, growing old and social issues, is as emotionally raw as it was a half-century ago.
The show, a revival of which is now in previews on Broadway, was radically innovative in its musical construction when it opened in the 1950s.

How to avoid “pillow face,” “trout pout” and other pitfalls of our filler-happy age.
Twelve Mother’s Day gifts that you don’t have to be a mom to covet, including a stylish laptop tote, comfortable garden clogs and an elegant linen robe.
Get a peek at some of this season’s chicest accessories.
Kevin Huynh | Photography by Emily Lipson for WSJ. Magazine | Fashion Editor Jenny Hartman
Sports-inspired looks are a slam dunk for men’s fashion this season.
Photography by Casper Kofi for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Jason Rider
Khouri—a favorite of celebrities like Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen—is preparing to sell one-of-a-kind pieces and, for the first time, her sculptures at Tefaf New York.
Lane Florsheim | Photography by Adrian Gaut
Take a trip to the adventurous side of fashion this spring with looks that inspire wonder.
Photography by Dario Catellani for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Vittoria Cerciello
Hint: It’s Alaïa. The runway star on the food, music and books that keep her going backstage and through life.
The watch world’s annual trade show Watches and Wonders Geneva reconvened in person for the first time in three years. Here are the top timepieces that made their debut.
Michael Clerizo and Jenny Hartman
When it comes to skin care, we’ve turned our attention below the neck.
With a new, beefier sneaker releasing this week and a sold-out Loewe collaboration under its belt, the Zurich-based shoe company is broadening its audience outside of minimalist marathoners
After last year’s partially remote celebrations, Hollywood’s biggest night finally returned, and the fashion along with it. See every notable look from the Academy Awards’ red carpet
Alexander Fisher, Lane Florsheim and Kevin Huynh
Going close-up with their imperfections, middle-aged stars are sparking a conversation around aging skin.
Skin-care influencers on the freewheeling social-media platform have unleashed a slew of trendy beauty routines. But do these treatments have any real benefit, or can some actually be harmful?
The two brands meld their signature styles by mixing crystal buckles and jewel-tone velvets with low-key comfort.
Jessica Iredale | Photography by F. Martin Ramin for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Jill Telesnicki
Unusual embellishments and sinuous shapes define the season’s most striking accessories.
Photography by David Abrahams for WSJ. Magazine | Set Design by Georgina Pragnell
This season, some designers responded to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, as others chose to focus on joy. Here’s the best of those fall collections, including looks from Chanel, Fendi and Prada.
Jenny Hartman, Lizzy Wholley and Alexander Fisher
The striking shadows, clean light and simple lines of a pueblo-style ranch near Santa Fe, New Mexico, form the ideal backdrop for effortless styles.
Photography by Annemarieke van Drimmelen for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Giovanni Dario Laudicina
The long and short of today’s tailoring means tight waists, sharp shoulders and cropped lines that bare some skin.
Photography by Katsu Naito for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Julie Ragolia
Models Andreea Diaconu and Simon Nessman are the picture of wedded bliss—in real life and on camera.
Photography Cass Bird for WSJ. Magazine | Styling By Katelyn Gray
New complicated timepieces and sturdy briefcases are built for a busy schedule.
Photography by Benjamin Bouchet for WSJ. Magazine | Styling by Jenny Hartman

Hulu’s new dramedy turns a top chef’s takeover of his family’s struggling Italian sandwich place into something special.
This HBO documentary provides chilling, recently unearthed video of the progress of a Soviet disaster.
This six-part HBO docuseries outlines the bizarre details of the Helen Wilson killing and the case of the Beatrice Six.
Amazon’s new show is a dysfunctional family comedy—with more than one modern twist
CBS’s Watergate special adds depth to the familiar Nixon administration scandal.
ESPN’s three-part documentary follows the thrills and disappointments that led to the USA Women’s Basketball Team’s 1996 Olympic gold and the formation of the WNBA.
A harrowing documentary on Hulu tells the story of the Boy Scouts of America and the sex-abuse scandal that sullied the image of a once-revered organization.
This HBO documentary about a clandestine network of illegal abortion providers in pre-Roe Chicago is gripping, regardless of where one stands on its central argument.
The man behind Shakespeare in the Park, the Public Theater and many lasting productions gets an ‘American Masters’ appraisal.
Olivier Assayas’s new series, based on his 1996 film that was inspired by a 1915 French serial, now stars Alicia Vikander as an actress looking to prove she has an artistic side.
A callow skateboarder takes over an apartment building that had been owned by his father and grows through his interactions with the tenants.
This dramedy series, drawn from Adam Kay’s diary-based book about his own obstetrical training in a British NHS hospital, tweaks the doctor-show formula.
This ‘Frontline’ presentation looks at the aftermath of the George Floyd murder as citizens of Minneapolis debated the future of policing in the city.
The PBS ‘Great Performances’ presentation focuses on ‘Company’ and man who set out to reinvent Broadway.
Ron Howard’s film is a laudatory portrait of celebrity chef José Andrés and his World Central Kitchen, a program that brings food to those in crisis.
PBS’s ‘American Experience’ production looks at an outbreak of plague in San Francisco and the scapegoating of the Asian community that followed.
David Attenborough hosts the five-night documentary, complete with high-tech visualisations, about the giant creatures.
This documentary on Shudder zooms in on movie footage and filmmaking techniques that only masquerade as the truth
This ‘NOVA’ entry on PBS looks at why the Ever Given got lodged in the narrow waterway, stranding more than 400 other ships along with nearly $10 billion in medical supplies, food and other goods.
Jean Smart returns in the second season of an HBO Max comedy series that is largely about pain

Opera Theatre of Saint Louis’s spring season includes Tobias Picker’s new opera about neurologist Oliver Sacks’s patients suffering from sleeping sickness.
The festival returns to a full performance schedule after two years with works including ‘Omar’ by Rhiannon Giddens and Michael Abels and Yuval Sharon’s production of ‘La Bohème.’
Anthony Davis’s opera about the iconic Black Power figure starts a nationwide series of engagements in Detroit.
Brett Dean’s interpretation of Shakespeare’s tragedy has its North American premiere at the Met.
György Kurtág’s first opera, adapted from Samuel Beckett’s one-act play and completed at age 91, is filled with compassion for its four aged characters
The Met’s new production of the Donizetti work, by Simon Stone and dubbed ‘Lucia: Closeups of a Cursed Life,’ transports the tragic tale to a dying American Rust Belt community in the present day.
In Los Angeles, Du Yun’s solo opera about a father’s struggles has its premiere and the Los Angeles Philharmonic teams with Deaf West Theatre for a unique take on Beethoven’s work.
Michel van der Aa’s film opera imagines what it would be like to leave your body behind to have your mind preserved in the digital world.
The U.S. premiere of a show, delayed by Covid-19, drawn from a Chinese compilation of myths that was first transcribed in the fourth century B.C.
To celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy Center and the 10th anniversary of the American Opera Initiative, monument-inspired premieres from diverse creators.
Composer Christopher Cerrone and librettist Stephanie Fleischmann offer an updated, Americanized take on the Japanese director’s ‘Rashomon.’
A jazz cabaret take on the final hours of Socrates’ life.
The operatic adaptation of Lynn Nottage’s play marries the best of its love-and-loss narrative to Ricky Ian Gordon’s musical talents in Bartlett Sher’s production.
Boston Lyric Opera and Opera Philadelphia collaborate on a film of Ana Sokolović’s work, about a group of women preparing their friend for her wedding day.
Verdi’s opera gets a new staging from Bartlett Sher that moves the action to Weimar Germany in the 1920s.
Wayne Shorter and Esperanza Spalding team up for an operatic retelling of Euripides’ play.
The Metropolitan Opera’s new staging of the work by composer Matthew Aucoin and librettist Sarah Ruhl refreshes the familiar.
San Francisco Opera new production of Beethoven’s work, set in a detention facility, might leave some hoping for an early release.
While companies slowly return to in-person performances, online videos like ‘La Voix Humaine’ and ‘In Song’ continue to bring the opera house to your home.
Monday night’s performance, the first in 18 months, featured the Met’s first-ever opera by a Black composer: a stage adaptation of the memoir by Charles M. Blow.

Christian Bale and Russell Crowe join the Marvel franchise in this movie directed by Taika Waititi and starring Chris Hemsworth.
This documentary tells the story of the Kraffts, the impossibly daring volcano scientists whose passion led to their demise.
Buzz Lightyear goes back to space, Penélope Cruz plays a movie director, a Chicago sandwich shop is transformed, and much, much more.
WSJ Arts in Review Staff
The comedian directs and appears in this movie comedy starring Joe List as a timid man whose Independence Day vacation, visiting his parents and extended family in Maine, is no picnic for him.
In this Regency era romcom, Frieda Pinto is embroiled in a friend’s revenge plot against a mysterious and aloof single man with a fortune.
Director Christos Nikou’s surreal new movie, in which amnesia goes viral, has a memorable range of allegorical implications.
The new Elvis Presley biopic, with Tom Hanks as “Colonel” Tom Parker, is just what you would expect from the film’s hyperactive director.
The new “Toy Story” spinoff is nostalgic and fun without taking itself too seriously.
In this Argentinian film, Penélope Cruz plays a European director forcing two famous but different actors into increasingly ridiculous predicaments for her—hopefully—award-winning movie.
The latest in the dino-centric franchise features returning stars and a script that’s more ridiculous than ever.
In a costume drama drawn from Balzac’s novel, a young poet works to ingratiate himself into the cutthroat society of French cultural writing.
Terence Davies writes and directs a film about World War I poet Siegfried Sassoon that focuses less on his experiences in the Great War and more on his sexuality.
A biopic looks at Maurice Flitcroft, a shipyard worker who slyly slipped into the 1976 British Open and was dubbed “the world’s worst golfer.”
Tom Cruise hops back into the cockpit, ‘Hacks’ returns, dinosaurs (continue to) stalk the earth, and much more
WSJ Arts in Review Staff
Tom Cruise returns in the much-anticipated sequel that’s entertaining if lacking in originality.
Dan Mirvish’s film features an unlikely, honor-bound bureaucrat discovering the Watergate Tapes.
The latest installment in Julian Fellowes’s upstairs-downstairs saga about the Crawleys gets a touch of Hollywood.
A documentary takes aim at a 1973 hostage crisis in Brooklyn.
Kino Lorber’s release of this set of six features and seven shorts presents the esteemed but too-little-known filmmaker at the apex of his career
In David Siegel and Scott McGehee’s new film, two adult children of a now-comatose father grapple with their inherited trauma.

On June 29, 2007, the first iPhone went on sale. On that same day, a boy named Noah Schmick was born. Over the next 15 years, the iPhone grew…and so did Noah. Through interviews with current and former Apple executives, WSJ’s Joanna Stern traces how Apple’s invention matured and changed all of us—perhaps the youngest generation most of all.
Through exclusive interviews with current and former Apple executives, WSJ’s Joanna Stern traces how Apple’s invention evolved over the next 15 years and changed a generation.

Elizabeth Bernstein writes the “Bonds: On Relationships” column for The Wall Street Journal, which explores social psychology and the manifold aspects of human interactions. In her column, she focuses on how we can best relate—to others and to ourselves.
Ms. Bernstein has been at the Journal for more than 20 years and has previously covered higher education, philanthropy, psychology and religion at the paper, all areas in which personal relationships loom large. In her work, she has ranged far and wide, from exposing the backlash against excessive emailing of baby photos to a detailed narrative reconstruction of a matricide. She has received awards from organizations including the New York Chapter of the Society of Professional Journalists' Deadline Club, the Education Writers Association and the American Psychoanalytic Association.
Ms. Bernstein received a bachelor’s degree in journalism and English from Indiana University and a master’s degree in journalism with honors from Columbia University. She has completed a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship at MIT, which focused on brain science, and a Rosalynn Carter Fellowship for Mental Health Journalism.
She lives in Miami, where she is an avid sailor and scuba diver.

The restaurateur also shares his morning routines: waking up at 5 a.m., struggling to write his memoir and breakfast at Balthazar.
“I just had a huge shower, very cold shower. Not even semi-hot, no. Just cold. Then [I’m] just absolutely fresh as a daisy.”
Murphy also tells us about Patagonia co-founder Yvon Chouinard changed her life: “He and I became friends and he really taught me a lot about living simply.”
The “SNL” comedian on his go-to breakfast item and showing a new side of himself in “Fire Island”: “I wasn’t really driving the jokes and it took me a second to really be okay with that.”
The chef worked in kitchens for over 20 years before buying The French Laundry—and has a secret hack for ordering In-N-Out fries
The actor and comedian also discusses her new children’s book and writing a diary in the sauna
“I have it for every single meal.” Tennis star Raducanu on her workouts, beauty regimens and coaching switchup: “I trust my own decision-making.”
The talk show host also tells us about the gratitude journaling she does with her kids and how she finds inspiration everywhere.
The Oscar-winning actor also tells us about her new book and why her breakfast routine is an “odd mess.”
The chef, whose forthcoming cookbook celebrates the food of the African diaspora, starts his days with a vegetable smoothie and a mantra.
Lane Florsheim | Portrait by Jai Lennard
It starts with more rest. The singer also tells us about her new music and shapewear line, Yitty.
The dance-pop singer-songwriter also discusses listening to new demos on the treadmill: “It helped me get quite a few more kilometers in.”
“I wasn’t even nervous about reading my lines. I was more nervous about looking like I had a bad limp.”
It involves having an extremely well-stocked closet: “I feel the most myself when I just kind of throw things on.”
The entertainment executive also tells us about the health trick she got from Beyoncé and how she finally learned to enjoy herself.
The performance artist also talks about why she doesn’t keep regular studio hours: “You’re kind of like a bank employee, where you’re going to work every day.”
The NBA guard, who chugs a glass of water every morning and always brings a Diptyque candle on the road, says this is the year for a Phoenix Suns championship.
Lane Florsheim | Photography by Lyndon French for WSJ. Magazine
“We’ve been living through a couple of decades where work has gotten busy, commutes were tough. I think people felt very stretched.”
The 52-year-old chef on mortality: “I’m trying to [live to] 100 because [of] the books I need to read, the movies I still need to watch, the music I want to relisten to.”
The famous sex therapist, 93, also has three Valentine’s Day gift ideas that can work even at the last minute.

This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.
Hugh Jackman and Billy Crystal are among the boldface names vying for acting honors this Sunday at the Tony Awards, Broadway’s big night. The true stars of the past season could be the people responsible for the plumbing.
A number of Tony-nominated productions feature scenes of a watery nature. In Neil Simon’s “Plaza Suite,” a thunderstorm erupts just as Matthew Broderick, playing a frustrated father of the bride, sets foot outside the namesake New York hotel. In David Mamet’s “American Buffalo,” the rain comes down heavily as the characters plot a late-night heist.
Continue reading your article witha WSJ membership
Copyright ©2022 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by
our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact
Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.

Peggy Noonan is an opinion columnist at the Wall Street Journal where her column, "Declarations," has run since 2000.
She was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Commentary in 2017.  A political analyst for NBC News, she is the author of nine books on American politics, history and culture, from her most recent, “The Time of Our Lives,” to her first, “What I Saw at the Revolution.”  She is one of ten historians and writers who contributed essays on the American presidency for the book, “Character Above All.”  Noonan was a special assistant and speechwriter for President Ronald Reagan.  In 2010 she was given the Award for Media Excellence by the living recipients of the Congressional Medal of Honor; the following year she was chosen as Columnist of the Year by The Week.  She has been a fellow at Harvard University’s Institute of Politics, and has taught in the history department at Yale University.
Before entering the Reagan White House, Noonan was a producer and writer at CBS News in New York, and an adjunct professor of Journalism at New York University.  She was born in Brooklyn, New York and grew up there, in Massapequa Park, Long Island, and in Rutherford, New Jersey.  She is a graduate of Fairleigh Dickinson University in Rutherford.  She lives in New York City. In November, 2016 she was named one of the city's Literary Lions by the New York Public Library.

Clare Ansberry writes the Turning Points column for The Wall Street Journal, exploring the various turning points in people’s lives. She was previously the Journal's Pittsburgh bureau chief, overseeing coverage of various industrial industries, while also writing about issues involving aging, family, community and people with developmental disabilities.
She is the author of “The Women of Troy Hill: The Back-fence Virtues of Faith and Friendship,” about a community of women growing older together on a small hilltop neighborhood. She also co-authored the book “Comes the Peace, My Journey to Forgiveness” about a young man’s journey to reconnect with his family. Both books are based on stories she wrote for The Wall Street Journal. A graduate of St. Francis University in Loretto, Pa., she has been awarded the Missouri Lifestyle Journalism Award, a Casey Medals Award, and the Darrell Sifford Memorial Prize in Journalism from the Missouri School of Journalism.
To contact her, email Clare.Ansberry@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter @clare_ansberry
More babies are likely to be available for adoption in the next few years if the Supreme Court ends the constitutional right to abortion, many adoption centers, sociologists and nonprofit groups say.
Clergy members are spreading their message in audio shows like ‘Clerically Speaking,’ which delves into religious and secular questions of our day. ‘Who do you love more? Mary or Joseph?’
For families with strong habits to curb spending, sticking to their strict household budget is the plan.
For parents, the return home often means shelving retirement plans, facing new worries about their child’s emotional and mental health.
Clare Ansberry | Photographs by Carlos Bernate for The Wall Street Journal
The posts can raise awareness but also spark debate about privacy and consent.
Clare Ansberry | Photographs by Jim McAuley for The Wall Street Journal
Caregivers for aging or infirm family members are heading back to the workplace with a mix of fear, frustration and uncertainty.
Two churches on the same block outside Pittsburgh are negotiating the anxiety and outrage over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Clare Ansberry | Photographs by Ross Mantle for The Wall Street Journal
Popular cloth masks might not offer enough protection against the fast-spreading variant, doctors say. Here is what you need to know about stronger options.
Alex Janin, Clare Ansberry and Nidhi Subbaraman
Within one circle of family and friends in the U.S., perceptions of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine reflect wider differences in history, age and experience.
+Clare Ansberry | Photographs by Justin Merriman for The Wall Street Journal
Covid-19 brought some families together and divided others. As case counts fall, many people want a fresh start but are unsure how to begin.

As Queen Elizabeth II marks her 70 years on the British throne, the details of her personal wealth remain a closely held secret. WSJ breaks down what is known about the monarch’s assets, her income streams and real-estate portfolio. Photo: Sean Gallup/Getty Images
Some days the high-speed news cycle can bring more questions than answers. WSJ’s news explainers break down the day's biggest stories into bite-size pieces to help you make sense of the news.

Jacob Gallagher is the men's fashion columnist on the style news desk of The Wall Street Journal, where he covers style trends. He is the author of "The Men's Fashion Book," published by Phaidon.
Abloh, who died last year at the age of 41, has yet to be replaced.
Is the skinny suit on its way back in? Everything old was new again at Milan men’s fashion week.
The pop star is creating youthful clothing and accessories for the Italian brand—and the mood is pure ’70s rock
According to menswear’s most influential trade show, the Dicky Greenleaf look is back.
The nonprofit farm in upstate New York, founded by artist Dan Colen, is striking out into the luxury clothing business. Will the demand for do-gooder merch extend to $746 sweaters?
Once-settled etiquette questions are open again, thanks to a return-to-office summer with fewer style rules and more casual norms.
Dior’s Sauvage fragrance is in some retailers’ top slots. A Depp spokesman praised the French luxury house as “steadfast and unwavering in its support.”
The athletic giant was a surprising guest star on spring runways, offering high-end versions of its sportswear that included fur and tweed
California dreaming—without a swim trunk in sight. Inside Dior’s West Coast show.
The refined French house once dressed Grace Kelly and Jacqueline Kennedy. Today, Balenciaga is cozy with Kardashians and Bitcoin: “We should be in sync with modern icons,” says CEO Cédric Charbit

Director Christos Nikou’s surreal new movie, in which amnesia goes viral, has a memorable range of allegorical implications.
The new Elvis Presley biopic, with Tom Hanks as “Colonel” Tom Parker, is just what you would expect from the film’s hyperactive director.
The new “Toy Story” spinoff is nostalgic and fun without taking itself too seriously.
In this Argentinian film, Penélope Cruz plays a European director forcing two famous but different actors into increasingly ridiculous predicaments for her—hopefully—award-winning movie.
The latest in the dino-centric franchise features returning stars and a script that’s more ridiculous than ever.
In a costume drama drawn from Balzac’s novel, a young poet works to ingratiate himself into the cutthroat society of French cultural writing.
Terence Davies writes and directs a film about World War I poet Siegfried Sassoon that focuses less on his experiences in the Great War and more on his sexuality.
A biopic looks at Maurice Flitcroft, a shipyard worker who slyly slipped into the 1976 British Open and was dubbed “the world’s worst golfer.”
Tom Cruise hops back into the cockpit, ‘Hacks’ returns, dinosaurs (continue to) stalk the earth, and much more
WSJ Arts in Review Staff
Tom Cruise returns in the much-anticipated sequel that’s entertaining if lacking in originality.
Dan Mirvish’s film features an unlikely, honor-bound bureaucrat discovering the Watergate Tapes.
The latest installment in Julian Fellowes’s upstairs-downstairs saga about the Crawleys gets a touch of Hollywood.
A documentary takes aim at a 1973 hostage crisis in Brooklyn.
Kino Lorber’s release of this set of six features and seven shorts presents the esteemed but too-little-known filmmaker at the apex of his career
In David Siegel and Scott McGehee’s new film, two adult children of a now-comatose father grapple with their inherited trauma.
In Christina Ricci’s new horror movie, directed by Chris Sivertson, the atmosphere is “The Donna Reed Show” meets “The Blob.”
This year’s celebration of pre-talkie movies featured screenings of works from Erich von Stroheim, Mikio Naruse and Soviet Ukraine.
Paranormal goings-on in the American West, an eccentric art thief, an English-language remake of a popular French dramedy and more.
WSJ Arts in Review Staff
Joe Morgenstern, The Wall Street Journal’s Pulitzer Prize-winning film critic, gives a valedictory wave in his final column for the paper.
Robert Eggers’s latest—a star-packed Viking revenge story with Alexander Skarsgård, Ethan Hawke and Nicole Kidman—resonates with our modern era as well.

The artist and filmmaker, who is directing a new version of “The Color Purple,” publishes his first novel, “The Scent of Burnt Flowers.”
Blitz Bazawule, a multidisciplinary artist born in Ghana, at his home in Decatur, Ga.Credit...David Walter Banks for The New York Times
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
DECATUR, Ga. — Blitz Bazawule did not look like someone with the weight of a multimillion-dollar movie on his shoulders.
On a Saturday afternoon earlier this month, Bazawule, the artist, musician and filmmaker, was at his home here, on a break from directing a new movie musical adaptation of “The Color Purple.”
In a few hours he would be heading into an editing session on that film. But for now, as a scented candle burned on a table in a side room where he was sitting, he cautioned that the tranquil atmosphere and his placid demeanor did not tell the whole story about him. “I have a great poker face,” he said.
Over the past two decades, the Ghanaian-born Bazawule, 40, has been on a relentless creative tear. He has recorded and performed worldwide under his hip-hop stage name, Blitz the Ambassador; he has directed music videos and a well-received debut feature, “The Burial of Kojo,” and was a director on Beyoncé’s visual album “Black Is King.” When he seeks a break from these projects, he paints.
And this month, he will publish his first novel, “The Scent of Burnt Flowers,” which Ballantine will release on June 28.
Bazawule took the breadth of his output in stride. “I’m one of those people who goes, ‘I bet I can do that,’” he said. “Often I’m wrong. But occasionally I’m right. You just have to be right a few times.”
“The Scent of Burnt Flowers” makes a compelling case that Bazawule is no literary dilettante. Set in the mid-1960s, the novel tells the story of a Black couple, Melvin and Bernadette, who have fled the United States for Ghana after Melvin kills a racist assailant in self-defense.
In Ghana, they hope to seek assistance from its embattled president, Kwame Nkrumah, who was Melvin’s college classmate. But their efforts to reach Nkrumah are complicated when they cross paths with a local musician, Kwesi Kwayson, who has his own dreams of making it to America.
The novel is by turns rollicking, romantic and solemn, always acutely aware of the historical forces shaping its characters’ destinies and fascinated with the culture shocks they experience as they move between continents.
As Bazawule explained, “Nothing is ever what you think it is, no matter how informed you think you are. When you land, you’re always going to learn things.”
Growing up in Accra, the capital of Ghana, Bazawule was a fan of World Cup and Africa Cup of Nations soccer and enamored of the hip-hop culture epitomized by American groups like Public Enemy.
“I remember seeing the ‘Fight the Power’ video, which was filmed in Brooklyn, and going, that’s where I want to be,” he said. “Whatever that energy was, I wanted to be in it.”
But as he took an interest in global culture and moved to Ohio to study at Kent State University, Bazawule said he was dismayed to learn how others viewed the diverse African nations as an undifferentiated whole or ignored their contributions altogether.
“It’s incalculable how much the world loses every day by intentionally excluding Africa, whether it’s in the creative endeavors or the sciences, which is sad because it’s the world’s loss,” he said.
Bazawule added, “I’m optimistic. I hope that the world is getting more aligned with each other and getting richer from the experiences.”
He has sought to bridge these gaps in his own work, like his 2016 release “Diasporadical,” an album that accompanied his short film series “Diasporadical Trilogia,” a triptych with installments set in Accra, New York and Salvador, Bahia, in Brazil.
In 2018, Bazawule put out “The Burial of Kojo,” which he wrote, directed and self-financed. The film chronicles a young Ghanaian girl, Esi (played by Cynthia Dankwa), and her father, Kojo (Joseph Otsiman), who transports her and his wife, Ama (Mamley Djangmah), from their rural village to a bustling city to pursue a dangerous financial prospect and confront a long-suppressed family secret.
With a storytelling style that is patient and suffused with a quiet mysticism, “The Burial of Kojo” earned wide acclaim. Reviewing the film for The New York Times, Glenn Kenny called it “a near-virtuoso work, a feast of emotion, nuance and beauty, and a startling feature directing debut.”
Ava DuVernay, the filmmaker and producer, said that the grassroots success of “The Burial of Kojo” showed the importance of looking beyond traditional outlets for new talent.
“It did not get into any of the quote-unquote major festivals,” said DuVernay, who acquired “The Burial of Kojo” for her distribution company, Array Releasing, and employed Bazawule on her television series “Cherish the Day.”
“When I think of Blitz, I think of all the other Blitzes who don’t have that bridge,” DuVernay added. “Most of the film press is only looking in one direction. This man came from a completely different direction.”
The success of “The Burial of Kojo” led to further directing opportunities for Bazawule, including “Black Is King,” which was released on Disney+ in 2020, and “The Color Purple,” which is based on the stage musical adaptation of Alice Walker’s novel and is planned for 2023.
But Bazawule’s industry peers and admirers do not regard him as a single-minded careerist, and say that his interests in multiple art forms are equally sincere and equally valid.
“He’s really trying to execute his ideas the best he possibly can, and isn’t as concerned with those outcomes, because if he were, it would stop him cold,” said Maori Karmael Holmes, the founder, CEO and artistic director of BlackStar, an organization that promotes films and media work by Indigenous people and people of color.
Holmes, who selected “The Burial of Kojo” for the BlackStar Film Festival and for the 2019 Whitney Biennial, described Bazawule as “a consummate artist who’s going to put everything he has into whatever he’s working on.” What unites his various works, she said, is his desire to “imagine radical new visions of the world and different paths to world-building.”
Bazawule was one of several directors who contributed to “Black Is King,” traveling with Beyoncé in Africa and helping to craft some of its most distinctive and dreamlike visuals, like the image of the pop singer confidently cradling a giant snake.
He said that he found the film fulfilling as a demonstration of Beyoncé’s cultural clout and how she passed along her freedom from studio-level interference to her colleagues.
“We were allowed to just make the work,” Bazawule said. “It wasn’t until the end that it was like, oh, this is what it’s going to be. She could cut it however she wanted. She could call it whatever she wanted.”
But in March 2020, when the onset of the pandemic prevented him from doing further shooting on the film, Bazawule found himself wondering what to do next.
“We dispersed,” he said. “After a couple of weeks of sitting back, going, what’s going to happen, I just realized, well, what have I wanted to do that I haven’t done?”
In his isolation, Bazawule worked on his painting and he committed himself to his goal of writing a novel, one that would be shaped by all the music and mythology he had absorbed in his life while telling what he called a “fugitive story” that had captivated him.
“We know a lot about how people escape, if they escape or don’t escape,” he said. “We don’t always know what happens when you get out.”
Placing “The Scent of Burnt Flowers” in the 1960s — the era of the civil rights movement in America and post-colonial democracy in Ghana — seemed obvious to Bazawule; as he explained, “the world we live in now was shaped specifically by that period, for better or worse.”
This also allowed Bazawule to include a fictionalized version of Nkrumah, an advocate of the pan-Africanism movement whose presidency began with hopefulness but ended with his overthrow and exile.
Like the author, Nkrumah was educated at an American university, and Bazawule said he was fascinated with how his former classmates might have felt about Nkrumah’s post-college ascent: “To say, that was my frat brother, I pledged with him, and now he’s the president of a newly independent country, that’s like when the guy you know from down the block ends up in the N.B.A.,” he explained.
Bazawule encrypts other details and observations from his personal history within the novel. Bernadette, who comes from Baton Rouge, finds the humid climate of Accra strangely familiar, just as Bazawule did when he traveled to Louisiana.
And the misadventures of Kwesi Kwayson, a touring musician who transports Melvin and Bernadette across Ghana, come more or less from Bazawule’s own experiences. “The sweat, the frustration, the band members that don’t get along — it was a lot of firsthand knowledge,” the author said. “My drummer was not as crazy. But it’s always the drummer.”
Chelcee Johns, a senior editor at Ballantine who acquired “The Scent of Burnt Flowers,” said that she responded to it as both a historical novel and a human story. “The history is so important and so needed,” Johns said. “The evidence of what happened during this time in America and in Ghana is still with us today. But you come here for the story of a couple who are trying to find themselves when America is no longer safe for them.”
“The Scent of Burnt Flowers” has been acquired by FX, which is developing the novel as a mini-series, and Bazawule will gain even more attention when “The Color Purple” is released next year. But Johns said she was fundamentally interested in him as a writer who cares about his craft.
“Blitz is at a good place in his career and very much invested in the book, and that was paramount for us,” she said. “This isn’t a one-off project — this is a great first novel with more to come.”
The room in his home where Bazawule sat was once adorned with notes, photos and visual references that he used while writing “The Scent of Burnt Flowers.” Now only a few pieces of paper were taped to its walls, bearing simple motivational slogans: “One step at a time.” “Rest is resistance.”
As Bazawule explained, the way he manages the many demands of his flourishing career is to not think of them as being in competition with each other. “I try my very best not to separate them,” he said. “I see it all as extensions of the same thing. And when I do that, I don’t compartmentalize, I don’t get overwhelmed.”
“When I’m working, I work a lot,” Bazawule added. “And when I’m not doing the most, I’m doing the least. That’s it. I don’t drink, I don’t do much of anything. I stay at home. I sleep. A lot.”

A historian marks the 200th birthday of a fearless conductor of the Underground Railroad with a visit to her birthplace, only to learn how climate change is washing away memories of “the ultimate outdoors woman.”
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Of the many feats Harriet Tubman accomplished, none awe me more as an historian than the estimated 13 trips she made to Maryland’s Eastern Shore. Each time, she stole family and friends from enslavement much in the way Tubman first secreted herself away to freedom in 1849. Born on the Eastern Shore, Tubman grew into a fearless conductor along the perilous routes of the Underground Railroad, guiding enslaved people on journeys that extended hundreds of miles to the north, ending on the free soil of Pennsylvania, New York and Canada.
This year commemorates the 200th anniversary of her birth and tributes to Tubman abound, including those set in the landscape of her native Dorchester County. I headed to the Eastern Shore to learn how people there remember this Black American freedom fighter, only to discover that the rising waters of climate change are washing away the memories of Tubman that are embedded in the coastal marshland she knew so well.
During each rescue, precious human cargo in tow, Tubman waded into marshes of tall grass and maneuvered through forests dense with pine and oak. Moving under cover of night, Tubman was guided by the constant stars. Angela Crenshaw, a Maryland State Park Ranger, described her as “the ultimate outdoors woman,” someone who made the region’s terrain her ally as she defied slave patrols and a system that held Black Americans as mere chattel.
The historian in me knows that Tubman’s time here is long past. She escaped to free soil in Pennsylvania more than a century and a half ago, only returning to the Eastern Shore for the rescues of enslaved people. Still, like a visit to an old family homestead, I hoped that returning to Tubman’s land might allow me to better understand how her past can inform our present.
Until her death in 1913, Tubman committed to securing America’s best ideals — freedom, dignity, equality — in the face of its worst sins, including slavery and racism. While no precise record of Tubman’s birth survives, historians and the National Park Service say that she was born Araminta Ross, likely in March 1822. When she was not yet 30, she launched her career as a conductor of loved ones, freedom seekers, along treacherous routes. Her reputation for heroism in challenging slavery was already well-established when the Civil War broke out in 1861. Legally still enslaved, Tubman risked capture by joining the Union’s front lines to defeat Confederate rebels and win slavery’s abolition.
Her service as a nurse, a relief worker among enslaved refugees, a scout and a spy was partly rewarded decades later with a pension. Settling in upstate Auburn, N.Y., Tubman established a home for aging and indigent Black Americans, many of whom, like her, had little means of support during their last years. Tubman never wholly retired and, amid early 20th-century Black struggles against segregation and lynching, she promoted efforts to win votes for Black and white women up until her death.
Tubman is now an icon celebrated for how she effectively made good trouble on so many fronts. Among those who admit their debt to her is Georgia’s Stacey Abrams, the voting rights organizer and two-time candidate for governor. In her book “Lead from the Outside,” Abrams credits Tubman with inspiring her own efforts to raise the political consciousness of Americans. Still in the works is the 2016 plan to replace the face of President Andrew Jackson on the $20 bill with a portrait of Tubman. Americans may have the chance to carry Tubman’s likeness with them as a reminder that the nation’s prosperity was made possible by women and men who, like Tubman, had so little and yet contributed so much.
In March, I decided to make a pilgrimage to the place where Tubman’s life began. From the state capital of Annapolis, I drove across the four-mile-long, low-slung Chesapeake Bay Bridge that carries visitors from the mainland, across the open jaw of the bay, to the Eastern Shore. I then headed a short way south on two-lane roads to Tubman’s native Dorchester County, winding past small farms, jagged waterways and modest Main Streets.
No place better remembers Tubman than her birthplace, which sits on the Delmarva Peninsula (that’s short for Delaware-Maryland-Virginia). Her life centered in Dorchester County, where slaveholders shuttled a young Tubman between work in fields, waterways, yards and homes, often separated from her family.
In Dorchester, Tubman’s story is told on the walls of two visitor centers, each structure designed to blend into the grays and browns of the natural landscape. At the Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge, established in 1933, the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service tells her story through its 28,000 acres of wetlands, forest and open fields. Nearby, the story of Tubman’s life and times is recounted at the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Visitor Center, opened in 2017, and operated by a partnership between the National Park Service and the Maryland Park Service. To introduce guests to Tubman’s life and work on the Eastern Shore, the visitor center invites them to discover how she knew intimately the land that is today the Blackwater refuge and its environs. Her epic rescues of scores of enslaved people were possible because Tubman knew how to navigate the region’s contours and trails, depths and denseness, flora and fauna, the seasons, sun and stars.
Tubman’s heroism is a point of pride to Black Marylanders in Dorchester. The struggle against slavery and racism has deep roots there. Among the locals are those descended from Tubman’s family and others who lived and labored alongside them. On my first visit in 2013, I called on Donald Pinder, a local businessman who took a leading role in safeguarding Tubman’s memory and who died last year. To begin, Mr. Pinder walked me through the Harriet Tubman Museum and Educational Center, set up in a downtown storefront in the small city of Cambridge. On the walls of the long narrow space, epic history and local memory mix. I learned how Tubman’s life has been celebrated by generations of Black Maryland farmers, mariners and rural families who have grown up far from cities like Baltimore and Washington, DC.
Mr. Pinder encouraged me to get outdoors to better imagine the trials Tubman faced as she steered loved ones across the rugged landscape and out of bondage. Though a city person, I mustered enough trust to follow his directions to Fork Neck Cemetery. Set on land long tilled by Black farmers, a cluster of headstones was visible from the narrow country road. Still worried about trespassing, I confirmed that it was indeed Mr. Pinder’s own family graveyard and then discovered why he sent me there. Among the weathered markers were those that dated back to Tubman’s days on the Eastern Shore. They paid tribute to Black Marylanders who had been Tubman’s neighbors, but never joined her freedom train. To recall Tubman here is to learn how the past and the present are in fact companion tales.
Back then, when I first visited Dorchester County, a Park Service site dedicated to Tubman was still a plan in the making. Encountering a single roadside marker, the only sign of what is today the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Historical Park, left me wondering how in this vast, sparsely developed place, Tubman’s story would be told. Returning this year, I learned that the answer is through the land. Today the Park Service encourages even casual visitors to know the natural world that was so central to Tubman’s work.
Inside the Tubman Park visitor center, carefully crafted exhibits place her in the habitat of muskrats — as an enslaved girl separated from her family, Tubman tended their traps. We’re introduced to the arduous labor Tubman did alongside her father in the timber fields; there she learned how to navigate the Eastern Shore’s forests and waterways. Faith also figures: Tubman credited her direct connection to God with her survival and her success. Maps trace a 120-mile-long route called the Tubman Byway, which charts the journeys Tubman made, encouraging visitors to trace them by foot, bicycle or car.
Under the gloom of an overcast sky, I trekked along a gentle walking path that wends around the visitor center and its outbuildings. Just the sound of my feet crunching against the gravel attuned me to how sounds fill the vast space — bird songs mixed with the rustle of trees. There was scratching in the low brush, though I couldn’t figure out its source. I heard my own breath. And even though I was within ear shot of the park rangers, I listened for human voices, wary of encountering strangers in the woods. In Tubman’s days, I know, she, too, kept her ears tuned for the sounds of people approaching: slave catchers intent on thwarting her freedom missions.
Time at the Tubman Park fueled my courage to venture out beyond the site’s manicured grounds. I was ready to appreciate the foreboding majesty of Tubman’s world and headed to the Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge. Its visitor center sits a short three miles from the Tubman Park. The walls, shelves and real-time video screens feature the area’s wild inhabitants; I watched remotely as a pair of ospreys contemplated arranging a nest on a nearby platform. Still, Blackwater tells of the humans who are a part of its story, from the first Native American inhabitants, including the Nanticoke people, to the Civilian Conservation Corps workers of the 1930s. Tubman was among the many Eastern Shore peoples, including Native Americans, who lived, worked, colonized and stewarded the place that today is called Blackwater.
When I told a Friends of Blackwater volunteer that I was interested in understanding Tubman’s experience, he recommended a slow car ride along the four-mile-long Wildlife Drive, which runs through the refuge’s marshland. There, I began to experience how Tubman’s travels included the smart and studied company of other inhabitants who, like her, survived by understanding the terrain and one another. I was not at a loss for company. A lone red-winged blackbird kept up a steady chatter as we both lingered above the wetlands on a raised observation platform. Fox squirrels and deer foraged while a statuesque white great egret stepped gingerly through a shallow inlet in search of lunch. I kept an eye out for the resident red fox, which I regard as a predator, but local eagles regard as a meal.
Today, it is arresting to witness how climate change along the Eastern Shore is all too quickly remaking the terrain that was the site of Tubman’s earliest exploits. The transformation gripped me when I encountered the ghost forests that dot Blackwater’s landscape. Decaying trees — devoid of foliage and branches, weathered to an eerie gray — stand tall in the brackish waters where the bay’s salt is overtaking inland sweet waters. Vestiges of a past or harbingers of the future, the skeletons of once mighty oaks and elegant loblolly pines defy efforts to wholly preserve Tubman’s memory on these lands.
I felt emboldened — perhaps Tubman’s courage was fueling my own — and ventured farther off the beaten path out to Parson’s Creek and a thread of water that was known as Stewart’s Canal in Tubman’s time. I stood alone on a short bridge that crosses the wetlands and saw a deep scar left by the enslaved laborers who long ago cut a canal that serviced timber production. Grasses are slowly claiming it. All I could hear was the wind rushing, but underneath were ancient echoes of the effort that Tubman, still enslaved, exerted alongside free men like her father, Ben Ross, as they felled, chopped and wrestled trees along these waterways. Time is rendering the scenes of Tubman’s grueling manual labor almost bucolic.
Walking in Tubman’s country had a ritual quality that felt nearly spiritual, even if I didn’t hear the voice of God that she said guided her journeys. It was here on the land that Tubman discovered her purpose. Today, Black women trek in her name as a tribute, as told in Selina Garcia’s documentary film, “A Walk in Her Shoes.” In 2020, not long after the killing of George Floyd by police in Minneapolis, the jazz artist Linda Harris, along with seven friends, traced Tubman’s trail, walking a total of 116 miles. Alone, on my much shorter walk, I quietly recited short poems, hummed to myself, even if off tune. I discovered that the trek was not simply about clocking miles. It was a chance to keep company with my own thoughts, for my mind to gather itself.
The Underground Railroad routes Tubman followed were a patchy network of allies, secret passages and safe houses that began operation in the early decades of the 19th century. To foil the patrols and slave catchers that policed the Eastern Shore, Tubman deployed quick, strategic thinking to, for example, quiet a crying baby who might give her location away. Still, I imagined her with moments to contemplate her world and sharpen a sense of her place in it.
Surely, Tubman, ever the activist, would encourage those who arrive in Dorchester County to discover her memory to also take time to discover how much more difficult that will be by 2050 when it is estimated that 50 percent of the lower Eastern Shore’s high marshes will be gone. Satellite images from the U.S. Geological Survey show how land has already been lost to rising tides. Gone are some spots where a century ago migrating birds regularly stopped over as they traveled north and south.
Two centuries after her birth, Tubman’s story continues to point toward the nation’s highest ideals. These include older lessons about the man-made world where aspirations for freedom, dignity and equality remain a high bar. Newer is what Tubman’s story reveals about the natural world, the land she knew so intimately. On the Eastern Shore, the Tubman Park and the Blackwater refuge are two chapters of the same story. We can walk in Tubman’s 19th-century footsteps on the very land where she struggled against slavery. Along the way, we may also discover our own footing in the climate challenge of our time.
Follow New York Times Travel on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation. Dreaming up a future getaway or just armchair traveling? Check out our 52 Places for a Changed World for 2022.

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Last month, the Bob Dylan Center opened in Tulsa, Okla., offering researchers unparalleled access to Dylan’s archives and peeling back the layers on his songwriting process, long the object of study and fascination. And this month, “Lou Reed: Caught Between the Twisted Stars” opened at the Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center — it’s the first exhibition drawn from Reed’s archive, which was acquired by the New York Public Library.
Both of these seek to offer deeper understandings of these rock icons, but they also offer the opportunity for alternate narratives to emerge. Dylan and Reed always carefully tended to their own mythologies — now the behind-the-scenes tools are available for all to see.
On this week’s Popcast, a conversation about the value of even the unlikeliest ephemera, the difference between public and private archives and the specific ways Dylan and Reed found methods to distance themselves from their pasts.
Ben Sisario, The New York Times’s music business reporter
Connect With Popcast. Become a part of the Popcast community: Join the show’s Facebook group and Discord channel. We want to hear from you! Tune in, and tell us what you think at popcast@nytimes.com. Follow our host, Jon Caramanica, on Twitter: @joncaramanica.

The animated fan favorite, released 20 years ago this week, featured nuanced depictions of Hawaii and strong female characters.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
When the director Chris Sanders was starting work on “Lilo & Stitch,” the film’s visual development supervisor, Sue Nichols, made a comparison that startled him.
“She did a side-by-side drawing of Mulan next to Nani,” Sanders said, referring to Lilo’s older sister. “And she pointed out that Mulan is actually missing pieces of her anatomy, if you look at how tall her torso is.”
Sanders, who wrote and directed “Lilo & Stitch” with Dean DeBlois, opted for a fuller-figured animation style for the movie, a comedy adventure that has garnered praise from critics and fans for its realistic body types, cultural accuracy and misunderstood protagonist in the two decades since its release on June 21, 2002.
The film tells the story of a young Hawaiian girl named Lilo whose life is upended when an alien fugitive, Stitch, crash-lands nearby. The film laid the groundwork for trends in recent Disney films like the lack of a major love story and a more downbeat protagonist.
“When we turned the clocks from the 1990s to the 2000s, everybody thought the world was going to come to an end,” said Shearon Roberts, the editor of the book “Recasting the Disney Princess in an Era of New Media and Social Movements” and an associate professor of mass communication at Xavier University in New Orleans. “So all the content they were creating was less the fairy tales we saw in the ’80s and ’90s and more this exploration of unknowns.”
Sanders had initially conceived the story as a children’s book, but he retooled the pitch for the big screen. It was an underdog from the start.
After a string of high-profile but expensive 1990s and early 2000s releases like “Atlantis” and “Tarzan” that cost $120 million or more, the “Lilo” producers aimed to make a smaller film for $80 million. DeBlois and Sanders, who’d worked together in the story department on the 1998 “Mulan,” reunited to co-direct and co-write. Daveigh Chase, a preteen who was already a veteran actress, voiced Lilo. But for Stitch, they went with Sanders.
“We didn’t want to go to a real actor like Danny DeVito, and then have the studio coming to us saying, ‘Why did you hire someone who’s a known entity, but they only say like 15 words?’” Sanders said.
“I love that that’s the way he remembers it,” said Clark Spencer, who produced the film and is now president of Walt Disney Animation Studios. “But this was Chris’s character from Day 1. He did the design; he knew what he wanted the character to be, the voice to sound like. I can’t imagine anyone but Chris’s voice for Stitch.”
Initially the story was going to take place in rural Kansas, but after an island vacation, Sanders decided to set the film in another remote location: Kauai, Hawaii.
He, DeBlois and other members of the creative team took another trip — together, this time — to Kauai, talking to locals and familiarizing themselves with Hawaiian culture.
“One thing we learned from working on ‘Mulan’ is that when you’re setting a story in a specific place in the real world, there are places you can’t go,” DeBlois said. “There are some cultural elements you can’t use because you’re an outsider.”
So they enlisted the Hawaiian musician Mark Keali’i Ho’omalu to consult on the hula dancing and choral arrangements, and cast members raised in Hawaii — Tia Carrere, who voiced Nani, and Jason Scott Lee, who played her boyfriend — suggested edits to better reflect the colloquial dialect of Kauai.
The production did not take steps that “Moana” would, like hiring a Hawaiian writing and directing team, though Roberts, the Xavier University scholar, said its more realistic depiction of Hawaii was a start.
“Disney has really struggled to tell Asian-Pacific stories,” she said. “That’s why they spent so much time putting together a brain trust around ‘Moana,’ a film that had a far better reception, from the casting to making sure that certain parts of the story arch didn’t border on stereotype. So there would be a few more lessons about bringing people to the table to support their writing team.”
“Lilo & Stitch” did touch on real-world issues that young audience members might relate to: Nani, forced to become Lilo’s legal guardian after their parents are killed in a car crash, faces parenting struggles. And a social worker always seems to catch Nani and Lilo at their worst.
Still, the filmmakers received negative feedback at the first screening, Sanders said: Viewers didn’t like that Nani grabbed Lilo by the wrist in a scene because they mistakenly believed Nani was Lilo’s mother.
The filmmakers clarified that with a Howard Ashman trick. “He said, ‘If you want the audience to remember something, you have to say it three times, one after the other,’” Spencer said. “So we redid the scene,” making sure that Lilo and Nani mention they’re sisters three times in a row.
But the team wouldn’t edit the film in response to another complaint, Spencer said: Audiences didn’t like how much Nani and Lilo yelled at each other.
“Chris, Dean and I would say, ‘But that’s real,’” Spencer said. “This is a moment when Nani is feeling pressure, when Lilo is feeling out of place and trying to figure out who she is.”
The filmmakers also prioritized realism in another area: A more realistic depiction of female bodies. Lilo is short and chubby, and Nani has thick thighs and what Sanders called “a real pelvis.”
Roberts, the scholar, said the film was a notable departure from typical Disney fare. “The decade before, the princesses had fully developed adult women’s bodies,” she said. “But we allow Lilo to still be childlike. Her face is very innocent. We have a body that’s not a size 0 — we have girlhood fully embodied in our dimensions.”
Lilo is allowed to be a child personality-wise, too: “One of the tropes in these movies is that kids are always smarter, better, more tuned in than the adults, who are played as buffoons,” Sanders said. “But we didn’t do that. Lilo bites a little girl, she throws a fit and she says things that are just nonsensical. She’s acting like an actual kid.”
Lilo, Roberts said, was the rare female Disney animated lead without a love interest (unless you count her passion for Elvis). In choosing to focus instead on Lilo and Nani’s sisterhood, the studio finally accomplished the reversal of an archetype that had been established as far back as “Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,” she added.
Disney had been “slowly picking away at the ‘Some day my prince will come’ message in the ’90s,” she said, adding that the earlier films like “Beauty and the Beast,” “Aladdin” and “Mulan” proved to Disney that a film with a female lead as strong as her male love interest could make money. “So Lilo then takes that one step forward by eliminating the male love interest.”
Janet Wasko, the author of “Understanding Disney: The Manufacture of Fantasy,” noted that by focusing on a female lead sans a romance or marriage plot, “Lilo & Stitch” prefigured future female Disney stars like Moana, Merida from “Brave” and Riley from “Inside Out.”
“Lilo & Stitch” proved to be a critical and commercial success, opening just $500,000 behind the Tom Cruise sci-fi thriller “Minority Report” and eventually earning $273 million globally. (It also picked up an Oscar nomination for best animated feature but lost to “Spirited Away” from Hayao Miyazaki.) “Lilo” spawned a franchise that would encompass three direct-to-video sequels and three television series, as well as a number of theme park rides. There’s even a live-action remake in development.
“It’s one of the films where when people say, ‘What have you worked on?’ you literally feel a change when you say ‘Lilo & Stitch,’” Spencer said.
Fans have repeatedly told him how they can relate — to Lilo’s frustration over feeling misunderstood, to Nani’s determination in spite of a world that continually thwarts her good intentions, even to Stitch’s rebellious nature.
“When the film came out, that’s what a lot of critics talked about,” he said. “Those moments that were based in reality in a way that people could see themselves in, and it didn’t feel like they were cartoon characters.”
For his part, Sanders wishes more people would notice how the relationship between the two sisters anticipates “Frozen” by more than a decade.
“To be clear, I think ‘Frozen’s’ great,” he said. “But it was a little bit frustrating for me because people were like, ‘Finally, a nonromantic relationship with these two girls,’ and I thought, ‘We did that! That has absolutely been done before.’”

All non-deployed aircraft will stand down for one day to “review risk-management practices and conduct training,” the Navy said.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
In the wake of three crashes, two of them fatal, the U.S. Navy has said it will ground all nondeployed aircraft for a day on Monday to focus on safety protocols.
The aircraft grounding comes after crashes within a seven-day period in California this month resulted in six deaths. The day will be used to “review risk-management practices and conduct training on threat and error-management processes,” the Navy said on Saturday.
“In order to maintain the readiness of our force, we must ensure the safety of our people remains one of our top priorities,” the Navy said, adding that deployed units would also conduct a safety review at “the earliest possible opportunity.”
On June 3, a Navy pilot was killed after his F/A-18E Super Hornet crashed in a remote unpopulated area near Trona, Calif., about 170 miles northeast of Los Angeles. The pilot, Lt. Richard Bullock, was flying a training mission, the Navy said.
On June 8, another military aircraft crashed, killing five U.S. Marines. The Marine Corps said the aircraft, an MV-22B Osprey that belonged to the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing, crashed near Glamis, Calif., which is more than 150 miles east of San Diego.
The next day, a Navy helicopter crashed near El Centro, Calif., more than 100 miles east of San Diego. The helicopter, a MH-60S Seahawk, was also conducting a training flight, the Navy said. All four crew members survived. One was taken to a hospital for injuries that were not life-threatening, the Navy said.
The authorities have said they are investigating all three crashes, each of which occurred during routine exercises. So far, there has been nothing connecting the crashes, Cmdr. Zach Harrell, a San Diego-based spokesman for the Naval Air Forces, said.
“If there’s anything that comes out of the investigation that determines there’s a link, that will be addressed immediately,” he said.
He said that safety pauses have taken place before, usually after there had been several crashes in a short period of time. The last time the Navy stood down nondeployed aircraft for safety reasons was in October 2020, Commander Harrell said. The grounding followed two crashes, one of which resulted in two deaths.
There have been nine of what the military considers to be the most serious crashes — one that results in property damage of $2.5 million or more, fatalities or permanent total disabilities — in the Navy and Marine Corps this year, Commander Harrell added.
He characterized the most recent crashes as “unusual.”
In March, four Marines were killed in Norway during a NATO training exercise. They were flying an MV-22B, the same aircraft that crashed on June 8.
In late March, a small Navy plane, an E-2D Hawkeye, also crashed along Virginia’s Eastern Shore, killing one crew member and injuring two others.
On Friday, the U.S. Marine Corps released the names of those killed in the June 8 crash: Cpl. Nathan E. Carlson, 21; Capt. Nicholas P. Losapio, 31; Cpl. Seth D. Rasmuson, 21; Lance Cpl. Evan A. Strickland, 19; and Capt. John J. Sax, 33, the son of Steve Sax, the former Los Angeles Dodgers baseball player.
Mr. Sax said on Instagram that his son loved being a Marine. “He loved to serve this country,” Mr. Sax wrote. “He is and always will be my hero.”
Luke Vander Ploeg contributed reporting.

Ten years later, a look back at the movie that helped the actor move from serious heartthrob to serious thespian.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
“Any assault on the borders of perception is going to seem rash at first,” says Eric Packer, the cocksure, self-destructive, limo-riding finance guy at the heart of David Cronenberg’s 2012 Don DeLillo adaptation “Cosmopolis.” The character is talking about currency speculation, but he may just as well be talking about the actor playing him: Robert Pattinson, known to audiences then as Edward Cullen, the co-protagonist of the “Twilight” franchise, and to audiences now as not merely a Batman, but the Batman. (And the co-protagonist of the “Twilight” franchise.)
At 10 years, “Cosmopolis” is a footnote in Cronenberg’s career and a pivotal moment in Pattinson’s. Before the movie premiered at Cannes in 2012, Pattinson’s work in films like “Little Ashes” (a romantic drama about Salvador Dalí’s love affair with Federico García Lorca), “Remember Me” (a romantic drama that ends in the World Trade Center on the morning of 9/11) and “Water for Elephants” (a romantic drama set in a circus that frankly plays like a circus itself) earned him negligible distinction compared to the “Twilight” movies, none of which distinguished him universally, for the better. Slant Magazine described Pattinson in “Twilight” as a “blank, pasty-faced, fire-haired Gap model”; The Austin Chronicle opined that his “cheekbones keep getting in the way of the story”; Slate semi-praised his performance at the expense of Catherine Hardwicke’s filmmaking, writing that Pattinson “doesn’t seem to have been given much direction beyond ‘melt the camera with your eyes.’”
As the “Twilight” films lumbered along, Pattinson’s notices grew slimmer, leading to his near-absence in reviews of the property’s capper, “The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn — Part 2,” which opened in theaters in the fall of 2012. (His co-star, Kristen Stewart, received the bulk of critics’ attention.) The conclusion of “Twilight” liberated Pattinson from his image as Edward Cullen, but “Cosmopolis” allowed him to make a new beginning, with a stage (and a stretch limousine) to explore his talent in ways his previous roles didn’t let him.
Stilted, strange and too eager to make its points about the financial elite and reckless capitalism during Occupy Wall Street, “Cosmopolis” cast Pattinson against contemporary screen titans (Juliette Binoche, Paul Giamatti); assigned him awkward dialogue about everything from Eric’s gastrointestinal health to his mother-in-law’s physique; and inserted him in situations, from kinky to violent to repulsive, far beyond his purview as a Y.A. heartthrob. Eric has ferocious casual sex with Binoche’s character, Didi Fancher, in the limo, has his prostate examined in the limo and in one of the movie’s rare scenes outside the limo, has athletic casual sex with his bodyguard, Kendra (Patricia McKenzie), then orders her to blast him with her stun gun. “I’m looking for more,” he rasps at her from rumpled sheets. “Show me something I don’t know.”
Again, “Cosmopolis” lends the sense that Pattinson is talking about Pattinson. Maybe, after a runaway franchise, Pattinson felt like he had something to prove. By his estimation, 75 percent of his performance in the “Twilight” movies came from his hair. No wonder he jumped on a movie about a man driving across New York City to see his barber. Eric’s ’do is subdued from the start — slicked, tight and controlled, much like Pattinson’s performance. He’s rigid with purpose, masking Eric’s interior doubts with a stiff exterior bravado that comes rapidly undone by the film’s climax. Throughout, Pattinson shows flashes of the actor he’s capable of being with the right material and the right director. The next decade frequently gave him both.
He appeared in a sprawl of independent films from seasoned auteurs and cutting-edge modern directors: David Michôd’s “The Rover,” Werner Herzog’s “Queen of the Desert,” James Gray’s “The Lost City of Z,” Brady Corbet’s “Childhood of a Leader,” the Safdie brothers’ “Good Time,” the Zellner brothers’ “Damsel,” Robert Eggers’s “The Lighthouse,” Claire Denis’s “High Life.” (He also teamed up again with Cronenberg in 2014 for “Maps to the Stars.”) Rather than parlay commercial success into roles befitting his celebrity stature, Pattinson took the money and ran, appearing in movies most of his fans almost certainly wouldn’t watch, or know about, without his involvement (and probably didn’t even with it). He didn’t play his career safe. He got weird.
“Cosmopolis” showed everyone watching the potential Pattinson couldn’t demonstrate in the boundaries of the “Twilight” movies, and he’s realized that potential in countless roles ever since. Certainly there are traces of Eric Packer in, for example, Samuel Alabaster, the effete, well-to-do pioneer man of “Damsel”; in Ephraim Winslow, the overambitious lighthouse keeper aspirant of “The Lighthouse”; or in Connie Nikas, the “Good Time” character who shares both Eric’s abandon and his apathy for bystanders caught in his path.
After making the most of his “Twilight” clout working on off-kilter, elusive and plain old bizarre indie movies, Pattinson has circled back around to something familiar: franchise blockbusters. Matt Reeves’s film “The Batman” returns Pattinson to his roots, in a sense. (Cronenberg, by happy coincidence, has stayed simpatico with Pattinson by returning to his own roots, body horror, in his new film, “Crimes of the Future.”) The surface similarities of “The Batman” to “Twilight” are matched by a few substantive similarities to “Cosmopolis”; much like Cronenberg’s movie, Reeves’s film is about a man too young to possess as much wealth as he does, who is driven in part by lingering grief over his dead father. But that’s where the comparisons between these two films end.
By the laws of franchise maintenance, Pattinson is set to star as the Dark Knight once more in an inevitable sequel, but by the lessons learned in “Cosmopolis,” he’ll most likely go back to making offbeat choices before long. Those are the choices that define him now, after all, not “Twilight,” and not “The Batman.” All he needed was to climb in a limousine and take a ride with Cronenberg.
“Cosmopolis” is available to stream on Amazon.

This month’s streaming picks include an Indonesian buddy film and a thriller about a hit man who doesn’t kill.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
If you haven’t seen “Filosofi Kopi” or its sequel, no need to fret. “Ben & Jody,” the rollicking third film in the series by the Indonesian director Angga Dwimas Sasongko, offers plenty of pleasures as a stand-alone anticapitalist, pro-environmentalist statement.
Nearing the opening of his new upscale cafe, Ben (Chicco Jerikho) learns that a band of lawless loggers led by the villainous Aa Tubir (Yayan Ruhian) has kidnapped Jody (Rio Dewanto) to stop him from leading a strike against deforestation and the relocation of local villagers. Venturing into the jungle to find his friend, Ben is captured but, aided by other prisoners, escapes with Jody. After their getaway, Ben and Jody come across a matriarchal village led by two sisters, Rinjani (Hana Malasan) and Tambora (Aghniny Haque), who are trying to find their imprisoned father.
While the two men do help, Sasongko thankfully doesn’t move the women to the periphery. The best fight choreography features the sisters while Ben and Jody occupy the background in an endearing bromance. The film is also visually arresting, with the cinematographer Arnand Pratikto utilizing to devastating effect of the double dolly-style camera move popularized by Spike Lee.
Another sequel that requires little background knowledge is the Japanese director Kan Eguchi’s gruesome yet comedic underworld thriller. Based on a manga series, this installment sees the hit man Akira Sato (Junichi Okada), code-named Fable, living in semiretirement with his partner, Yoko (Fumino Kimura). Unbeknown to Sato, however, Utsubo (Shinichi Tsutsumi), a ruthless gangster posing as a disability-rights activist, is searching for him.
Utsubo further burnishes his public persona by caring for the teenage wheelchair user Hinako (Yurina Hirate), whose parents were killed by an assassin. But Utsubo is a predator who’s actually holding her captive. And when Sato befriends Hinako, he makes it his mission to free her.
While “The Fable” features intricate kills, like a bulldozer used to hang a man over a freshly open grave, it’s the film’s gut-busting humor that leaves the biggest impression. If you’re a fan of manga comedy, then Eguchi’s film is catnip. Sato is the perfect unfazed hero, containing both the ability to kill someone in six seconds or less, and a love for corny soap operas.
Rent or buy on Vudu.
Taking place during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937-45), this film from the Chinese writer-director Yang Feng tells the story of the Shandong Rail Corps, a group of resistance miners and train workers battling for Chinese independence.
The faction’s leader, Hong (Zhang Hanyu), dispatches unlikely fighters like the drunken station operator to gain Japanese trust and intercept intelligence documents. But the arrival of the vicious Hirokazu Fujiwara (Hiroyuki Mori), an officer tasked with ending the Rail Corps’ progress, brings new challenges. Hong executes four dangerous missions to undermine the occupying Japanese soldiers.
Apart from the shootouts, evoking film noir of the 1940s, it’s the sheer scale of “Railway Heroes” that excites. The snowy sets are teeming with extras, the precise period details offer a tactile texture and the large set pieces gives the story an epic quality. The director’s exacting vision is best felt in the final claustrophobic passenger-car showdown, where Hong and Hirokazu trade slow-motion bullets.
A man singing in a tree is suddenly killed by an unknown gunman. Later that night opium dealers rob and murder a husband and wife. On their face, the two are separate tragedies. And yet, a peculiar antiques salesman named Siddharth (Harshvardhan Kapoor) might be connected to both.
Set in 1985 around the desert border of Rajasthan in northern India, this revenge neo-western by Raj Singh Chaudhary is a grisly, unrelenting adventure with few winners. Because hiding behind Siddharth’s quiet, amiable exterior lies a monstrous brutality fueled by grief. When he’s not falling for the wife of a target, he’s torturing her husband and his friends on a remote cliff by driving spikes into their feet.
This muscular movie adores the sound of crunching bones and is never visually squeamish: The makeup work and practical effects of gouged wounds are deliciously gnarly. Equally effective is the outlaw milieu created by Chaudhary. Ajay Jayanthi’s score recalls the spaghetti westerns of the 1960s like “The Good, the Bad and the Ugly,” while Anil Kapoor as the motorcycle riding, aviator-glasses-wearing Inspector Singh is akin to Marlon Brando in “The Wild One.” That collection of influences makes “Thar” an ingenious reinvention of a classic genre to tell a distinctly Indian story.
Rent or buy on most major platforms.
Set in 1944, this fictional World War II story features a unique premise: A group of German soldiers known as KG 200 are flying captured American and British aircraft to use as Trojan horses in a larger plan to decimate London. Capt. David Holden (James Maslow), an American pilot downed behind enemy lines, must evade another marooned German pilot (Trevor Donovan), free a band of POWs and destroy a Nazi air base if he hopes to give the Allies a chance to win the war.
For combat-movie lovers, this film, directed by Michael B. Chait, offers tangible thrills by leaning on practical effects for its intricate dog fights. Rather than recreate the battles in the sky through clunky computer graphics (there is some use of visual effects fire), Chait mixes real air crafts with Westley Gathright’s palpable cinematography and Janina Maria’s electrifying editing to build intoxicating air action that transports one back to the peak of 1950s Hollywood war films.

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
In the past, Drake has been focused on rewiring hip-hop with melody. But his seventh solo studio album, “Honestly, Nevermind” — which arrived as a surprise, with an elaborate nine-and-a-half-minute video for the track “Falling Back” — is an unanticipated pivot toward the dance floor. Drake has long included moments like this on his albums, but they rarely shaped the narrative. But now, for the first time, production that is hard-knocking and up-tempo is reshaping his sound.
Is this just a logical turn for a pop star who has typically made pop from different component parts? Is it a reaction to the growth of drill music, the prevailing gritty hip-hop subculture? Or is it an acceptance of the exuberant freedoms of midcareer middle age?
On this week’s Popcast, a conversation about Drake’s evolution and production choices, the ways in which he toys with the expectations of his listeners and the dance music subcultures he’s experimenting with.
Joe Coscarelli, The New York Times’s pop music reporter
Lawrence Burney, arts and culture editor at The Baltimore Banner and the founder of True Laurels
Connect With Popcast. Become a part of the Popcast community: Join the show’s Facebook group and Discord channel. We want to hear from you! Tune in, and tell us what you think at popcast@nytimes.com. Follow our host, Jon Caramanica, on Twitter: @joncaramanica.

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Ms. Edel grew up in southern Russia and now lives in San Francisco. She is the author of “Russia: Putin’s Playground: Empire, Revolution, and the New Tsar.”
The war in Ukraine is a never-ending catastrophe. Russian forces, concentrated in the east, continue to inflict terrible damage on Ukrainian soldiers and civilians alike. Countless lives have been lost and upended. Once again, the world must confront the possibility of nuclear war and grapple with a compounding refugee and cost of living crisis. This isn’t the “end of history” that we hoped for.
Less violently, another transformation is taking place: After three decades of exchange, interaction and engagement, the door between Russia and America is slamming shut. Practically every day another American company — including the most symbolic of them all, McDonald’s, whose golden arches heralded a new era 30 years ago — pulls out of Russia. Diplomats have been expelled, concerts canceled, products withdrawn, personal visits called off. In the shuttered consulates, nobody is issuing visas, and even if they were, American airspace is now closed to Russian aircraft. The only substantive interaction left seems to be the issuing of sanctions and counter-sanctions.
For a Russian American like me, whose life has been forged in the interstices between the two cultures, it’s a bewildering, sorrowful turn of events. Measures to curtail the Kremlin’s capacity of aggression are, to be clear, politically and morally necessary. But the collateral damage is a severing of ties that is bound to revive harmful stereotypes and close down the space for cross-cultural pollination. More profoundly, the current parting of ways marks the definitive end of a period when Russia’s integration with the West, however vexed, appeared possible — and the antagonism between ideological superpowers was a thing of the past.
That’s certainly how it felt on a warm March day in 1989 in Krasnodar, the provincial southern town near the Black Sea where I grew up. My school was hosting a group of seniors from a high school in New Hampshire: I was about to turn 17, and until that day America existed in my mind only as an abstract concept. It was the villain of a New Year’s holiday show, the object of Nikita Khrushchev’s quest “To catch up and overtake America” and home to the “Star Wars” program — just one, we were told, of the imperialists’ many designs to take down the Soviet Union.
Only those boys and girls in jeans and sweatshirts who appeared in our schoolyard didn’t look like imperialists, or appear to be threatening at all. They looked like better-dressed versions of us: shy, well-meaning and fascinated. Just a few hours ago, during our military training class, we had been assembling Kalashnikov guns to be used on enemy agents. And here they were, standing in front of us. We stared at each other. Then someone smiled, someone said hello. In a matter of minutes, the wariness between us was gone. “I’m reading ‘Crime and Punishment’ for spring break,’” a tall guy with a silver earring told me. “Raskolnikov is cool!”
Over the next five days of mutual discovery, we learned that the Americans were also afraid of nuclear war, only in their version, it would be waged by us. That when transcribed, the lyrics of “Ice Ice Baby” didn’t make much sense. That “pot” had a meaning other than a kitchen item, as explained by the Raskolnikov fan. And that when a boy tells a girl that she’s “special,” that’s, well, special. Together we roamed the streets, snapping photos next to Lenin statues — or rather, as the Americans put it, we “hung out.” Before a tearful goodbye, we traded addresses and promised to be friends for life.
I’ve kept a green notebook filled with the names of American towns, along with a love letter, a dried carnation and a stack of black and white photographs, tokens of the magic of 1989: the Berlin Wall dismantled, the Iron Curtain coming down, the scary “us” and “them” disappearing into the finally free air. Chanting “Goodbye America, where I have never been,” a popular anthem, we were bidding farewell to America the enemy, America the myth — and anticipating the discovery of the real thing. Words like “borders” and “ideology” were no longer relevant. America and Russia seemed to be united by a common yearning for peace.
The years that followed generated immense good will between our nations. As a Russian in America, I met countless people who built it: a Californian doctor who helped set up children’s heart surgery centers across post-Soviet Russia; a Bay Area filmmaker who organized the first Jewish film festival in Moscow; a Seattle captain who set up joint maritime ventures with fishermen in Russia’s far east. Russian college graduates, meanwhile, flocked to America, giving their brains and talents to everything from Hollywood films to DNA sequencing. There were a lot of marriages. A popular Russian all-female band captured the spirit in the 1990s when they implored, to electric balalaika chords, a hypothetical “American Boy” to come and whisk them away.
That happened to be my route. Having married into a family of former dissidents sheltered by America, I too was a testament to the flow of people and ideas. Money flowed also. My first paid job in America back in 1998, for example, was translating for the second annual U.S.-Russian Investment Symposium, hosted by Harvard University and featuring an all-star lineup of international bankers vying for the attention of the Russian guests, among them the tycoon Boris Berezovsky and the mayor of Moscow at the time, Yuri Luzhkov.
Yet somewhere along the way, the good will slowed. After expressing enthusiasm for Russia’s first post-Soviet president, Boris Yeltsin, America’s leaders found his K.G.B.-fashioned successor, Vladimir Putin, less to their taste. Mr. Putin made it clear that he didn’t care. “American hegemon,” a phrase from my Soviet childhood, began popping up in Russia’s pro-Kremlin media. In the West, Russians were no longer viewed as liberated hostages of a totalitarian regime, reformed villains from James Bond movies or emissaries of the great culture of Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky, but rather as all-cash buyers of luxurious properties in Manhattan and Miami. The enchantment between the countries and their citizens dimmed, yet shared interests and social bonds held.
The annexation of Crimea in 2014 was a turning point. True, Mr. Putin had previously given vent to his aggression in Georgia and, devastatingly, in Chechnya, but it was his claiming of Ukrainian territory that gave the West its wake-up call. The sanctions that followed hit the Russian economy hard. They also supplied the Kremlin with ample means to stoke anti-American sentiment. Blaming America for the country’s troubles was a familiar, almost nostalgic narrative for Russians, more than half of whom were born in the Soviet Union. The simple tune — “NATO expansion,” “Western aggression,” “enemy at the gate”— played on repeat, keying Russians to believe that America aimed for their motherland’s destruction. The propaganda worked: By 2018, America was once more regarded as Russia’s No. 1 enemy, with Ukraine, its “puppet,” coming second.
In America, things weren’t nearly as bad. But Donald Trump’s arrival on the global political stage complicated the already strained Russian-American relationship. Mr. Trump cozied up to the openly authoritarian Mr. Putin, strengthening anti-Russian sentiment that had been rising since the Kremlin’s meddling in the 2016 U.S. presidential election and rarely distinguished between Mr. Putin and the country he ruled. Economic and cultural ties began to wilt as it got harder to secure visas and funding. Still, student exchanges happened, films were screened and family visits paid, if at longer intervals.
The Russian missiles that struck Ukrainian cities on Feb. 24 extinguished that flickering light. America now provides billions of dollars’ worth of weapons to be used against Russia, while Russia’s stated aim is to put an end to America’s “unfettered” global domination. The two countries, once allies in the war against Nazi Germany, are effectively fighting a proxy war. As I watch videos of Russian parents egging on their children to destroy iPhones or read about threats against a venerable Seattle bakery known for its Russian-style baked goods, I’m gripped, above all, by sadness. Our post-totalitarian dream of a peaceful, friendly future is over.
Apart from wreaking physical horror, Mr. Putin’s war in Ukraine is erasing countless intangibles, among them the collective good will of the West toward Russia. In my children’s future, I see no cultural miracles akin to the one that I experienced back in 1989. This is a loss for both countries, and Russia’s will be greater if Mr. Putin continues doubling down on carnage and isolation. That future isn’t set in stone. After all, the perestroika years, when the Soviet Union embarked on wholesale reforms in the name of openness, showed that Russia is capable of change.
For now, though, each explosion in Ukraine also strikes at what was good in the relationship between America and Russia. In Mr. Putin’s land, “Goodbye America,” once a tongue-in-cheek song suffused with hope, has become a darkly self-fulfilling prophecy.
Anastasia Edel (@aedelwriter) is the author of “Russia: Putin’s Playground: Empire, Revolution, and the New Tsar.”
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

Teamed with Dash Crofts, he hit it big with “Summer Breeze” in 1972. The two went on to have chart success with “Diamond Girl” and other songs.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Jim Seals, half of Seals & Crofts, a soft-rock duo who had a string of hits in the 1970s, including the Top 10 singles “Summer Breeze” and “Diamond Girl,” died on Monday at his home in Nashville. He was 79.
His wife, Ruby Jean Seals, said the cause was an unspecified “chronic ongoing illness.”
Mr. Seals and his musical partner, Dash Crofts, were still teenagers when they were asked to join an instrumental group, the Champs, which had a No. 1 hit in 1958 with “Tequila.” By the mid-1960s they had tired of the band and of the loud, sometimes angry strains that were infusing the hard rock of the time.
Adherents of the Baha’i faith, they sought to make a calmer brand of music, mixing folk, bluegrass, country and jazz influences and delivering their lyrics in close harmony.
“Jim Seals plays acoustic guitar and fiddle,” Don Heckman wrote in The New York Times in 1970 in a brief review of their second album, “Down Home,” “and Dash Crofts plays electric mandolin and piano; together they sing coolly intertwined, and quite colorful, vocal harmony.”
With the lilting, nostalgia-seeped single “Summer Breeze,” released in 1972, the two found international stardom. They had developed a modest following, but that song changed everything, as they found out when they arrived in Ohio to play a show.
“There were kids waiting for us at the airport,” Mr. Seals told Texas Monthly in 2020. “That night we had a record crowd, maybe 40,000 people. And I remember people throwing their hats and coats in the air as far as you could see, against the moon.”
The song, written jointly by the two men, featured the kind of chorus that sticks in the brain:
“Summer breeze, makes me feel fine, / Blowing through the jasmine in my mind.”
The single reached No. 6 on the Billboard Hot 100, and a follow-up, “Hummingbird,” made the Top 20. “Diamond Girl” in 1973 reached No. 6. “Get Closer” in 1976 also reached No. 6.
But the duo’s run of success basically ended when the decade did, and they called it quits for a time.
“Around 1980, we were still drawing 10,000 to 12,000 people at concerts,” Mr. Seals told The Los Angeles Times in 1991, when the two revived the act. “But we could see, with this change coming where everybody wanted dance music, that those days were numbered.”
Six years earlier, though, the pair had begun to fall out of favor with some listeners and critics because of their sixth album, “Unborn Child,” which was released in 1974 not long after the Supreme Court’s Roe v. Wade decision on abortion rights. The title track urged women who were considering an abortion to “stop, turn around, go back, think it over.”
Mr. Seals, in a 1978 interview with The Miami Herald, acknowledged that the record damaged the duo’s career.
“It completely killed it for a while,” he said. Radio stations refused to play the record. Some Seals & Crofts concerts were picketed, although there were also hundreds of letters of support. In the 1991 Los Angeles Times interview, Mr. Seals said the pair had never intended the song to be a lightning rod.
“It was our ignorance that we didn’t know that kind of thing was seething and boiling as a social issue,” he said. “On one hand we had people sending us thousands of roses, but on the other people were literally throwing rocks at us.
“If we’d known it was going to cause such disunity,” he continued, “we might have thought twice about doing it. At the time it overshadowed all the other things we were trying to say in our music.”
James Eugene Seals was born on Oct. 17, 1942, in Sidney, Texas, to Wayland and Susan Seals. His father worked in the oil fields, and Jim spent much of his childhood in Iraan, a boomtown in southwest Texas.
“There were oil rigs as far as you could see,” Mr. Seals told Texas Monthly. “And the stench was so bad, you couldn’t breathe.”
His father played a little guitar, and his mother played the dobro, so informal jam sessions were a common way to pass the time in the household. When a fiddler came by one evening, young Jim was taken with the instrument, and his father ordered him one from a Sears catalog.
Jim later took up the saxophone, which led to an invitation to join a rockabilly band called the Crew Cats, which played at dances and in local clubs. The band’s drummer quit right before a show at a junior college, and the drummer from another band on the bill sat in — Darrell Crofts, known as Dash.
The two became friends and played with the Champs for several years out of Los Angeles. Both mastered other instruments, including the guitar. Once they hit it big as a duo, they knew the image they wanted to project and tried to stay true to it. In 1973, when they were about to tour England, Mr. Seals told a reporter that they had pulled out of a previous European engagement.
“We were going to tour there earlier, but we had a last-minute change of mind when we found out that we’d be playing with Black Sabbath,” he said. “I’m sure they’re a fine band, but I’m not sure that the audience would be quite right for us.”
In addition to his wife, Mr. Seals is survived by their two sons, Joshua and Sutherland; a daughter, Juliet Crossley; and three grandchildren. A sister, Renee Staley, and a half brother, Eddie Ray Seals, also survive him. His brother, Dan Seals, a singer who had success in the late 1970s as a member of another soft-rock duo, England Dan & John Ford Coley, died in 2009. The two brothers toured together for several years before Dan Seals’s death, with Jim Seals’s two sons sometimes playing with them.

A wake-and-bake comedy returns to Showtime, and a sumptuous new drama set on the Italian Riviera comes to PBS.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
‘Flatbush Misdemeanors’When to watch: Sunday at 11 p.m., on Showtime.
This lowrider comedy series, created by the friends and stand-up comics Kevin Iso and Dan Perlman, returns for a second season. Combining real stakes — child welfare, chemical dependency, job insecurity — with a lackadaisical, wake-and-bake tone, the first season introduced the starving artist Kevin (Iso) and the high school teacher Dan (Perlman), longtime friends who share a crummy apartment in a gentrifying Brooklyn enclave.
This second season explores the consequences of the Season 1 finale, which saw Kevin flee and Dan sent to the rubber room, their friendship frayed. (Season 2 starts streaming Friday on the Showtime website and app.)
‘Hotel Portofino’When to watch: Sunday at 8 p.m., on PBS. (Check local listings.)
A hospitality-industry “Downton Abbey” and an upmarket, entrepreneurial version of “The Durrells in Corfu,” this six-episode PBS Masterpiece series is set on the Italian Riviera during the interwar years. Bella (Natascha McElhone), the daughter of a British industrialist, has opened a boutique hotel, an enterprise complicated by her useless husband (Mark Umbers) and artistic, shellshocked son (Oliver Dench). Creeping fascism is kind of a problem, too. The show has a paint-by-numbers feel, but the sumptuous gowns and more sumptuous locations have their particular pleasures. If you enjoy pale English people in mildly exotic environs, book in.
‘The Summer I Turned Pretty’When to watch: Starting Sunday, on Amazon Prime Video.
For fans of the “To All the Boys” film series, based on the novels by Jenny Han, here, it seems, are more boys. For this seven-part series, Han has created an adaptation of the first book in her own “Summer” trilogy; it stars Lola Tung as Belly, an introverted high schooler who shows up for her usual summer beach vacation having suddenly woken up on the right side of puberty. Her friends — particularly the two handsome sons of her host — treat her differently now. Watch if you like it when teenagers have all the feels and you don’t mind a little sand in your lobster roll.

Inventive riffs on murder mysteries, westerns and gangster movies are among the highlights of this month’s under-the-radar streaming recommendations.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Stream it on Netflix and Hulu.
The director Albert Shin lays on the dread from the opening frames of this atmospheric Canadian thriller; something’s wrong here, even if we don’t yet know what. Abby (Tuppence Middleton) doesn’t know either, but she has spent most of her life haunted by the childhood incident that begins the film: a half-understood encounter at a lake during which she might have witnessed a kidnapping. Now, as an adult whose life is falling apart, she does what so many of us do: She ignores her own problems and becomes fixated on the increasingly peculiar details of a barely remembered incident. Shin has a way of unsettlingly creeping his camera and peering inquisitively into darkness (literal and figurative); the result is a solid, moody mystery about buried secrets and oddball history. Bonus: an appropriately odd appearance by the Canadian treasure David Cronenberg as a grizzled podcaster.
Stream it on HBO Max.
Just as it was fun to celebrate “Twilight” fans flocking to Robert Pattinson’s oddball Cronenberg collaborations in the years after that franchise folded, one can only delight in imagining viewers of “The Batman” on HBO Max clicking over to this Pattinson vehicle and being utterly befuddled. The genre (western) and title notwithstanding, this is something of an antihero turn for the actor, who seems to revel in the opportunity to play a cowardly doofus; the title character, hardly in distress, is played with verve and gusto by Mia Wasikowska. The directors David and Nathan Zellner orchestrate the events with cockeyed wit; it’s an odd movie, but an engaging one.
Elizabeth Olsen has been fully immersed in the Marvel world for so long that it’s easy to forget what an unpredictable actress she once was. That anything-goes quality was never more present than in this, her breakthrough role and film debut, in which she stars as a disturbed young woman trying to escape a Manson-like cult and resume a life of normalcy — or, at least, an approximation of it. The writer and director Sean Durkin builds his story slowly and deliberately, revealing the details of this woman’s life piece by unnerving piece. Olsen’s performance is a stunner, showing everything, telling nothing. And Sarah Paulson, as her concerned sister, ably navigates several tricky moments, while John Hawkes exudes charismatic menace as the cult leader.
The gifted Chinese filmmaker Jia Zhangke writes and directs this riveting crime saga, which traffics in the tropes of gangster pictures, but does so with the empathy of an indie drama. Zhao Tao is electrifying as a mob moll who takes the fall for her boyfriend, serving five years on a gun charge, and then finding that everything in her life has changed upon her release. Zhangke tells the story with authenticity and atmosphere galore, but with an emphasis on redemption and sacrifice over violence and revenge.
Dog owners, consider yourselves warned: There is a fair amount of violence (both physical and emotional), some of it inflicted on man’s best friend, in this Hungarian drama from the director Kornel Mundruczo. But every dog has its day, as the saying goes, and this tale of companionship, abandonment and reunion unfolds with quite a bit more gonzo energy and excitement than your average “Homeward Bound” movie, and its closing passages are thrilling and moving in equal measure.
Gemma Arterton, usually cast as various varieties of bombshell, stretches well as a cranky, reclusive writer — dubbed “the beast on the beach” by residents of the nearby seaside town — who takes in a refugee kid in the darkest days of World War II. It’s not hard to guess where this is going (imagine a film where a grumpy hermit is softened not one bit by a charming moppet), but the writer and director Jessica Swale tells her story with grace and good humor, and the casting is superlative; Arterton and Lucas Bond find the proper note of guarded affection as the writer and her charge, while Gugu Mbatha-Raw fills the role of The One That Got Away quite nicely.
Stream it on HBO Max.
The first time we see Tony Hawk, he’s out of breath, working his tail off on a move he can’t quite pull off. He keeps climbing back up the steps of a skate ramp, huffing and puffing, trying it again, again, again — just eating it, over and over — in silence, until he finally yells out in both pain and frustration. Because Tony Hawk does not give up, you see, and one of the virtues of Sam Jones’s documentary portrait is how it ties Hawk’s tireless stubbornness to the specifics of skateboarding, where a single move can shake up the entire sport. Hawk’s white whale was the seemingly impossible maneuver called “900,” which we see him try and almost land over and over at the 1999 X Games best trick contest; it’s like watching the climax of the movie “Tin Cup” in real life, but when he lands it, it’s electrifying. And by that point in the film, we feel like we understand why he acts the way he does. This is an uncommonly personal portrait, of a funny, charismatic, self-aware dude.
Anyone who knows about soul music of the 1960s understands the importance of FAME Studios and Muscle Shoals Sound Studio in Muscle Shoals, Ala., where the artists Aretha Franklin, the Rolling Stones and Wilson Pickett all traveled to capture a distinctive, blues-infused, Southern-fried sound. Greg “Freddy” Camalier’s entertaining documentary layers archival footage, studio sounds and new interviews to make the case for the region’s outsize influence on popular music, then and now.

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Original music by Dan Farrell
We cannot escape our bodies. So how do we reconcile them with who we really are?
Sam Anderson, a staff writer, considers this particular conundrum of the human condition by recounting his lifelong struggle to maintain a healthy weight: his teenage triumph over the “legendary snacker” he was in middle school, the slow creep of the pounds in early adulthood, and the pandemic’s expansive effect on his waistline.
While Anderson explains how using a dieting app enabled him to monitor his consumption, which lead to weight loss, he remains steadfastly realistic about the long-term efficacy of warding off weight gain. Instead of dwelling on uncomfortable truths, the article is a paean to the joys of eating; Anderson recalls the years in which he surrendered himself “completely, unreasonably, to the pleasure of consumption.” This is, Anderson writes, “the great subversive joy of a snack: It is meaningless eating, eating purely for eating’s sake, eating detached from nutrition and even, in the end, from appetite itself.”
Anderson considers what it takes to monitor food consumption, the linguistic legacy of 1980s diet culture, the curse of intergenerational weight problems, the natural limitations of weight-loss efforts and the importance of self-acceptance.
There are a lot of ways to listen to ‘The Daily.’ Here’s how.
We want to hear from you. Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Follow Michael Barbaro on Twitter: @mikiebarb. And if you’re interested in advertising with The Daily, write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.
Additional production for The Sunday Read was contributed by Emma Kehlbeck, Parin Behrooz, Anna Diamond, Sarah Diamond, Jack D’Isidoro, Elena Hecht, Desiree Ibekwe, Tanya Pérez, Marion Lozano, Naomi Noury, Krish Seenivasan, Saskia Solomon, Corey Schreppel, Margaret Willison, Kate Winslett and Tiana Young. Special thanks to Mike Benoist, Sam Dolnick, Laura Kim, Julia Simon, Lisa Tobin, Blake Wilson and Ryan Wegner.

The springtime extravaganza returns with another sweeping bill of fare. We trawled through the slate so you can savor the gems.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Spring in New York City is a season of promise. It’s terrific timing for the Tribeca Festival, which runs from June 8-19 and features its trademark community focus and sweeping bill of fare. Like visitors to a botanic garden, Tribeca audiences seem as keen on roaming through thickets of mainstream movies (not to mention immersive installations, TV series and scripted podcasts) as they do savoring the small films blooming alongside.
This year’s opening night feature, “Halftime,” an admiring Netflix documentary that traces a hectic year in the life of Jennifer Lopez, slots into the former category, boasting exclusive access and the whiff of celebrity gossip and prestige. But the standouts among this year’s world and international premieres are more homespun productions. If “Halftime” is the program’s gold lamé gown, the bulk of its wardrobe is dress-code casual.
It could be that the modest scale of some of these movies was motivated by pandemic protocols, which favor lean casts and secluded locations. But never rule out plain old budget restrictions. And anyway, independent cinema has always had a knack for making hay while the sun shines, and while it rains too.
B.J. Novak’s feature directing debut, “Vengeance,” is one project that was rocked by Covid-19 early on: Blumhouse suspended production in March 2020 while the team was shooting in Albuquerque, N.M. Premiering now as Tribeca’s centerpiece, the clever thriller is poised to be a crowd-pleaser.
Novak stars as Ben, a Manhattan journalist and serial dater who flies to Nowheresville, Texas, for the funeral of a woman he was seeing. Only a fling, Abilene meant little to him. But in her grieving kin, a fiery bunch who grow convinced that Abilene’s death was a murder, Ben smells fodder for a Great American Podcast, and starts recording their affairs. Come for the artful dark comedy; stay for the biting parable about self-seekers who leech stories from small-town suffering.
Hunkering down is the name of the game in “We Might as Well Be Dead.” The German tale unspools inside a private compound that serves as a refuge from unspoken dystopian affliction. We meet Anna (Ioana Iacob, spiky and stirring), one of the enclave’s only Jewish residents, amid a crisis: Her daughter Iris (Pola Geiger) has sealed herself in the bathroom in a fit of agoraphobic superstition, a taboo that could get them the boot. An ace feature debut from the director Natalia Sinelnikova, the deadpan comedy feels like a cousin to works by Yorgos Lanthimos, an absurdist equally attentive to how confinement breeds fear and fear breeds barbarity.
The image of a woman spiraling alone also appears in “Good Girl Jane,” an entry in the U.S. Narrative Competition written and directed by Sarah Elizabeth Mintz. The coming-of-age story follows an outcast teenager (Rain Spencer) in 2000s Los Angeles who sinks into drug abuse after falling for a local dealer. Mintz couples sumptuous long takes with torrid raw emotion, and like the best debauched kids-gone-wild dramas — “Thirteen” comes to mind — the project is a sleight of hand, teasing bliss before drowning you in dread.
Another world premiere taking a bulldozer to prosaic images of young love is the peculiar animated musical “My Love Affair With Marriage.” The Latvian writer-director Signe Baumane, who financed the feature in part through Kickstarter, builds an impressionistic world of line-drawn characters who skip across diorama backdrops in search of true romance. Sass and pedagogy intermingle in this curious Soviet tale, and if its stuffing sometimes bulges at the seams, it’s only for a surfeit of imagination.
Documentaries at Tribeca are often strong, and in a sea of engaging world premieres, a trio shine as timely, enriching chronicles of paradigm shifts: “Sophia,” “Battleground” and “My Name Is Andrea.” They are each overseen by experienced filmmakers: Crystal Moselle (“The Wolfpack”) co-directed “Sophia” with Jon Kasbe; Cynthia Lowen (“Netizens”) directed “Battleground”; and “My Name Is Andrea” is a work by the narrative and nonfiction director Pratibha Parmar.
Moselle and Kasbe’s absorbing vérité exercise centers on the inventor David Hanson and his robot creation, Sophia. Over several years, we observe this gentle Dr. Frankenstein juggle work goals and the demands of home life as his hazel-eyed humanoid evolves. A more dogmatic crew takes the stage in “Battleground,” which follows a cavalcade of anti-abortion activists. Lowen positions their ideas in a context (especially fraught in light of new threats to Roe v. Wade) and uses tactful editing to cast certain moments under a pall of irony, urgency or alarm.
“My Name Is Andrea” leafs several chapters earlier in the history books to sketch an abstract portrait of the public intellectual Andrea Dworkin. Parmar makes use of routine archival footage, but she also mounts dramatic re-enactments of Dworkin’s major life events; Ashley Judd, Amandla Stenberg and Soko are among the performers who play versions of the icon-turned-firestarter. These scenes layer with voice-over of her writings to create a moving palimpsest of identity.
Echoes often occur by chance at film festivals, and I discovered an intriguing one between Sarah Adina Smith’s millennial comedy “The Drop” and Michelle Garza Cervera’s allegorical horror exercise “Huesera.” Both grapple with the angsts of motherhood, and share a distressing accident scenario: a woman letting an infant slip from grasp. (To save you the heart attack, the tots are fine.)
The title of Smith’s movie lays all of its cards on the table. It follows Lex (the superb Anna Konkle of “Pen15”) as she attends a tropical destination wedding. She and her husband, Mani (Jermaine Fowler), are trying to get pregnant, and upon arrival on the island, a pal hands Lex her baby daughter. No shock in what happens next — but the real juice flows in the days following the cataclysm, as Lex and Mani’s trust cracks and spectators cast quiet judgment on Lex’s AWOL maternal instincts.
Perhaps my favorite of all the Tribeca selections I sampled was the Mexican knockout “Huesera.” Oozing with omens and heavy with menace, the story follows the furniture maker Valeria (Natalia Solián, a terrifying talent), who is preparing for the birth of her first child. But occult forces are at play. Amid crib construction, medical visits and family celebrations, Valeria hallucinates a bony demoness who seeks to infiltrate her home and poison her body and mind.
Quintessential horror story beats fuse with elements of Catholic spirituality and Mexican folklore. The most thrilling set piece features a purgative ritual that Cervera executes with a dance choreographer’s sense of movement and a gothic artist’s eye for composition. But even as Valeria retreats from loved ones and sequences devolve into phantasmagoria, Cervera never loses sight of core themes. Spinning on an axis of anxiety, “Huesera” raises the provocative idea that motherhood can feel akin to a curse stripping one of stability and sacred autonomies. No easy ride, the movie — like many great works of vision, scale be damned — is almost an exorcism itself, stripping away fuss and banalities to expose raw truths.

Near the Arctic Circle, Shuvinai Ashoona, a star of the Venice Biennale, and her community of Inuit artists refuse to let isolation stand in their way.
Kinngait, Nunavut, in the Canadian Arctic. Its celebrated Kinngait Studios has been home to many generations of Inuit artists, including Shuvinai Ashoona. Credit...Brendan George Ko for The New York Times
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
KINNGAIT, NUNAVUT, Canada — Just 125 miles shy of the Arctic Circle, in a hamlet etched into an icescape of rock and snow, a tiny figure clutching worn colored pencils sprawls atop a huge drawing, her frame half the size of the paper. Shuvinai Ashoona is putting the finishing touches on her latest work, a calendar populated by fellow Inuit, an Indigenous people of Arctic Canada. Some in parkas are communing with a walrus, some are chewing bubble gum.
The artist, whose enchanting and enigmatic drawings recently won special mention at the Venice Biennale, is ensconced in her warm corner of Kinngait Studios, where she works alongside printmakers and lithographers in one of the most influential and challenging art-making spaces in the world: an improbable studio-that-could that has nurtured five generations of acclaimed Inuit artists, many of them Ashoona’s relatives.
To reach the striking, corrugated blue metal building that houses Kinngait, simply dodge the snowmobiles buzzing with hornet intensity down the street. Try not to think about the day’s high temperature — 1 degree Fahrenheit in April. Bushwhack up a steep incline through thigh-high snow. And heed the local advice: “Be careful. There’s a polar bear around town.”
The geographic isolation of Kinngait (pronounced kin-gite, pop. 1,400) can be difficult to fathom. It is 1,300 miles north of Ottawa, on the tip of Baffin Island, jutting into the frigid Arctic Ocean. The town is part of the vast, largely Inuit territory of Nunavut, which has no roads linking other towns — specks on the tundra hundreds of miles apart. Kinngait is reachable by prop plane flights (at Gulfstream prices) that may or may not show up. Formerly called Cape Dorset, the town reverted three years ago to its traditional name, which means “high mountains” in the Inuktitut language.
That a place of significant challenges, from poverty to suicide, has evolved into a “Florence of the North” is a proud fact of life here. Artists comprise roughly a quarter of the community and largely learn by observation, mentored by elders and family members.
Though the Biennale’s air-kissing and clinking glasses of prosecco don’t exactly jibe with sealskin mittens and Mukluks, the selection of Ashoona’s drawings for “The Milk of Dreams,” the Biennale’s central exhibition, was a milestone for her and for contemporary art.
She is part of a small group of third and fourth generation artists breaking through overly-romanticized notions of the Arctic that have defined Inuit art in the eyes of Westerners. “Shuvinai is pushing the limits on what Inuit art was assumed to look like,” said Nancy Campbell, a Toronto-based curator who has exhibited and written extensively about her. “Her bold, fantastical and often inexplicable images bridge the Indigenous and non-Indigenous, the traditional and contemporary, the mythical and historical. ”
“And it is capturing the attention of the global art world,” she added, “at a time when locale and nationality have opened viewers up to seeing art practices that exist outside the art world norm.”
Ashoona’s drawings, which the artist describes as “a kingdom with another kingdom under that,” are in the permanent collections of the National Gallery of Canada; Qaumajuq, the new Inuit museum at the Winnipeg Art Gallery, and the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of the American Indian.
Her richly detailed artistic universe, while rooted in her home terrain, ventures far beyond it, merging the spirit world and the pop culture worlds. In her singular imaginings, mermaids swim up to watch TV news about their planet, ships play tag with giant squid, and humans get up close and personal with a purple narwhal with blue wings.
In a 2021 drawing now in Venice, a bright orange octopus stretches its tentacles in yoga-like fashion and a perky three-headed monster holds hands with an Inuit family. (“They didn’t mention where they were going,” Ashoona said jokingly).
“Surrealism” is a term used to describe her works “because that’s what makes sense in a non-Native world,” said Wanda Nanibush, an Anishinaabe curator of Indigenous art at the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto.
Transformation, in which large rocks could be giants and whales and walruses might sprout human faces, is a theme that looms large in Inuit culture. In a drawing inspired by her memories about skinning a polar bear, shown in an online exhibition at Fort Gansevoort, the New York gallery, Ashoona writes in Inuktitut, her first language, about
Polar bears coming out of a batPolar bears coming out of a duckPolar bears coming out from an earPolar bears coming out from a toe
One night in Kinngait, the night sky resembled Las Vegas, with the Aurora Borealis streaking neon green. ““The Northern Lights were full of humans and animals,” Ashoona told me the following morning. “Maybe they were having an air school with a rainbow teacher.”
Now 60, Ashoona is the eldest of 14 children, three of whom died at birth. Her unconventional upbringing embraced television and horror films in Kinngait but also the traditional life “on the land.”
During her early 20s, she and her family spent a decade in a remote outpost camp, a still-vivid interlude that informs her work. She placed rock traps in rivers to “grab fish with knitted mitts,” she says, and gathered wild mushrooms and blueberries in the mountains. The family ate what are known as “country foods” that are hunted, fished or foraged.
In high school, she became pregnant and gave birth to a daughter, Mary, with whom she is close. At around age 30, Ashoona experienced a physical and mental health crisis, in an era when counseling and other support services were rare. She struggled with painful headaches, whispering to them to “get out from the person you’re in.” Her conversations can sometimes be difficult to track, leaping from chocolate to escalators to the fate of the “Big I-Pod,” as she calls the earth. “I believe what she sees in her mind, she puts on paper,” said Chris Pudlat, Sr., who worked with her at Kinngait Studios.
Goota Ashoona, a renowned sculptor now living in Winnipeg, was deeply worried about her beloved older sister and suggested that art might help Shuvinai be independent and support her yen for soda and cigarettes. The structure and camaraderie of the studio have been a safe haven. “The pencil and paper make me think better a lot,” Shuvinai observed in a 2010 short documentary “Ghost Noise.” “It probably helps me, like aspirin.”
Jimmy Manning was the manager of Kinngait when Ashoona arrived in the mid-1990s. The studios were in cottages known as “512”s (512-square-foot government housing). “She started right away moving from regular-size paper to big,” he recalls. “Oh my God, she had some kind of energy that we didn’t have.”
She possessed the gene: Her grandmother Pitseolak Ashoona, was a pivotal figure in the Cape Dorset art world. Her family traveled between seasonal camps by dog-sled and sealskin boat, and lived in snow houses, or igloos. When Pitseolak’s husband, a fur trapper and hunter, died in an epidemic, leaving the family close to starvation, she and her children settled near Cape Dorset, founded as a trading post for the Hudson’s Bay Company.
Entirely self-taught, Pitseolak providentially connected with James Houston, an artist, writer, government field officer and Indiana-Jones-style swashbuckler. Houston inadvertently “discovered” Inuit art when a man ran up to him with a clenched fist, which Houston assumed would lead to “a punch in the nose,” but revealed an exquisite contemporary carving, he recalled in a book of his exploits from 1948 to 1962, “Confessions of an Igloo Dweller.”
Houston proselytized for Inuit art, bringing it to international museum audiences and founding what would become Kinngait Studios. He hit upon limited-edition prints as a way to translate Inuit motifs into marketable art. Pitseolak was an early star, producing more than 8,000 drawings on the “old ways” she grew up with, making prints in widowhood. “If no one tells me to stop, I shall make them as long as I am well,” she wrote.
Pitseolak’s legacy infuses “Ashoona: Enduring Art Stories,” an exhibition curated by Goota featuring 23 family members, at La Guilde gallery in Montreal through July 3. Among her heirs is the 37-year-old sculptor and filmmaker Koomuatuk (Kuzy) Curley, Shuvinai’s nephew, who lives near Ottawa but returned to complete a 30,000-pound granite homage to his great-grandmother. It will be installed at tiny Kinngait airport, where each arrival is a boisterous family reunion and babies poke out from their mothers’ amauti, or parkas, like hatchlings in a nest.
Shuvinai’s artistic home is the Kenojuak Cultural Center & Print Shop, named for Kenojuak Ashevak, whose celebrated graphic owls adorned Canadian postage stamps. When the expansive $10.8 million facility opened in 2018, Kinngait Studio moved there. It may be the only studio in the world where artists’ wet boots share space with artfully-arranged walrus skulls and whale baleen.
Every stone-cut print, stencil, etching, lithograph or drawing produced here is community-owned. Kinngait is operated by the West Baffin Eskimo Co-operative, whose shareholders include most of the town’s adults. The Co-op and its all-Inuit board also own the general store, a fuel oil delivery business, a snowmobile and ATV repair shop and profits are distributed each year. They provide a financial buffer for the studio in lean years, fortified by a full-time arts manager.
The Co-op pays artists upon completion of a work — roughly $300 to $1,000 for a small sculpture, up to $3,500 or more for an ambitious, large-scale drawing by Ashoona. They get shipped “down south” to Dorset Fine Arts in Toronto, the studio’s wholesale showroom, where gallerists can get up to speed on the latest work and Kinngait’s 1,600-strong annual print collection. Ashoona’s drawings retail for $1,500 to $8,500.
With Pink Floyd on the radio and the smell of varnish in the air, she works alongside accomplished printmakers like Qavavau Manumie, who collaborates with artists on stone-cut prints, an exacting process in which stone is replaced with more malleable slate from pool tables, an idea that he mischievously said originated “at the dump.”
His favorite theme is inugarulligaarjuit —— spirits “so strong they can carry a huge piece of walrus meat up a mountain,” said Manumie, whose prints are based on stories told by his father.
And there is Quvianaqtuk Pudlat, a gifted late bloomer who worked as a water truck driver and a sport hunting guide before moving to drawings of Sandhill and Whooping cranes sinuously flowing across the page.
Other stars of the Kinngait Studio include Ningiukulu Teevee, a storyteller and graphic artist known for her striking ravens and owls; Johnny Pootoogook, whose emotionally-charged drawings capture the cycles and storms of life, and the master carver Pudlalik Shaa, who, like his compatriots, works outdoors because drilling stone generates toxic dust. To find carvers in town, just listen for the piercing nails-on-a-blackboard sounds.
At her table, Ashoona’s images pour forth “far away from the pillow.” She draws without preliminary sketches, starting at the corners and filling in the details with her eye for vibrant color. It doesn’t take long to realize that Ashoona and her creations are one and the same; when I offer her nail polish, she draws little red faces on her thumbs.
At lunchtime one day, she made her way up an icy slope to the town graveyard through the snow drifts, brushing snow off crosses as she tried — without success — to locate the resting places of the artists in her family, including her father, Kiugak, an internationally known carver, and her artist mother, Sorroseeleetu.
Then there was her first cousin, Annie Pootoogook, whom Ashoona calls “my number one.” A courageous documentarian, she captured the complexities of modern Inuit life, be it the frozen food section at the Co-op or a couple watching pornography in bed. Her harrowing autobiographical portrayals of domestic violence and alcoholism shattered the silence on taboo subjects.
Pootoogook’s early acclaim — a solo exhibition in Toronto, the $50,000 Sobey Prize for emerging artists, being the first Inuit visual artist at Documenta in Germany — was heady stuff for a young artist from an Arctic community and a culture shock. Seeking new horizons, she left Kinngait for Montreal and then Ottawa, where alcoholism and abusive relationships stalked her. She bounced between shelters and the street, selling drawings for beer money. At age 47, Pootoogook’s body was found in the Rideau River in Ottawa. A police investigation found no evidence of foul play.
“Annie is the only person who knows how that happened,” said Joemie Tapaungai, the assistant studio manager at Kinngait.
Other artists spoke to me of their battles with alcoholism and a son’s suicide. One talked about his two years in federal prison for alcohol-related violence. Still another placed her children in foster care and fled an abusive husband.
Such travails unfold within the context of a broader historical trauma — the forced relocations of many Indigenous people beginning in the early 1900s by the government and religious missionaries. Segregated in settlements like Kinngait, the Inuit were separated from nomadic traditions, making them dependent on a cash economy. The coerced placement and abuse of Indigenous children in Canada’s residential schools was the subject of Pope Francis’s recent reconciliation discussions with Inuit, Métis and First Nation delegations. His apology came a year after hundreds of children's remains were found on the grounds of Catholic schools.
The reverberations of forced assimilation persist in suicide rates for Inuitthat are nine times higher than the non-Indigenous rate; in stubborn poverty (according to census data, Nunavut Inuit median income is less than a quarter of that of non-Aboriginal people who live there), in high rates of tuberculosis, and in severely overcrowded housing that heightens the potential for stress and violence. The nearest major medical center is 1,300 miles away. The cost of basic staples has made food insecurity rampant; as a result, hunting is still prized. (“What do you call a vegetarian in Nunavut?” Tapaungai quipped. “A bad hunter.”)
Art can be a countervailing force. The ancestral knowledge and spiritual power embedded in Inuit art survives — it is a mark of “cultural resilience,” said the Inuk art historian Heather Igloliorte.
“It’s not just an economic driver,” said Jesse Mike, director of social and cultural development for Nunavut Tunngavik Inc., which represents 30,000 Inuit. “It helps us stay grounded to our stories and traditions and other things we miss in our lives.”
That resilience thrives in textile art, films, ceramics, and, recently, an all-Inuit television network. Artists like 27-year-old Neevee Jaw, Kinngait Studio’s first female printer, are forging new ground while steeping themselves in their elders’ practices, like throat singing, a deep guttural chanting. Ashoona stops by her table to share chocolate or gum.
On a little slip of paper Ashoona wrote: “Venice/Venus.” She lives with two sisters, going back and forth, and is the family breadwinner, “helping the ones around me with phone bills and fruit and couches and bedsheets and everything about the house,” she said. She does not have a romantic partner. “Maybe I’m in love with everybody,” she said wryly.
As I step onto the floe edge where waves of snow and uplifts of ice meet the open sea, the artist’s description of her seasonal landscape lingers. “The whole month was white, like polar bears dancing,” she said. “Adam and Evie created them for sure.”

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Every few months, members of The New York Times pop music team gather for the ritual Popcast mailbag.
On this week’s episode, we answer questions about the current state of rock music, including recent revivals of emo and hardcore; the status of Adele and Chance the Rapper’s careers; the degree to which critics consider extramusical concerns when assessing work; rising talents including Rina Sawayama and Yeat; and much, much more.
Joe Coscarelli, The New York Times’s pop music reporter
Caryn Ganz, The New York Times’s pop music editor
Jon Pareles, The New York Times’s chief pop music critic
Connect With Popcast. Become a part of the Popcast community: Join the show’s Facebook group and Discord channel. We want to hear from you! Tune in, and tell us what you think at popcast@nytimes.com. Follow our host, Jon Caramanica, on Twitter: @joncaramanica.

Over the six seasons of “Peaky Blinders,” its central character has grappled with his post-traumatic stress disorder and what redemption could look like.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
This article contains spoilers for Season 6 of “Peaky Blinders.”
LONDON — “John was a good boy. Arthur tries. Tommy’s different,” Aunt Polly (Helen McCrory) says of the Shelby brothers in Season 4 of “Peaky Blinders.”
Throughout the stylish BBC gangster drama (which airs on Netflix in the United States), Tommy Shelby (Cillian Murphy) is in a league of his own. Although he’s the second-born brother, the ambitious Tommy quickly takes his place as head of the family upon returning home to Birmingham, in central England, after fighting in World War I.
The show’s creator, Steven Knight, has said that he sees the show as a western, and Tommy is the outlaw at its center. While the show has spawned many “Peaky”-inspired haircuts and themed events, Tommy, as the story’s defining figure, is the character most fans seek to emulate. (In 2020, he was voted the “greatest TV character of all time” by the male-oriented British website LADbible.)
Although the show has now ended — the final season arrived on Netflix June 10 — Tommy’s influence is set to continue, as Knight has plans for a feature film set during World War II.
From the beginning of “Peaky Blinders,” when the show’s characters were still emerging from the shadow of World War I, masculinity and violence have been inextricably linked. The gang succeeded by using physical force as well as cunning, not to mention those razor blades they supposedly sewed into their caps. “The only way to guarantee peace is to make the prospect of war seem hopeless,” Tommy argues in Season 3.
When “Peaky Blinders” premiered in 2013 in Britain, it joined a TV landscape littered with male antiheroes: “Breaking Bad” and the transformation of Walter White ended the same month that “Peaky” debuted; “Sons of Anarchy” — with the violent biker Jax Teller at its center — aired its penultimate season that year; and viewers were six seasons into Don Draper’s journey up the corporate ladder in “Mad Men.”
Tommy fits in well among these other dangerously and seductively flawed leading men. Through his character, though, the show has also explored the impact of battlefield trauma, prefiguring the more explicitly mental health-conscious TV that we see today.
In Britain, “Peaky Blinders” has received a steady stream of criticism for its stylish depiction of violence, and last year Nick Fletcher, a member of Parliament, said Tommy, specifically, was a negative role model. “Is there any wonder we’re seeing so many young men committing crime?” Fletcher said. “These programs make crime look cool.”
Watching a show like “Peaky Blinders” is not enough, on its own, to lead to violent behavior, according to the psychologist Douglas Gentile, whose work focuses on the impact of mass media. But “the whole time you’re watching a violent show, you’re rehearsing aggressive fantasies,” he said in a recent video interview, and the more you watch, “the more desensitized you become to both media and real world violence.”
Public conversations around male-perpetrated violence have shifted dramatically since “Peaky Blinders” debuted nearly a decade ago. The emergence of the #MeToo movement popularized the concept of “toxic masculinity,” which broadly refers to a model of manhood that encourages men to “suppress emotion and mask distress” and can lead to aggression, according to the American Psychological Association.
“Peaky Blinders” has undergone an evolution of its own, focusing less on physical fights and more on the internal battle within Tommy, said Anthony Byrne, who directed Seasons 5 and 6.
“Violence is very overused,” he said in a recent phone interview. “Season 4 was all about gangsterism. I felt like the show had gotten away from what it should continue to be: the journey of Tommy’s psyche.”
In the final season, for example, Byrne cut a “classic Peaky Blinders” fight scene featuring Tommy, Arthur and some dockworkers. “It just didn’t work and it felt wrong,” he said. “Time had moved on. Tommy had moved on.”
From the beginning, Tommy has struggled with what we now understand as post-traumatic stress disorder, stemming from his time in World War I. In Season 6, he suffers from seizures, with his body reflecting the inner turmoil wrought from fighting at home and abroad.
This vulnerability is essential reason viewers root for the character, according to Julie Taddeo, a historian who focuses on British television. “He can be a very unlikable character,” she said in a recent phone interview, “but he’s relatable because we now have a more nuanced understanding of war and trauma.”
Despite the show’s focus on the Peaky Blinders and their conflict, female characters like Ada Shelby and Aunt Polly are central to Tommy’s trajectory. “I always explored his masculinity through his feminine self,” Byrne said.
“Everything in Tommy’s psyche is governed by the women in his life, both dead and alive.” he explained. “His mother, who committed suicide by throwing herself into a canal, is kind of a spectre who is very much the subtext of Tommy.”
We bid farewell to Tommy at a time in which ideas around masculinity are becoming more expansive, and public figures in Britain like the rapper Stormzy and Prince Harry have shared their own mental health struggles.
As a result, “our expectations and demands of male characters have definitely expanded and intensified,” Taddeo said. “We now want a lot more from these men.”
This has been reflected in shows like “Derry Girls,” whose central father, Gerry (Tommy Tiernan), is more than comfortable expressing his emotions as the characters navigate “The Troubles” in Northern Ireland; “After Life,” in which Ricky Gervais plays a widow whose grief leads him to consider suicide; and “This Is Us,” in which Randall, the lead character played by Sterling K. Brown, struggles with anxiety.
Throughout “Peaky Blinders,” the question of redemption hangs over Tommy. In the final season, Tommy says he’s learning kindness from his children, and in the closing scenes of the show, he chooses not to shoot a man who has wronged him. Instead, he walks away.
“Tommy rides in on a black horse and out on a white horse, so there’s hope for him,” Byrne said. “Where he goes, nobody knows, but there will be a feature film, so the story will continue.”

In her new book, Sarah Stodola tours seaside resorts and catalogs some of the damage they can do.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.
THE LAST RESORTA Chronicle of Paradise, Profit, and Peril at the BeachBy Sarah StodolaIllustrated. 341 pages. Ecco. $27.99.
Publishing a book about beaches in the season of the “beach read” is a bold and meta move, like when Kramer made a coffee-table book about coffee tables on “Seinfeld.”
The conventional wisdom is that readers want something light and unchallenging for their summer vacations, something they don’t mind smudging with Coppertone and leaving behind at the rental house. Sarah Stodola’s “The Last Resort,” its title echoing Cleveland Amory’s classic about high-society playgrounds, is definitely not that kind of book. Indeed it aims, in well-intentioned, widely researched and somewhat scattershot fashion, to make you profoundly uneasy about the very act of visiting the beach.
Why are you even going, anyway? For much of human history, Stodola reminds us, the seaside was considered a deeply uncomfortable and perilous place. In the 18th century, dubious seawater “cures” — like flushing the eyes or repeated dunking — were promoted in the West. But beaches were long tolerated rather than enjoyed, resorts there a lower-altitude parallel to the kind of sanitarium in Thomas Mann’s “The Magic Mountain.” They also feature in literature and movies, probably more than mountains do: Mann’s “Death in Venice” and F. Scott Fitzgerald’s “Tender Is the Night” flash immediately before the eyes. “Splash.” “Jaws.”
The beach, rebranded by Hollywood and real estate developers as an adult playground — it makes a great set, in art and life — nonetheless still carries a vague sense of impending danger. The sharks might be circling. The merciless sun beats down. The big wave could hit. And even before Covid, the tourism trade was vulnerable to outbreaks of disease and violence. “It’s one of the few industries,” Stodola writes, that requires its consumers “to show up in person to the place of manufacture.” And those consumers are fickle; their idea of “paradise,” denoted by palm trees and cocktail paper umbrellas, all too portable.
The biggest danger, Stodola darkly intones, throwing down plenty of statistics, is humans themselves. They overdevelop, recklessly dump plastic and commit great violence to delicate marine ecosystems. The earth is warming; sea levels are rising and established shorelines are being reshaped when they’re not disappearing entirely. And yet many travelers persist in pouting only about the immediate forecast. “There’s a thing about any extreme weather event being dismissible as a freak occurrence,” Stodola writes, “and then there’s our current deluge of extreme weather events that makes it harder to ignore that the center is not holding, to borrow a phrase from Didion, who borrowed it from Yeats.”
There’s a lot of borrowing in “The Last Resort,” and the bibliography may divert you quickly to the more focused histories Stodola consulted, like Mark Braude’s “Making Monte Carlo.” Her glancing forays into race relations brought to mind Russ Rymer’s more substantive “American Beach: A Saga of Race, Wealth, and Memory.”
Stodola, whose previous book was “Process: The Writing Lives of Great Authors,” and whose own writing life includes some amount of luxury travel (she founded and edits an online magazine called Flung), does fruitfully dig up a 1980 essay by a geographer named R.W. Butler. In “The Concept of a Tourist Area Cycle Evolution: Implications for Management of Resources,” Butler identified half a dozen stages, Kübler-Ross-like, in a resort’s life cycle, including Stagnation, Decline and possibly Rejuvenation. (“Tulum today is textbook Consolidation Stage,” Stodola writes of the Mexico municipality, which has become clogged with sargassum and hipsters.) She does a good back-and-forth analysis of why Bali, Indonesia, has become a major destination while nearby Nias has struggled.
Still, you have to chuckle when a little girl among a group of village children solicits a photograph from Stodola’s partner, Scott, and then one of the children holds up a middle finger just as he’s taking the shot. This critic didn’t feel quite that level of hostility, but the disorienting number of places Stodola alights, the number of vegan dishes and drinks she reports ordering, some at swim-up bars — an old-fashioned on the terrace of the Hotel du Cap Eden Roc in Antibes, France; Absolut and juice at the Naviti Resort in Fiji; “a totally decent glass of wine in Cancun” (which she deems in Stagnation Stage) — does make one scratch the head about what this book proposes to be, exactly; it tends to seem more last hurrah than last resort. “A nuanced understanding of the beach resort industry where none currently exists,” is what Stodola is attempting, while acknowledging that the carbon offsets she bought for all her long-haul flights “is not enough to rationalize the emissions.”
Mea Acapulco! (Where she enjoyed a melting frozen margarita at the El Mirador.)
Anyway, it’s time to retire the term beach read. We can do it here, now. “Read” (like “invite”) is better as a verb, and summer is precisely the season when readers should be “digging deep,” building castles in the air as well as the sand.

“Peaky Blinders” is back. Or check out a new AMC thriller starring Zahn McClarnon.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
‘Dark Winds’When to watch: Sunday at 9 p.m., on AMC, or on AMC+.
If the hiatus in the final season of “Better Call Saul” has left an “ominous lonesome desert footage”-shaped hole in your heart, try this six-part mini-series set in and around the Navajo Nation. The show, based on the Leaphorn and Chee books by Tony Hillerman, is set in 1971 and follows tribal police officers investigating a series of perhaps unrelated crimes. While the plotting can get a little baggy, brilliant performances (especially from Zahn McClarnon, as Joe Leaphorn) and striking cinematography make up for it, and the show’s sensibilities around mourning, community and spirituality elevate it beyond other sad-man cop shows. If your soul is at peace whenever Noah Emmerich plays an F.B.I. agent, watch this.
‘Evil’When to watch: Sunday, on Paramount+.
Season 3 of this well-done churchy horror procedural picks up right where Season 2 left off, with David (Mike Colter) and Kristen (Katja Herbers) seeking absolution … with a side of potent sexual tension. Characters on “Evil” are in a constant do-si-do of advance and retreat, encroachment and rapprochement, crossing the line and then scuttling backward and swearing to never commit that sin again. The show takes its scary parts seriously, but it also takes its funny parts seriously — characters make jokes and experience the ordinary humor of life while also understanding a demonic realm, and whatnot. If you ever thought you and Dana Scully would be friends, go back and start with Season 1 of “Evil” and have yourself a fun little summer TV project.
When to watch: Arrives Friday, on Netflix.
The sixth and final season of “Peaky Blinders” is finally here, nearly three years after Season 5 and nine years after the show premiered. Through its run, “Peaky” has become a little less focused, as Tommy (Cillian Murphy) develops appetites for new vices, and this long after its debut, the show feels like part of an older, fleeting TV era of violent bleakness and damp British criminals. It remains ominous and tragic, though, its haunted beauty intact, with air so thick that cigarette smoke doesn’t rise, fog so heavy that the horses seem to exhale extra hard. There are only six new episodes, so binge gently.

By Amanda WebsterMay 26, 2022
I’m a photo editor on The Times’s Culture desk who focuses on film, music and comedy. I’m away from my desk this week, driving through the desert and sleeping next to some really big rocks.
Here are five cultural things I’ve been enjoying on and off the grid →
Book: ‘Who Is Changed and Who Is Dead’
A trove of imagery and text, Ahndraya Parlato’s second monograph is a deeply felt and complicated exploration of motherhood, death and gender.
It connects Ahndraya’s writing and photograms of her mother’s ashes with images of her own children and references to 19th-century “hidden mother” photography.
I return to this work frequently; its impact never dulls.
I’m gearing up for Dead & Company’s summer concerts with my collection of Grateful Dead live cassettes. What I love about these recordings, often made by people in the audience, is the noise of the crowds. It’s like I’m there with them.
TV: ‘The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills’
Reality TV is an art form all its own, and this diamond of the franchise is a master class in high-profile drama. Several complex conflicts — one involving a home invasion — are coming to a head this season.
A Pair of Photography Shows
Great photo shows in New York right now include Shikeith’s “grace comes violently” at Yossi Milo Gallery and Daniel Arnold’s “Nothing” at Larrie, which has my favorite photo ever taken of an N.Y.C. garbage truck.
Part of my job is sifting through dozens of film stills looking for the most beautiful and informational images, so I have a leg up on the new trivia game where you guess the movie based on a series of frames.
It has become part of my morning routine and wakes me up visually — once I’ve hit play on a Grateful Dead tape, made coffee and, of course, solved the day’s Wordle.
Here are some more recent favorites:

Two sleuths — a curator and a librarian — in New Paltz, N.Y., helped the F.B.I. track down 200-year-old paintings that were stolen from a historical society in 1972.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
On a Wednesday evening in February 1972, as police officers and emergency responders in New Paltz, N.Y., flocked to a fire, somebody snatched a pair of 19th-century portraits of a wealthy local couple from a historical society elsewhere in town.
The theft also resulted in the loss of dozens of objects, some three centuries old, including a prayer book, a powder horn and antique guns and swords. At the time, the president of the society estimated the items to be worth about $30,000, a figure he said was dwarfed by the sentimental value they offered the historic community, which is about 85 miles north of New York City and was settled in the 17th century by the descendants of French Protestants.
Many of the items were recovered at a Manhattan thrift shop several weeks later, but the paintings from the 1820s — sullen portraits of a rosy-cheeked man with a puckered mouth and a woman holding a snuff box — were not among them.
This month — more than 50 years after the theft — the F.B.I. announced that the portraits had been returned to the society, Historic Huguenot Street, thanks in part to the persistent detective work of two local sleuths — a curator and a librarian.
Immediately after the crime took place, it was infused with intrigue. Local officials speculated that the fire, at a Veterans of Foreign Wars building, was linked to the theft, a theory that gained traction in a local newspaper. While the police responded to the fire, “the robbers had a free hand on Huguenot Street,” The Daily Freeman of Kingston, N.Y., reported.
The paintings were done in oil by Ammi Phillips, a famed 19th-century portraitist, and they depicted Dirck D. Wynkoop and his wife, Annatje Eltinge, key figures in the history of New Paltz. Mr. Wynkoop owned farmland that had helped feed the American colonists during the Revolutionary War. He had a darker history that was also entwined with that of the fledgling country: He owned slaves.
To Carol Johnson, a librarian at Elting Memorial Library in New Paltz and a society trustee, the theft of the paintings deprived local residents of a chance to learn how their history connected to the broader story of America, warts and all.
As the coronavirus pandemic took hold in 2020, Ms. Johnson joined up with Josephine Bloodgood, the curator of the historical society, to create an exhibit about a man named Jacob Wynkoop, a New Paltz carpenter who was among the first Black men in the community to vote and who fought in the Civil War. Jacob Wynkoop’s father had been enslaved by Dirck D. Wynkoop.
Their mutual interest in Jacob Wynkoop led Ms. Johnson and Ms. Bloodgood to take a crack at solving the mystery of the missing paintings.
Ms. Johnson and Ms. Bloodgood were armed with a black-and-white postcard image of the stolen portraits that had been distributed to art dealers shortly after the theft. They compared notes and records but quickly hit a roadblock: The paintings, to their knowledge, simply had not surfaced in the half-century since they were taken.
A break came around June 2020, when they spotted the paintings in an online catalog of works by Mr. Phillips. The catalog said that the portraits were of unidentified subjects and that they were sold at auction by Sotheby’s in 2005.
“There was shock that they were out there in plain sight,” Ms. Bloodgood said.
After purchasing a Sotheby’s catalog from eBay, Ms. Bloodgood confirmed that the paintings had, in fact, been put up for auction in 2005, and that they had sold for roughly $13,000, a paltry amount compared with some of Mr. Phillips’s more famous work.
With their research in hand, the two women contacted the F.B.I., which has a team dedicated to art crime. It subpoenaed Sotheby’s and discovered the name of the buyer, who was unaware that the paintings had been stolen, according to the F.B.I. and the researchers. The buyer agreed to turn over the paintings, the researchers said, though it was unclear whether the buyer received money in return.
“It’s so rare to have portraits of individuals from this early period, especially for New Paltz,” Ms. Bloodgood said. “We’re so pleased to have the Wynkoop portraits back in the collection, where they can again be interpreted to tell a fuller story of our community and how it relates to the rich and complicated history of our country.”
The researchers never contacted Sotheby’s for help. The couple’s names were on the backs of the paintings. Ms. Johnson said that should have been enough information for the auction house to know the paintings were stolen.
“We could not understand why Sotheby’s did not do their due diligence and look up these paintings,” Ms. Johnson said. Sotheby’s did not respond to messages seeking comment.
A lack of transparency among auction houses and a desire to protect the privacy of art buyers and sellers create a culture in which art theft can flourish, said Erin Thompson, an associate professor of art crime at John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Dr. Thompson says auction houses like Sotheby’s and Christie’s argue that art is often sold under sensitive circumstances — the “three D’s” of death, divorce and debt. According to Dr. Thompson, these are the circumstances that the auction houses contend beg for privacy.
“From the perspective of me — suspicious, cynical art critic — it creates opportunity to launder stolen or looted objects, as seems to have happened with these,” she said, adding that it was unclear what paperwork Sotheby’s received with the paintings. “Who knows how convincing that paperwork is or what the auction house asked for?”
The F.B.I. could not be reached. Ms. Johnson and Ms. Bloodgood said that an agent told them that the statute of limitations had passed. Even though the paintings are back in the historical society’s hands, which was Ms. Johnson and Ms. Bloodgood’s main goal, the women have still not solved the mystery of who took them in the first place.
They plan to keep exploring that question as they try to locate other items lost in the theft.

The Tony Awards were held Sunday at Radio City Music Hall.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
The Tony Awards were back at Radio City Music Hall for the first time since June 2019. The awards ceremony, which honors the plays and musicals staged on Broadway and resumed its traditional calendar after a long pandemic disruption, honored work that opened on Broadway between Feb. 20, 2020, and May 4, 2022. (“Girl From the North Country” opened on March 5, 2020, just a week before theaters shut down for the pandemic.)
Ariana DeBose, the former Broadway understudy turned Oscar winner, hosted the three-hour broadcast portion of the Tony Awards on CBS, which was preceded by a one-hour segment hosted by Darren Criss and Julianne Hough on Paramount+. “A Strange Loop” won best musical and “The Lehman Trilogy” was awarded best play at a glittering ceremony celebrating Broadway’s comeback. Myles Frost won his first Tony for best leading actor in a musical for “MJ,” his Broadway (and professional acting) debut. And there were performances from some of the past year’s most prominent musicals: “Company,” “Girl From the North Country” and “Paradise Square,” among others.
A complete list of winners is below.
Best Revival of a Musical
Best Revival of a Play
Best Book of a Musical
Michael R. Jackson, “A Strange Loop”
“Six: The Musical,” music and lyrics by Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss
Best Direction of a Play
Sam Mendes, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Direction of a Musical
Best Leading Actor in a Play
Simon Russell Beale, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Leading Actress in a Play
Best Leading Actor in a Musical
Best Leading Actress in a Musical
Best Featured Actor in a Play
Jesse Tyler Ferguson, “Take Me Out”
Best Featured Actress in a Play
Best Featured Actor in a Musical
Best Featured Actress in a Musical
Best Scenic Design of a Play
Es Devlin, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Scenic Design of a Musical
Best Costume Design of a Play
Montana Levi Blanco, “The Skin of Our Teeth”
Best Costume Design of a Musical
Gabriella Slade, “Six: The Musical”
Best Lighting Design of a Play
Jon Clark, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Best Lighting Design of a Musical
Best Sound Design of a Play
Best Sound Design of a Musical
Simon Hale, “Girl From the North Country”
Special Tony Award for Lifetime Achievement
Tony Honors for Excellence in the Theater
Asian American Performers Action CoalitionBroadway for AllFeinstein’s/54 BelowEmily GrishmanUnited Scenic Artists, Local USA 829, IATSE

The megaselling novelist’s professional life has been marked by a certain steadfastness. His personal and political evolution wasn’t quite so smooth.
A Los Angeles actor and producer moved across the pond to restore his crumbling ancestral home. But fixing up a 50,000-square-foot manor isn’t easy.
Being the hairstylist to fashion’s most iconic coiffure may sound glamorous, but it’s his art practice that gets Andreas Anastasis talking.
Last year’s Westminster dog show winner was not in it for the money, and he is very much a dog — even if it can be hard to tell from a distance.
A pair of 19th-century portraits were stolen from a historical society in 1972. Two sleuths in New Paltz, N.Y., helped the F.B.I. track them down.
An accident shines a light on the House speaker’s California life among the vineyards.
Researchers found bacterial cells so large they are easily visible to the naked eye, challenging ideas about how large microbes can get.
This edition of The Weekender was edited by Jaclyn Reiss.

Starting in the Air Force in Israel and later moving to the United States, he set a record as the world’s most widely syndicated in his field.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Ranan Lurie, an Israeli war hero and world peacemaker who set records as the world’s most widely syndicated political cartoonist, died on Wednesday in Las Vegas. He was 90.
His death, at an assisted living center, was confirmed by his son Rod Lurie.
At his peak, Mr. Lurie’s evocative caricatures appeared in about 1,000 publications with more than 100 million readers in 100 countries, setting a benchmark in the Guinness Book of Records in the 1980s (since surpassed by Johnny Hart, creator of The Wizard of Id and B.C.).
He welded drawing and writing into a mightier-than-the-sword instrument that gave voice to his strongly-held political opinions and whose imagery, he said, conveyed even greater impact than photography.
“Even if it is the most sophisticated camera in the world,” he told the Israeli newspaper Haaretz in 2017, “it will never be able to capture the person more accurately than the artist or the cartoonist who knows how to point out his true character.”
Other media can impart several points of view simultaneously, he told The Times in 1989, but the political cartoon can make only one, so “when I win,” he said, “I better win with a knockout.”
His first of some 12,000 cartoons was published in the newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth in 1948, when he was 16 and recuperating in a hospital from an arm injury inflicted by a grenade during his time with the Irgun, the underground militia demanding that Britain redeem its decades-old promise to sanction a Jewish state.
“By chance, I had a pencil and some paper in the hospital, so I drew,” he said. “By the same token, if I had had a violin there, I might have been a great violinist today.”
In 1968, after working as a caricaturist for The Air Force Journal, an Israeli military publication, and as an illustrator and political cartoonist for Israeli newspapers, he was recruited by Life magazine, originally to deliver a first-person account of his role as a major in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
His work at Life led to later stints as a political cartoonist with Le Figaro, Paris Match, The Times of London, Die Welt in Germany, Asahi Shimbun in Japan, Newsweek, U.S. News and World Report, Time International, The Wall Street Journal, Foreign Affairs and The New York Times.
Mr. Lurie was a founder and editor in chief of Cartoonews, a current events and educational magazine; a member of Cartoonists for Peace, an international coalition; and a senior associate at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a nonpartisan public policy group based in Washington.
Mr. Lurie, who had fought in two Mideast wars as an Israeli, was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 2002 by Glafcos Clerides, the president of the Republic of Cyprus at the time, for, as he said, “creating a great spirit of understanding among the people of many races,” adding that Mr. Lurie had “helped in the effort to defuse political and other hot conflicts worldwide.”
Ranan Raymond Lurie was born on May 26, 1932, in Port Said, Egypt, where his parents had traveled from Tel Aviv so that his mother could give birth at the home of his paternal grandfather, Rabbi Isaiah Lurie, who was the chief agent there for the Carmel Mizrahi wine company. Two weeks later, they returned to Tel Aviv.
His father, Joseph, was an accountant and a member of the sixth-generation of his family to be born in Jerusalem. His mother, Shoshana (Shmuelewitz) Lurie, who was seventh-generation Jerusalem-born, was office manager for a utility company.
According to “The Lurie Legacy: The House of Davidic Royal Descent” (2004), by Neil Rosenstein, the family traces its ancestry to the Prophet Isaiah, the medieval French rabbi Rashi, Felix Mendelssohn and Sigmund Freud. The family had moved to Jerusalem in 1815.
“I was always good at drawing, even at age 4,” Mr. Lurie told The New York Times in 1995. “It gave me an overwhelming tool and the appetite to maintain and develop it.”
A school newspaper printed one of his cartoons when he was 10.
Fudging his age by two years, Ranan enlisted in the Irgun at 14 while still enrolled in school, the Herzliya Gymnasium in Tel Aviv. He trained to become a fighter pilot but was dismissed when he buzzed a beach in the coastal town of Herzliya so closely that a lifeguard dived in the water from his paddleboard to avoid the plane. He completed his high school education while working as a newspaper reporter.
In 1954, posing as an Australian journalist while working for the Israeli Defense Forces magazine, he talked his way onto an Egyptian warship moored in Venice and snapped detailed photographs of the ship’s classified Soviet radar technology. As a result, when he was 22, he became the first recipient of what became the Sokolow Prize, the journalism award conferred by the Tel Aviv municipality.
His first full-time job as a cartoonist was with The Air Force Journal. His artwork from that period was anthologized in 1955 in the first of his books, “Among the Suns.” (Many of his illustrations included a smiling sun icon.)
Among his other books was “The Cartoonist’s Story” (2004), alternately described as a novella and a memoir, in which an Israeli teenager is recruited by the Mossad, the Israeli intelligence agency, and wields his pen as a cartoonist to insinuate himself with world leaders and other powerful figures.
For a decade beginning in 1957, in his mid-20s, Mr. Lurie was the political cartoonist for Yediot Aharonot — the newspaper that had published his first cartoon when he was a teenager. It became Israel’s largest circulation daily.
In 1967, as a major in the Israeli reserves, he was exhibiting his work in a show of portraits at Expo 67 in Montreal when he was recalled to serve in the Six-Day War with neighboring Arab nations.
As the military governor of Anabta, a town in what is now the West Bank, he said, he personally intervened with Prime Minister Levi Eshkol, with whom he had become friendly by then, to halt the army’s order to deport the town’s Palestinian residents to Jordan.
He told Haaretz in 2017 that he had lectured his troops “not to lay a finger on an old man, a woman or a child.”
“One of them asked me what to do if a boy of 12 was holding a rifle,” Mr. Lurie added. “I said to him that even if we capture cannibals, we will not start eating human beings just because that’s what they do.”
After he was recruited by Life magazine, he moved to the United States, where he became a naturalized citizen in 1974. His cartoons were syndicated by King Features, Universal Press and The New York Times Syndicate. In 1985, he started his own syndicate, Cartoons International, which was managed by his wife, Tamar (Fletcher) Lurie, a real estate executive.
Before residing in Las Vegas, he lived in Manhattan and Greenwich, Conn. In addition to his son Rod, a film director and screenwriter, Mr. Lurie is survived by his wife; another son, Barak, who is a lawyer and a radio show host; and two daughters, Dr. Daphne Laurie, the directing psychologist at the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego, and Danielle Lurie, a movie director.
Among Mr. Lurie’s artwork outside of cartooning is “United Painting,” part of his Fine Art With a Mission project that originated in 2005 with a 75-foot-tall, 600-foot-long installation of multicolored squares and rectangles on display at the United Nations headquarters in New York. (The project’s stated mission was “to unite the world under the umbrella of goodwill and mutual respect.”) Additional sections of “United Painting” were later installed on a satellite orbiting the Earth; still others were delivered by Sherpas to the summit of Mount Everest.
Those peaks were a long way from where he started when Life originally invited him to the United States to promote his first-person account of the Arab-Israeli war, published in June 1967 under the title “A Major’s Long Ride to a Short War.”
“At that time, in 1968,” he told The Times, “we had no contacts, no old boys’ network, virtually no friends or money.
“Everything,” he said, “materialized from my 10 fingers.”

The cult British show’s final season is now on Netflix, but its creator has plans for a spinoff movie and says he wants to follow the Shelby family into the 1940s and ’50s.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
LONDON — Steven Knight knew something special was happening around “Peaky Blinders,” his TV crime drama, a few years ago, when the rapper Snoop Dogg asked to talk with him.
The pair met in a London hotel room, Knight said in a recent interview, and for three hours discussed the show, which is based on the real-life Shelby family that operated in Birmingham, in central England, in the shadow of World War I. “Peaky” reminded the rapper of how he got involved in gang culture in Los Angeles, Knight said.
“How the connection occurs between 1920s Birmingham and South Central, I don’t know,” Knight, 62, said. “I think you just get lucky with some projects and it resonates with people.”
Since premiering in Britain in 2013, the tumultuous fortunes of the Shelby family, headed by Tommy Shelby (Cillian Murphy), and set against the backdrop of the political and social tumult of the interwar years, has resonated with many.
Devotees hold weddings themed around the show’s early-20th-century aesthetic and cut their hair like the characters. The official “Peaky” brand extensions have been diverse, weird and wonderful, including an official cookbook, despite fans noting that Tommy is never seen eating; a Monopoly board game; a virtual reality game; and a dance show which premieres in Britain this year.
Now, after six seasons, the cultural hit is drawing to a close, its final outing dropping on Netflix on Friday. (The season aired in Britain earlier this year.) While Season 6 is the official conclusion of the show, Knight has trailed a spinoff movie and other projects, framing the final season as “the end of the beginning.”
In a recent video interview, he discussed the development of “Peaky,” and what he has planned for the future. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
When did you first have the idea to dramatize the story of the Peaky Blinders?
These stories were told to me when I was a kid by my parents because they grew up in Small Heath in Birmingham, and so they sort of experienced that world. When they told me stories, I always thought it would make a great drama.
I first thought about doing it as a TV series probably 20 years ago, and I’m really thankful that it didn’t happen then because I don’t think there was the technology to have done it justice. Then I was off writing movies and, when television started to become what it is now, someone said, do you have any television ideas? It was an idea that I had sort of in the bottom drawer.
Why did those stories resonate with you as a child, did you see them as heroes?
Yes. My dad’s uncles were illegal bookmakers known as the Peaky Blinders, so he was in awe of them as a kid — whenever he saw them he was terrified and impressed, they were heroes to him. He would see them in immaculate clothes with razor blades in their hats and drinking whiskey out of jam jars.
And I know those streets, I know the pubs, I know the Garrison pub — the real one — and when I wanted to do “Peaky” I decided to keep the mythology rather than be like, what was it really like?
I wanted to keep it as if they were being viewed through the eyes of a kid. The horses are all beautiful. The clothes are all magnificent. I was a big fan of westerns; it’s like a western, and that’s how I wanted to keep it.
Do you think the show has changed how Birmingham is viewed? In Britain at least, the city and the accent have often been maligned.
Part of the challenge in the beginning was to try and make Birmingham — which was a blank canvas at best before — cool. To give it a story. Liverpool has the Beatles and Manchester has the nightclub scene, Birmingham never really had anything.
There was a suggestion in the early days of moving the story to London or another city, and I said no. I think the fact that Birmingham was a blank canvas helped because there were no preconceptions.
According to people I know from Birmingham, when they go abroad and they speak, instantly people mention “Peaky Blinders.” And it’s not a bad thing, it’s always good. I think it has given Birmingham an identity that perhaps it didn’t have, purely in the media.
The show could easily have been ahistoric, but you weave contemporary social movements and political goings-on throughout the seasons. Why was that important to you?
If you’re setting something in the 1920s, if you look at what was really going on historically, it gives you an enormous amount of material to use.
I didn’t look at history books because I think they, first of all, don’t really tell the history of the working class anyway, and also they tend to look at trends and patterns that eventually made everything that happened seem inevitable when it wasn’t.
If you look at newspapers and wherever you can get word-of-mouth testimony about the way life was, it’s so fascinating. And if you can bring that into the work, it just gives it — even though this is very heightened and mythological — a real base.
The show takes place in a similar time frame to “Downton Abbey.” As in that series, British period dramas usually show working-class characters as servants.
Servants or figures of fun or whatever. What I wanted to do was have these working-class characters where we’re not looking at them and saying, “Isn’t it a shame? Wasn’t it awful? Wasn’t their life so dreadful?” Their lives are amazing and romantic and tragic.
An abiding critique of the show is its portrayal of violent masculinity. What do you think about claims that “Peaky” glorifies violence?
I think there’s lots of things going on. First of all, you’re depicting life in the ’20s and ’30s and it was very different — to suggest that people behaved the way they behave now, would be the same as saying they didn’t smoke. But also, the way that I look at it, any act of violence in “Peaky” has a very big consequence. If they get scarred, they stay scarred.
There’s a scene in one of the early series where Arthur [a Shelby family member] is in a boxing ring and kills someone because he loses his temper. In the next season, that boy’s mother turns up at the Garrison with a gun and wants to get revenge for what happened. In other words, it’s not like this is parting violence. All violence has a consequence.
The show is coming to an end, but you have spoken of spinoffs, including a movie. Why do you want to keep returning to the show’s world?
It’s partly to do with the fact that it seems to be going up and not down in terms of audience. And I’m interested in concluding during the Second World War. So the film will be set during that war, and then the film itself will dictate what happens next.
But I’m quite interested in keeping that world going into the ’40s and ’50s and just seeing where it goes because as long as there’s an appetite, then why not do it? I probably won’t be writing them all, but the world will be established.
Tommy Shelby is a deeply complicated character. How did you want his story to end?
I always imagine that before Episode 1 of Season 1, he put a gun to his head and decided, “Well, I’m not going to kill myself, I’m just going to do whatever I want.” There’s a great Francis Bacon quote about how, since life is so meaningless, we might as well be extraordinary. Tommy doesn’t think there’s a point, he doesn’t think there’s a goal, he doesn’t think there’s a destination, he just does these things.
Then over the six seasons, he, bit by bit, comes back to life. It’s like something that’s frozen is thawing out, but obviously that process is very painful. My take is that Season 6 is asking the question: Can Tommy Shelby be redeemed? And I think that question is answered in the last 10 minutes.

Genetic genealogy was used to identify skeletal remains as those of a 15-year-old girl who went missing in Florida in 1972. The authorities believe she was the victim of an ex-police officer convicted in 1973 of two murders.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
In the mangroves off a Florida highway in 1974, the authorities found human bones that appeared to have been the remains of a body that had been tied to a tree with wire. How they ended up there was a mystery for decades, and attempts to identify the victim went cold.
Last week, the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office announced that the bones had been identified as the remains of Susan Poole, a 15-year-old girl who disappeared in Broward County just before Christmas 1972. The authorities believe Gerard Schaefer, a serial killer who was convicted in 1973 of the mutilation murder of two Broward County girls and is suspected of other killings, is the “best suspect” in Susan’s murder. Mr. Schaefer died in 1995, when he was killed in prison while serving a life sentence, according to the authorities.
At a news conference on Thursday, Detective William Springer of the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office said that Susan’s bones were identified using a process known as genetic genealogy, which involves comparing genetic evidence with ancestry records. Genetic genealogy has been a key tool for identifying more than 40 murder and rape suspects in cases that are years old, including the infamous Golden State Killer in California.
Little is known about Susan’s disappearance. When she was reported missing in 1972, Detective Springer said, she had left clothes and a pocketbook at an apartment where she was staying. She had dropped out of school before she disappeared, he said.
“Nobody knew where she went,” Detective Springer said. “What I’m trying to do is piece together her last weeks.”
When Susan’s bones were found in the mangroves of Palm Beach County, Detective Springer said, there was “totally nothing left of her except the bones.”
“Her clothing was pretty well deteriorated by then,” he said.
Around the time of Susan’s disappearance, Mr. Schaefer, a former police officer, lived near Susan and had been arrested and charged with kidnapping two girls and tying them up in the mangroves. Mr. Schaefer was out on bail at the time Susan went missing, Detective Springer said.
“His M.O. was to pick up young girls hitchhiking,” Detective Springer said. “Everything kind of fits.”
When the police raided the home of Mr. Schaefer’s mother in 1973, they found items including drivers licenses and jewelry that belonged to several victims, Mr. Springer said.
At the news conference on Thursday, Detective Springer said that Susan’s family “was happy to know what happened.”
The Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office is now looking to speak to three friends of Susan and anyone who might know about her whereabouts when she went missing. There is no physical evidence to link Mr. Schaefer to Susan, Detective Springer said, adding that he would have to rely on circumstantial evidence to close the case.
“All we need is a lead,” the office said in a statement. “Who could have committed this heinous crime?”
Mr. Schaefer is believed to have killed a number of other girls, including Peggy Rahn and Wendy Stevenson, who disappeared in 1969, according to The Charley Project, an organization that catalogs details about missing people. Mr. Schaefer was never charged with their murders, but he admitted to killing them in a letter he wrote in 1989, according to the organization.
Mr. Schaefer’s crimes have been well documented over the years. He is the subject of a documentary and two books. In one book, “American Ripper: The Enigma of America’s Serial Killer Cop,” by Patrick Kendrick, a neighborhood friend of Mr. Schaefer described him as “preoccupied with girls.”
“He had a fascination with women like in a dirty little boy kind of way, and he didn’t lose that,” Mr. Kendrick said in an interview on Thursday.
Mr. Kendrick said that he intends to help the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office, starting with reviewing lists of evidence that was found where Mr. Schaefer lived. Mr. Kendrick, who has been writing about Mr. Schaefer since the 1980s, said he had a long history of letter writing with Mr. Schaefer when he was in prison.
Noting that Mr. Schaefer’s “M.O.” was to pick up women who were hitchhiking and kill them, Mr. Kendrick said that he was not surprised to see that Mr. Schaefer was named a suspect in Susan’s killing.
“It fits the bill,” Mr. Kendrick said. “The timing’s right.”

The accident happened in transit to a local airport in Baja California Sur in Mexico. Six other cast and crew members were injured, Netflix confirmed.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Two cast members of the Netflix show “The Chosen One” died after an accident on Thursday in Baja California Sur, Mexico, that left six other cast and crew members injured, Netflix said.
The accident occurred in transit from Santa Rosalía to the local airport, Netflix said. The accident was not on set, the company said, adding that those who were injured — two cast members and four crew members — were in stable condition.
The company did not provide details about what happened, but The Associated Press reported that the cast and crew members were in a van that crashed.
Redrum, the production company behind the show, has temporarily stopped production, Netflix said. Representatives from Redrum could not be immediately reached for comment on Sunday.
“The Chosen One,” according to a Netflix description, is about a 12-year-old boy who learns he is the returned Jesus Christ, destined to save humankind. The show is based on a comic book series by Mark Millar and Peter Gross. Netflix said on Twitter in April that shooting had started in Mexico.
In a statement on Facebook on Friday, the Baja California state government confirmed that the two actors killed were Raymundo Garduño Cruz and Juan Francisco González Aguilar.
“Our condolences to their family, friends and the Baja California arts community,” the government said.
SAG-AFTRA, the union representing film, television and radio workers, said in a statement that it had been in contact with Netflix, as well as with Asociación Nacional de Actores, which represents actors in Mexico, about the accident.
“We are investigating the circumstances with local production,” SAG-AFTRA said. “On set safety is always our top priority. We will continue to take all necessary steps to ensure that our members and others are safe in their workplace.”

“Twelve Carat Toothache,” the new album from the post-genre star, continues to collapse several styles into one, and hones a template adopted by a new generation, including Tate McRae.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
For a stretch in the mid-to-late 2010s, Post Malone found a way to make every kind of music, all at once. His songs were rooted in the attitude of hip-hop while helping underscore the genre’s sing-rap evolution. He had a penchant for lightly plangent country, and lived in the long shadow of what was once called alternative rock. Every now and then, he dialed up his tempo ever so slightly, turning his wails into bright pop. And his voice, a heavily processed sweet gargle, sounded completely modern, yet also like a deeply imprinted memory.
On his fourth album, “Twelve Carat Toothache,” the 26-year-old musician returns with more sorrowful yodels from the basement of the gilded mansion. Success hasn’t sated him, nor has it challenged him. He remains a calm synthesizer of styles for an era in which old borders matter less than ever. At times, he is relentlessly effective, but just as often, his music has an air of indifferent inevitability — it sounds both like the template for what’s still to come and also the logical endpoint of pop specificity as we once knew it.
What makes Post Malone particular are songs in which ecstasy and misery are indistinguishable: antagonists are saviors, surrender is freedom. “I was born to raise hell/I was born to take pills/I was born to chase mills,” he moans on “Reputation,” never shifting his tone. On “Euthanasia,” he can’t decide what form celebration should take: “Behold! A sober moment/Too short, and far between/I should crack one open to celebrate being clean.”
The real narcotic is Post Malone’s voice, though — it contains unanimity. Whether boasting about stealing someone’s girlfriend (“Insane”), excavating the anxiety associated with hyperfame (“Wasting Angels”) or delivering the odd deeply moving koan (“Everything done for the dead after they’re dead is for the living”), he sounds the same: bereft, lonely, removed.
That consistency goes a long way in the streaming ecosystem, when songs have no incentive to ever come to a conclusion, or resolution. TikTok may reward the choppy and the bristling, but Spotify privileges the tuneful and the atmospheric.
This album’s production leans in to that, even as it includes some of Post Malone’s brightest sounds to date: “Wrapped Around Your Finger” has 1950s sweetness and 1980s syntheticness, and “I Cannot Be (a Sadder Song)” has a bubbly undertow that recalls some of the squeakiest K-pop. “One Right Now,” with the Weeknd, is more zippy dyspepsia.
But even the chirpy moments don’t detract from the album’s tonal consistency — Louis Bell, a longtime collaborator and architect of Post Malone’s sound, is an executive producer on “Twelve Carat Toothache,” and has a production credit on each track. Mostly, he’s conducting a gloomy mood that’s tactile — “Insane” is ominous, “Cooped Up” is lavishly empty, and the production on “Love/Hate Letter to Alcohol” sounds like Foley artists recreating storm sounds for a disaster film. It’s ignorable but inescapable music that operates at gut level, not ear level — call it “Ambient 2: Music for AirPods.”
The album’s guest roster captures the potency of this approach as well: Mostly, Post Malone seeks out like-voiced performers who blend singing and rapping — Gunna, the Kid Laroi, Doja Cat, Roddy Ricch. He even recruits Fleet Foxes, who more than a decade ago brought a keening shimmer to roots-friendly indie rock, making music that was epiphanic and smudgy, and a little grating. This gathering of performers feels pointed: a seamless bridge between generations of stars in Post Malone’s image, even as the man himself remains blurry.
Strikingly, though, this tactic is even spilling over to more straightforward pop singer-songwriters, who are finding the audience for crispness narrower than it might once have been.
It’s hovering over “I Used to Think I Could Fly,” the astute and piercing debut album from the 18-year-old Canadian Tate McRae. McRae has found some success on TikTok, mostly as a lightly puckish (or even punky) pop singer in the Olivia Rodrigo vein. Her recent hit “She’s All I Wanna Be” is a taut mix of self-laceration and eye-rolling. And some of the finest moments on this album follow a similar pattern, like “What Would You Do?,” with its sock-hop sass, or the exceptional “What’s Your Problem?,” which renders romantic gut punch with curiously ecstatic production.
But more often, McRae’s sharp vocals are coated in layers of production — the melancholy “Hate Myself” is thick with theatrical reverb, and “Go Away” pulses with a muscular throb. There’s the faintest hint of R&B on “I’m So Gone” and “Don’t Come Back.” And the smeared production and vocal effects on “Chaotic” start somewhere near Billie Eilish but then become something more synthetic, touching on the anodyne joy of Christian pop and Post Malone’s aquatic pain. For good measure, Bell produced a track on McRae’s album, “You’re So Cool,” which echoes some of the more optimistic moments on “Twelve Carat Toothache.”
It is a savvy decision, but also something of a hedge — in an era in which styles are all melting into one, it can seem like the way to stand out is to fit in. But maybe not forever.
Tate McRae“I Used to Think I Could Fly”(RCA)

By Joshua BaroneJune 9, 2022
I’m the assistant classical music and dance editor on The Times’s Culture desk.
After years of being a chronic completist, I’m finally learning how to break up with bad books and TV shows.
Here are five things I’m watching and reading instead →
This is basically a gay “Juno,” and I mean that as a compliment. Like Diablo Cody, who wrote that mid-aughts charmer, Jared Frieder finds heart in the story of a teenager learning that he might be H.I.V. positive and having to spend his last summer before college waiting to know for sure.
Part of a trio of Kelly exhibitions now at Matthew Marks’s Chelsea galleries, this show is a delightful glimpse into the playful side of an artist better known for formal austerity. Kelly’s rarely seen postcard collages reflect his sense of space and shape, yes, but also of camp.
What hooked me on this Swiss series was the trope — familiar to many New Yorkers, including me — of reconciling big-city ambition and a small-town background. It’s a beautifully shot, expansive family drama.
I’ve spent the past year and a half learning German through the Goethe-Institut, but language courses aren’t really designed to teach the most current trends in culture and argot.
Goethe’s TikTok account, however, is a gift — small doses of trivia and lessons in, say, transgender and nonbinary vocabulary. It’s helpful for students and tourists alike.
As I write this, I’m preparing for a hike in the mountains near Zakopane, Poland. For homework, a friend recommended this Zygmunt Miloszewski art-world thriller, which is partially set there. It’s breezy, a little naughty and rich with twists that keep you on unsure ground.
Here are some more recent favorites:

The actress, who grew up in the public eye, finally finds the role she’s been looking for.
Credit...Daniel Jack Lyons for The New York Times
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
LOS ANGELES — Christina Ricci knew there were great roles out there for her. She just had to wait until she was older. Not old — just older. Old enough to no longer be judged for how sexy she was (or wasn’t). Old enough that the men in the room didn’t think about her in that way.
This was in the early aughts. Ms. Ricci was in her 20s and already a full-fledged movie star. Just a few years earlier, she had played the rosy-cheeked, towheaded Katrina Van Tassel opposite Johnny Depp in Tim Burton’s adaptation of “Sleepy Hollow.” She had hosted “Saturday Night Live” and appeared on television talk shows and the covers of major magazines. She was ambitious. She wanted to build a lasting career.
But this was also the era of romantic comedies, when actresses like Kate Hudson, Rachel McAdams, Jennifer Aniston and Jennifer Love Hewitt dominated the screen. Could Ms. Ricci try to be a little more like that? You know, feminine. Relatable. Easy to laugh. Friendly. The girl next door. Still sexy, of course, just with a little less edge. None of that dark, goth stuff. It was cute when she was younger, but come on now, it’s time to grow up.
Some of her films around this same time — “I Love Your Work” and “The Gathering,” specifically — had flopped. It was OK to have one or two failures, but in this industry she needed to be careful. Irrelevance lurked just around the corner.
This kind of talk bred insecurity and made her impressionable. Other people’s opinions of what scripts to like and who she should be mattered more than they should have.
So she auditioned this new version of herself. She was likable, fun, normal. But she was told that her look was too specific. Was she really a leading lady, she wondered? Whenever she said “I love you” for the camera, it never felt that convincing anyway.
“When I watch myself and I’m trying to be afraid,” she said, “I always find I’m just a little too blasé about the whole thing.”
Now, at age 42, Ms. Ricci is playing Misty Quigley, a terrifying nurse who owns a pet parrot named Caligula and knows how to disappear a body. She is part of a standout cast in Showtime’s “Yellowjackets,” which premiered last fall and has quickly become one of the network’s most successful series. The show alternates between 1996 and the present, telling the story of a high school girls’ soccer team whose plane, en route to a national tournament, crashes in the Canadian wilderness. The team survives for 19 months before being rescued, and, in that time, possibly practices cannibalism.
One reason she has loved this role is because she doesn’t have to pretend. “With Misty,” Ms. Ricci said with a little smile, “I never had to play any of those annoying emotions.”
Her character is the team’s bespectacled, curly-haired equipment manager, who lacks the charisma of the more popular athletes around her. Ms. Ricci portrays her as a passive-aggressive weirdo, whose syrupy sweet voice is laced with an unnerving amount of hostility. America’s sweetheart she is not.
Ms. Ricci explained this all to me one recent morning as we hiked up to the Griffith Observatory in Los Angeles, where she strode briskly up the dirt path. Her face was obscured by large sunglasses, and like everyone else on the trail, she was dressed in athleisure. When she stopped to pet a friendly dog, its owner pulled out her phone to take a picture.
I asked Ms. Ricci if people recognize her a lot, and she shrugged, as only someone who has been famous her whole life would.
It can be hard to keep up with Ms. Ricci’s body of work. She has never stopped performing, appearing in a film or television series (or two or three) almost every year since she started acting as a child. She’s played a cursed heiress with a pig’s snout for a nose (“Penelope”), a privileged sorority girl who falls in love with a person with disabilities (“Pumpkin”), Zelda Fitzgerald (“Z: The Beginning of Everything”), the writer Elizabeth Wurtzel (“Prozac Nation”), a con artist (“Miranda”), an ax murderer (“The Lizzie Borden Chronicles”), a yellow crayon (“The Hero of Color City”) and a lawyer on “Ally McBeal,” among many others.
By the time she was 10, Ms. Ricci was a celebrity. She made her film debut alongside Cher and Winona Ryder in “Mermaids” (1990). A year later, she played Wednesday Addams in “The Addams Family” (the character is being reprised in an upcoming Netflix series, directed by Tim Burton and starring Jenna Ortega; Ms. Ricci is also part of the cast), in which she made an indelible impression as a cherubic-looking, precocious little girl who had a flair for sadism and spoke with the deadliest of deadpan. Despite her sociopathic tendencies, there was an innocence to Ms. Ricci’s Wednesday that still endeared her to you.
In real life, she was just as intelligent and charming. The media loved her confidence and her lack of interest in performing for grown-ups. By the time she was 15, she had already made eight films, including the mega-hits “Casper” and “Now and Then.”
A few years later, she started appearing in indie and dramatic films: “The Ice Storm,” “Buffalo ’66” and “The Opposite of Sex.” In all these films, she played characters who were less innocent, teenage girls who tested the boundaries of the adults around them and had grown up a little too loose and too fast.
Her body — visible for the world to judge — had changed, too. She now had hips and breasts. At 19, she had breast reduction surgery because she couldn’t stand the way people talked about her body. A few years before that, she had developed an eating disorder. Anxiety became a constant companion in her life. Uncomfortable with the attention, she began to act out with the news media, saying hyperbolic and provocative statements in interviews, including a crack about incest to a reporter who wanted to discuss the brother-sister love affair in Jean Cocteau’s “Les Enfants Terribles” after Ms. Ricci expressed her appreciation for the French novel. This confrontational attitude, she believes, probably cost her roles.
Navigating her career for the next two decades was challenging. It wasn’t that she was unlucky. Incredible opportunities presented themselves. She worked with marquee directors including Wes Craven, John Waters, Lana Wachowski and Woody Allen.
But the pressure got too intense. So she stopped caring what part she did or didn’t get, she said. She began to have no emotional attachment to her work. It was hard to feel any sort of passion. She’s not complaining; after all, it’s the life of an actor to hear “no.” Still, the rejection never hurt any less. To cope, Ms. Ricci used to tell herself none of it — this world, this set, this part — was real. “I used repeat to myself over and over again, ‘You don’t exist,’” she said.
If there is a through-line, a way of making sense of how Ms. Ricci traversed a male-dominated and occasionally unimaginative industry from little girl to adult, Ms. Ricci pointed to her decision to do “Monster” in 2003. The year before, she had read Patty Jenkins’s script and loved it. She had a meeting with Ms. Jenkins and Charlize Theron, who had signed on to play the lead, Aileen Wuornos.
The film told the real-life story of Ms. Wuornos, a sex worker and serial killer in Florida who murdered and robbed several of her johns. Ms. Jenkins and Ms. Theron wanted Ms. Ricci to play Selby Wall, Ms. Wuornos’s girlfriend. They explained they weren’t trying to make some salacious film. Theirs would be grotesque and unflinching. (To become Ms. Wuornos, Ms. Theron gained 30 pounds and wore fake teeth.) Ms. Ricci wanted to say yes. But some of the people in her camp worried it was a mistake. She’d look too ugly. And be too unlikable. There would be no turning back.
She did it anyway. She worried, of course. At the time, there was a set path to being a movie star, and she wanted the guidance of those who knew how to get there. “Monster” deviated from this.
Yet the film was a critical and commercial success. The relationship between Ms. Wall and Ms. Wuornos is so twisted, and what happens is so horrific, it is impossible to look away. When Ms. Theron won the Academy Award for best actress in 2004, she stood in front of millions of viewers and thanked her co-star as her “leading lady,” saying: “You are truly the unsung hero of this film.”
Ms. Jenkins recalled that Ms. Ricci “knew she was playing the role to set up another actress to succeed.” “That’s a very brave thing to do as a young woman,” she said.
Even though Ms. Ricci’s performance received less attention than Ms. Theron’s, she took the experience as a lesson to trust her own instincts. That an industry obsessed with precedent may not always have her best interests at heart. That there was nothing wrong with who she was.
“When people are constantly asking you to change, they can feel it,” Ms. Ricci said. “They can sense the insecurity, and so they never really buy what you’re selling. The more I tried to change and be a different person publicly — I’m sure it just seemed so false and confusing.”
“When I was 20, I was afraid to go to the post office because I didn’t know how it worked,” Ms. Ricci recalled. We were having dinner on the deck of Nobu Malibu, with a view of the ocean. “A roommate took me and I remember thinking, ‘I don’t want there to be things in life that I don’t know how to do because I’m a celebrity.’ I’ve always really tried to live as normally as possible.”
Ms. Ricci was wearing a blue plaid dress with black ankle boots, but she was cold, and had wrapped herself in one of the restaurant’s throws. The place was crowded. A woman called out her name and waved as she walked over to our table. She was a fellow mother from the school Ms. Ricci’s eldest child attends. They made the kind of small talk that only parents are capable of — their intimacy born from a moment in life when you form new friendships with people because of your children.
In 2014, Ms. Ricci gave birth to her first child, Frederick Heerdegen. At the time, she was married to James Heerdegen, a dolly grip and cinematographer she met while filming the television series “Pan Am.” In 2021, People magazine published an article that stated Ms. Ricci had sought and obtained a domestic violence restraining order against Mr. Heerdegen. Mr. Heerdegen denies that he ever physically abused Ms. Ricci. She and Mr. Heerdegen are now divorced.
Last year, she married Mark Hampton, a fashion and celebrity hair stylist, and gave birth to their daughter, Cleopatra Ricci Hampton. Motherhood has changed the actress in profound ways.
“I was pretty nihilistic before I had my son,” she said. “I didn’t know I had the capacity to love somebody so much. When that happens, it opened the floodgates. All of a sudden, I had feelings about everything.”
When I suggested that some of these shifts in her career and her life could also be attributed to leaving a conflict-filled marriage and being happily in love, she didn’t disagree.
“That experience, while I could have lived without it,” she said, “has made me a better actress in many ways.”
In 2017, Ms. Ricci began to do the convention circuit, speaking at popular events like Comic Con. Actors are known to show up to these gatherings when they are in a Marvel franchise, for example. Or if they starred in a cult film from the ’90s, like she had. They’re less glamorous than splashy red carpet events or award ceremonies, but they’re lucrative and an important way to connect with influential fans.
To her surprise, Ms. Ricci found her encounters at these events meaningful. She kept meeting people who had grown up with her, who had loved her before she tried to contort herself into someone she knew she couldn’t ever be. She was able to see herself — her more authentic self — through their eyes. In doing so, she began to see her value as an artist again.
The experience made her want to look for projects that gave her this feeling, she said. That felt true to who she was. Eventually, she decided to change her manager, publicist, and more, keeping only her television agent.
When I asked what roles reflected this transition, she paused and then said: “I’d say Misty, actually.”
Ms. Ricci likes the anger in Misty. She likes how Misty has been dismissed — that she has been pushed to the margins but refuses to go away. That she weaponizes her lack of sex appeal.
“Misty began as a character who wants nothing more than to connect to people and is unable to,” said Bart Nickerson, who wrote “Yellowjackets” with Ashley Lyle, his partner. “What is the most extreme version of that person? How warped and traumatic can that be? To what length will that person go to be seen or understood?”
Melanie Lynskey, one of Ms. Ricci’s “Yellowjackets” co-stars, said: “Christina does a lot of things with Misty that are so weird and so good. She strikes that balance of being someone who — if she were your co-worker or a classmate — would drive you absolutely crazy, but with Christina, you cannot take your eyes off of her. There’s a lot of physical stuff to her performance, like that funny little walk she does. Or that strange little laugh or unnerving eye contact. She isn’t like that in real life.”
Mr. Nickerson said that what is so compelling about Ms. Ricci’s performance is that she can “reach into the darkness of Misty.”
“It’s not that she’s Wednesday Addams,” he said. “That facility was on display then and it’s on display now — they’re two very distinct things that are united by her performance.”
I told Ms. Ricci a theory I have. That “Yellowjackets” owes its success, in part, to the range of women’s stories it tells. That the emotions she and her fellow actresses (who include Ms. Lynskey, Juliette Lewis and Tawny Cypress) portray and the challenges they experience are true to the female experience, and this truth underscores the drama of the series. These women can be fiercely competitive, insecure and violent. They are selfish and deceitful. Some of them are — at their worst — capable of murder.
But they are also kind and loving. They are characters who possess a sense of interiority, whose wants and needs feel real to us. They have agency. And it’s both threatening and thrilling to watch. Male characters exist, but they serve mostly to advance the plot (and a few of them — spoiler alert — end up dead). This is rare — rarer than you think — for television.
Ms. Ricci agreed. “We did talk about the fact that the cast was almost all women, which was fun. And — not to generalize — but there was less ego on set.” Ms. Ricci had been pregnant while filming, and had been exhausted by the long hours, but she had confided in her castmates early on in her pregnancy, which helped build camaraderie.
“The truth is, Christina has always been an artist more than she was a young ingénue,” Ms. Jenkins said. “She had to fight a lot harder to be her authentic self, but the irony is that once she made it to the other side, it sets her apart. The people who are trading only on their looks and appealing qualities when they’re younger don’t have much to go for when they’re older. Christina — because she’s such a complex and interesting person — has a massive reservoir to draw from for the rest of her career.”
Whatever it is that Ms. Ricci possesses as an actress — a deep sense for the transgressive, an ability to make you root for her characters even when they are damaged or awful — is also rare.
Ms. Ricci, who would eventually like to be behind the camera directing, is contemplative. “I was willing to change or do anything to make my career succeed,” she said. “I thought if I could just trick everyone, then once I was powerful enough to make my own work, I’d be OK, but it didn’t work like that. I couldn’t change who I was.”

Colbert said that the Wisconsin senator tried to avoid talking to reporters after Tuesday’s Jan. 6 hearing, “but like most things, he’s not very good at that.”
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. Here are the 50 best movies on Netflix right now.
Tuesday’s Jan. 6 hearings presented evidence suggesting that Senator Ron Johnson sought to hand-deliver fake elector votes from Michigan and his home state of Wisconsin to then-Vice President Mike Pence. Johnson acknowledged receiving the package but claimed he had no idea where it came from or what it contained.
“It could have been anything in that envelope — he doesn’t care. Fake electors, angry bees, naked pictures of Mary Todd Lincoln. It don’t matter to Ron — he’s just a delivery boy,” Stephen Colbert joked on Wednesday.
“You know those announcements in the airport when they say, ‘Do not carry onto the flight a package for someone you don’t know’? I’ve always wondered who those announcements are for. Turns out, it’s Ron Johnson.” — STEPHEN COLBERT
“During yesterday’s hearing on the Capitol attack, committee members showed texts that indicated Republican Senator Ron Johnson wanted to hand-deliver a list of fake electors for then-Vice President Mike Pence to introduce on Jan. 6. You sent that over text? How do you send bribes — Venmo?” — SETH MEYERS
“When this came out, Johnson tried to avoid talking to reporters, but like most things, he’s not very good at that.” — STEPHEN COLBERT
“Everyone knows you put the phone on the same side as the reporter — that’s scam artistry 101.” — SETH MEYERS
“Finally, if you are one of those people who regularly likes to vape, first of all, congratulations on being basic, and second of all, you might want to stock up because your supply is about to run out.” — TREVOR NOAH
“The F.D.A. just announced that they are banning all Juul e-cigarettes in the U.S. Yeah, no more Juul. No more Juul. That will explain tomorrow when you see a bunch of your co-workers sucking on a Glade plug-in.” — JIMMY FALLON
“But this is a big move by the F.D.A., because you realize Juul is the iconic vaping brand. So by them doing this, it is like going after soda by banning Coke, or going after coke by banning Don Jr.” — TREVOR NOAH
“It’s a big deal because if they also ban fedoras, your old college roommate is going to have a nervous breakdown.” — JIMMY FALLON
“It’s a tough day for everyone who loves ingesting chemicals, you know what I’m saying? Can’t even huff gas anymore — it’s too expensive.” — JIMMY FALLON
On “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” the guest host, Sean Hayes, revealed he was an original cast member of the hit Netflix show “Ozark” and shared scenes from the cutting-room floor.
Evan Rachel Wood will appear on Thursday’s “Tonight Show.”
The Indie-pop group Muna is back with a self-titled third album and a new label boss: Phoebe Bridgers.

Small beer companies and independent wrestling leagues find that pairing their offerings attracts big crowds and big fun.
The wrestler Casanova Valentine, who also works at Other Half Brewing, had the idea to incorporate wrestling into the brewery’s themed festivals. Such beer and wrestling partnerships are catching on around the country Credit...Jon Premosch for The New York Times
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
On a broiling Friday night in Brooklyn, beer fans gathered to try cold I.P.A.s from scores of breweries and blow off steam by screaming. In most contexts, raucous shouting is discouraged. But at Other Half Brewing’s Green City Championship beer festival, held this month at ZeroSpace, a sprawling events venue in Gowanus, crushing beer while cutting loose was precisely the point of the event’s entertainment: professional wrestling.
Every 30 minutes during the four-hour festival, which also ran a Saturday edition, an audience holding hazy beers assembled around a wrestling ring to cheer and jeer. Spandex-clad wrestlers with stage names like Manbun Jesus, Rex Lawless and Casanova Valentine performed body slams and leaped off ropes, egging on spectators and occasionally inflicting performative injury with arm twists and traffic barrels.
The percussion of bodies bouncing off the mat steadily boomed through the crowd, drawing hops-fueled roars that grew louder as the evening grew later.
“Being a little bit more lubricated and loose just makes it that much better,” said Mike Bruckenthal, 30, who lives in Brooklyn and works in sales.
Craft beer and wrestling are increasingly performing as a tag team. The energetic Brooklyn event is one of many around the country, and just one way that brewers and wrestlers are joining forces to piggyback on, and amplify, each other’s popularity.
“Wrestling has become part of beer culture,” said Shane O’Neill, an owner of New York Wrestling Connection, which helped put on the evening’s entertainment.
Historically, the two worlds lacked such a close-knit connection. “Growing up watching wrestling, I didn’t see a lot of intoxication at shows,” said longtime wrestling journalist Keith Elliot Greenberg, who wrote for World Wrestling Entertainment’s magazines for 22 years, starting in 1985. “Wrestling was intoxicating on its own. If you went to wrestling and couldn’t get a beer, you still left buzzing.”
Professional wrestling leagues were also reluctant to associate with beer “because they were marketing to children,” added Mr. Greenberg, the author of the forthcoming book “Follow the Buzzards: Pro Wrestling in the Age of Covid-19.” Instead, advertisements featured wrestling personalities like Macho Man Randy Savage snapping into Slim Jim jerky, while Andre the Giant hawked Honeycomb cereal.
Still, some modern wrestlers cultivated fan bases in the late 1990s and early 2000s by treating beer consumption as spectacle and performative subversion. The Sandman James Fullington smashed beer cans across his head, and Stone Cold Steve Austin double-fisted domestic lagers, spilling foam everywhere.
Fans cheered on the beer-spilling performances, but beer companies were less enamored of Mr. Austin’s edgy persona. “We made a pitch to one brand,” Mr. Austin said, but “they wouldn’t touch us with a 10-foot pole.”
Cultural attitudes have evolved, though. Many craft brewery taprooms welcome customers of every age, and wrestlers have transcended the top ropes to become entertainment superstars. They are now joining other celebrities in creating alcoholic beverage brands, like Dwayne Johnson’s Teremana Tequila and Capa Cagna wine from the World Wrestling Entertainment star Leah Van Dale, who goes by the ring name Carmella.
Making a beer seemed almost preordained for Mr. Austin, who retired from wrestling in 2003. While living in Los Angeles, Mr. Austin started exploring craft beers, and a mutual friend introduced him to the president of El Segundo Brewing, Rob Croxall. They hit it off, and teamed up to design the citrusy, appealingly bitter Broken Skull I.P.A. The beer debuted in 2015, and in March El Segundo added Broken Skull American Lager.
“We haven’t been able to keep up with the absolute demand,” Mr. Croxall said.
Like following certain bands or sports teams, embracing a specific beer “can help a wrestler round out their persona,” said Nick Reely, the vice president of marketing for Pabst Brewing Company, makers of Pabst Blue Ribbon lager.
Pabst partners on events with Game Changer Wrestling, a popular promoter that stages wrestling matches, and sponsors the wrestler Matt Cardona’s podcast, “The Major Wrestling Figure.” Mr. Cardona drinks PBR during ring entrances, hits opponents with PBR 12-packs and filmed a PBR commercial with fellow wrestlers. “It’s part of our community and our brand,” he said.
Wrestling promoters are finding success in events at breweries, which often offer ample space — a ring and its surrounding guardrails alone can require 400 square feet — and enthusiastic fans. “We get these crowds that just want to go let loose,” said Nelio Cuomo Costa, the executive director of Coastal Championship Wrestling, which produces the monthly Bash at the Brew matches at Unbranded Brewing in Hialeah, Fla.
Matches can draw some 700 fans, many drinking Triple Chokeslam I.P.A., an Unbranded collaboration, as action unfolds amid brewing tanks and kegs double as props. “We’re embracing being inside a brewery,” said Mr. Costa, who has since added the Saturday Night Slam events at Miami Brewing in Homestead, Fla., and is searching for a third brewery venue.
“Breweries love it because people are going to be drinking heavily,” Mr. Costa said.
Releasing new beers was once enough for breweries to entice customers to get in line for four-packs, but “great beer by itself isn’t enough anymore,” said Chris Rippe, an owner of Bierstadt Lagerhaus in Denver. “There has to be an experience.”
Bierstadt began offering wrestling in 2016, and now hosts monthly Rocky Mountain Pro Wrestling matches in its parking lot. (Winter events occur indoors.) “The loudest nights in Bierstadt are always wrestling nights,” said Mr. Rippe, adding that sales can increase 20 percent over an average Friday night.
For breweries, wrestling can also solve the kid conundrum. Taprooms might welcome children, but what’s an 8-year-old to do while Dad drinks a double I.P.A.?
At Southern Star Brewing in Conroe, Texas, about 40 miles north of Houston, matches from Texas All-Star Wrestling and the all-female Mission Pro Wrestling can draw as many as 300 people, including quite a few families.
Southern Star’s general manager, Keith Amador, said: “Seeing little girls yelling and screaming with their dads or sons with their fathers yelling at the wrestlers is so cool.”
At first, the Brooklyn wrestler Casanova Valentine found it difficult to draw friends to his Long Island performances, so he started wrestling in no-ring-needed “death matches” in New York City bars and clubs. “I brought the wrestling to them,” said Mr. Valentine, who prefers to go by his stage name rather than his birth name, Christian Salvatore Taranto.
Other Half hired Mr. Valentine in 2017 (“I’m a big dude, and they just need a big dude who can lift stuff sometimes,” he said), and he soon saw an opportunity to mix his passion with his workplace. Wouldn’t a beer festival be more exciting with wrestling?
“Beer festivals can be boring if you’re standing in line and getting a beer and then going into the next line,” said Andrew Burman, Other Half’s chief operations officer.
Since the first edition of the Green City festival in 2018, Mr. Valentine has worked with New York Wrestling Connection to program wrestling at Other Half’s festivals, including Pastrytown, its celebration of rich, culinary-inspired beers, such as sour ales and stouts.
“People are ready to have fun,” Mr. Burman said. “You check your reality at the door.”
Wrestlers are also opening breweries. Veteran wrestler Tony Deppen, who performed at the Green City event, started home brewing with friends in 2017, and found eager audiences for the resulting stouts and I.P.A.s. Last July, Mr. Deppen and brothers Tyler and Conlan Budwash opened Pilger Ruh Brewing in Pottsville, Pa. Wrestling fans regularly stop in before attending events.
“It’s a good cross-promotion,” Mr. Deppen said.
Randy and Suzanne Tyson opened DDT, a wrestling-themed bar in Brooklyn’s Park Slope neighborhood, in early 2020 to capitalize on the “revival for wrestling not necessarily being an avenue of entertainment for children,” said Mr. Tyson, a lifelong wrestling fan. “We really wanted to be part of wrestling tourism in New York City.”
European wrestling fans regularly visit, and loyal regulars arrive from Staten Island, the Bronx and Queens to crush Broken Skull I.P.A. and catch marquee matches on TV. “I can’t even advertise anymore because we get that busy,” Mr. Tyson said.
Televised wrestling might be a draw, but it’s tough to top watching live wrestlers perform pile-drivers and rattle rings as onlookers jeer and cheer.
Back at Green City’s final Friday match, Casanova Valentine fended off his challenger in a bruising brawl featuring a trash can, ladder and other construction equipment. Fittingly, he celebrated by climbing onto the ropes and chugging a beer, soaking up the drinking crowd’s full-throated approval.
“It’s like going to the movies, but it’s a real-life performance and you get to drink,” Mr. Cardona said. “What’s better than that?”
Follow New York Times Cooking on Instagram, Facebook, YouTube, TikTok and Pinterest. Get regular updates from New York Times Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.

The police had shut down the event, known as Moechella, a free street festival that they said was unauthorized, after previous disturbances.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
A 15-year-old boy was killed and three adults, including a police officer, were shot when gunfire erupted Sunday night at an unauthorized music event in a Washington, D.C., neighborhood known for its nightlife, the authorities said.
The Metropolitan Police Department had shut down the event, known as Moechella, a free street festival near the city’s culturally storied corner of 14th and U Streets Northwest, after violence earlier in the evening, including a fight among attendees, the police said.
As police and emergency medical workers cleared the area to treat people who were injured while fleeing a disturbance, “several individuals were shot,” Chief Robert J. Contee III of the Metropolitan Police Department said at a news conference late Sunday.
Chief Contee said that the officer who was shot was expected to recover and that the two other adults were in stable condition. He did not say whether a suspect or suspects were in custody. The circumstances of the shooting remained unclear late Sunday, but he said that police officers did not fire their weapons, and he suggested that all four people had been shot with the same gun.
Several other people were injured by having their legs or ankles trampled on as attendees fled the scene, he added.
Chief Contee said he wanted to ensure that people would be held accountable for holding events without a permit.
“This is one of the reasons we don’t want unpermitted events taking place in our city,” he said. “Unfortunately, things like this can happen when you have the wrong mix of people, or people who introduce firearms into a situation.”
The chief expressed frustration at the number of illegal firearms in the area, noting that police officers had discovered several such weapons earlier in the evening.
“Illegal firearms in the hands of people who should not have them make events like this unsafe for people who just want to enjoy the beautiful weather, who want to enjoy Father’s Day, who want to enjoy our city,” he said.
The shooting occurred at a festival The Washington City Paper described as “a free, go-go band-led event full of Black cultural spirit and anti-gentrification passion.” The newspaper said the event’s name blends slang for friend, “moe,” with the name of the music festival Coachella.
An event organizer, Justin Johnson, who is also a rapper and an activist known as Yaddiya, could not immediately be reached for comment.
“We’re doing something for the people that’s inclusive,” he told The City Paper. “I don’t really feel like it’s a Juneteenth event if you’re charging a lot for it.”
The shooting unfolded in the aftermath of a series of high-profile gun killings, including two massacres in May: one at an elementary school in Uvalde, Texas, that left 19 children and two teachers dead; and a racist attack at a Buffalo supermarket in which a white gunman killed 10 Black people.
Earlier this month, a brawl turned a packed Philadelphia street into a scene of terror after two men pulled out guns and began firing wildly at each other. By the time the gunfire ended, three people were dead and 12 more were injured.

“The Capitol Police are much more cautious than they were, say, 18 months ago, and for a very good reason,” Colbert said. “If you don’t know what that reason is, I know what news network you watch.”
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. Here are the 50 best movies on Netflix right now.
Members of “The Late Show” production team were detained while filming near the U.S. Capitol last week. On Monday night’s show, Stephen Colbert explained how his staff was in Washington to shoot Triumph the Insult Comic Dog interviewing members of Congress about the Jan. 6 hearings (“He’s a bipartisan puppy. He’s so neutral, he’s neutered.”), and that they were all detained, processed and released.
“A very unpleasant experience for my staff, a lot of paperwork for the Capitol Police, but a fairly simple story — until the next night, when a couple of ‘the TV people’ started claiming that my puppet squad had ‘committed insurrection at the U.S. Capitol building,’” Colbert said in Monday’s monologue.
“This was first-degree puppetry; this was high jinks with intent to goof; misappropriation of an old ‘Conan’ bit.” — STEPHEN COLBERT
“The Capitol Police are much more cautious than they were, say, 18 months ago, and for a very good reason. If you don’t know what that reason is, I know what news network you watch.” — STEPHEN COLBERT
“Now, it’s predictable why these TV talkers are doing this — they want to talk about something other than the Jan. 6 hearings on the actual seditionist insurrection that led to the deaths of multiple people, and the injury of over 140 police officers. But drawing any equivalence between rioters storming our Capitol to prevent the counting of electoral ballots and a cigar-chomping toy dog is a shameful insult to the memory of everyone who died, and it obscenely trivializes the service and the courage the Capitol Police showed on that terrible day. But who knows? Maybe there was a vast conspiracy to overthrow the government of the United States with a rubber Rottweiler.” — STEPHEN COLBERT
“After all, Thursday night, the night they were detained, was the 50th anniversary of the Watergate break-in. Are we supposed to believe that was a coincidence? Yes.” — STEPHEN COLBERT
“The only thing falling faster is Bitcoin and Joe’s approval ratings.” — STEPHEN COLBERT
“I think we just found the new spokesperson for Life Alert.” — SEAN HAYES, guest hosting “Jimmy Kimmel Live”
“Poor Biden — even his bike was like, ‘I’m sorry, but I can no longer support you.’” — JIMMY FALLON
“If you want to see that clip again, it’s airing on a 24-hour loop on Fox News.” — JIMMY FALLON
“Yeah, it’s — it’s shocking. Not the fall, that Biden looks kind of good in bike shorts.” — JIMMY FALLON
Kristen Bell teased a third “Frozen” film while on Monday’s “Tonight Show.”
Elliot Page, star of “The Umbrella Academy,” will appear on Tuesday’s “Late Night with Seth Meyers.”
“Honestly, Nevermind,” Drake’s seventh album, takes the rapper in a new direction — the dance floor.

With a win for “A Strange Loop” in the best new musical category, Jennifer Hudson, one of the show’s co-producers, joins a select group of people who have won an Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony.
The singer and actress was added as a producer of the Michael R. Jackson show as it transitioned to Broadway. Other celebrities listed as producers include RuPaul Charles, Don Cheadle, Mindy Kaling, Billy Porter and Alan Cumming.
“This brilliant, funny masterpiece exposes the heart and soul of a young artist struggling with his desires, identity and instincts he both loves and hates,” Hudson said on the awards show Sunday while introducing a performance of the musical.
Hudson won an Oscar in 2007 for her role in “Dreamgirls” and two Grammys — one for best R&B album and another for the cast album of “The Color Purple.” An interactive animated short that she was an executive producer on, “Baba Yaga,” won a Daytime Emmy Award.
Hudson, who shot to fame in 2004 as a contestant on “American Idol” and starred in the 2015 Broadway revival of “The Color Purple,” is the latest addition to a short list of EGOTs that includes Rita Moreno, John Legend, Audrey Hepburn and Whoopi Goldberg.

The musical, which opened in 2017, is the third to announce a closing in two days, as many shows struggle in a pandemic-softened marketplace.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
This article is part of our Daily Covid Briefing
“Come From Away,” the inspirational musical about a remote Canadian community that rallied to support thousands of stranded air travelers after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, will end its run on Broadway in October.
The musical, which has been a hit on Broadway and has been successfully staged around the world, is the third show to announce a plan to close in the last two days, as it becomes clear that with New York City still attracting fewer tourists than it did before the pandemic, there are not enough patrons to support all the productions now running.
On Tuesday “Dear Evan Hansen” and “Tina,” two musicals that had been selling strongly before the pandemic, both announced that they would close late this summer.
“Come From Away” will close on Oct. 2. It began performances Feb. 18, 2017, and opened March 12, 2017; at the time of its closing it will have had 25 preview performances and 1,670 regular performances at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater.
The musical continues to tour in North America and Australia and to run in London. A filmed version of the stage production is streaming on Apple TV+.
The show was an unlikely hit — before it arrived in New York, the conventional wisdom was that locals would never embrace a musical about Sept. 11 because the subject was too potentially upsetting. The producers, seeking to build word-of-mouth first, took a roundabout path to Broadway, staging it in San Diego, Seattle, Washington, D.C., and Toronto before coming to New York.
But the show, arriving early in the Trump administration, quickly became a success, seen as a parable about welcoming strangers and building community.
The musical, which won a Tony Award for Christopher Ashley’s direction, is based on true events that took place in Gander, Newfoundland, where 38 commercial planes were diverted. The musical’s writers, a married couple named Irene Sankoff and David Hein, went to Gander a decade after Sept. 11 to interview locals, and created the musical based on those interviews; the show was first staged at Sheridan College in Ontario, where a school dean, Michael Rubinoff, had been trying to persuade someone that the subject would make a good musical.
The show’s original star, Jenn Colella, who portrayed an airline pilot, will rejoin the cast from June 21 to Aug. 7.
“Come From Away” is produced by Junkyard Dog Productions, which is led by Randy Adams, Marleen and Kenny Alhadeff, and Sue Frost, who spotted an early workshop of the show at a festival held by the National Alliance for Musical Theater.
The show’s grosses have dropped significantly since the pandemic shutdown of theaters. Last week it grossed $461,760; during a comparable early June week in 2019 it grossed $897,186.
On Tuesday, “Tina” said it would close Aug. 14, and “Dear Evan Hansen” said it would close Sept. 18.

Viewers can travel from Westeros to Middle-earth and everywhere in between in a season that shows no sign of a slowdown.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
The recent travails of Netflix, and the tech sector in general, have served notice that the abundance of new series that you have gotten used to — and perhaps grown tired of — may not last forever. But if it turns out that this summer represented the beginning of the end, it will have been an impressive going-away party.
The big news is the arrival, within two weeks of each other, of the heavily anticipated prequel series “House of the Dragon” (taking place in the world of “Game of Thrones”) and “Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power.” But outside the universe of blockbuster fantasy-franchise extensions, there’s plenty to look forward to. Some of TV’s best comedies, like “Reservation Dogs” and “What We Do in the Shadows,” return; the creators of “The Americans” and “American Vandal” present new series; and the Albuquerque fun ride “Better Call Saul” reaches its finale.
And just when you thought there were no more acting-legend-comes-to-TV moments to be had, there’s Jeff Bridges starring in a series, “The Old Man,” for the first time. TV continues to be too much of a pretty good thing — here are 27 shows to check out this summer, arranged in chronological order by premiere date. (This list includes spoilers for some shows’ earlier seasons.)
The 19th and 20th of the modern Marvel TV series are the most comedic so far. In “Ms. Marvel,” a real-life fan-girl, the appealing newcomer Iman Vellani, plays Kamala Khan, a Captain Marvel fan and Marvel’s first Muslim superhero. In “She-Hulk,” Tatiana Maslany of “Orphan Black” plays a green-skinned, 6-foot-7 lawyer to the superpowered; Jessica Gao, whose credits include “Robot Chicken” and the “Pickle Rick” episode of “Rick and Morty,” is the head writer. (Disney+, “Ms. Marvel” Wednesday, “She-Hulk” Aug. 17)
Starz welcomes yet another stabby, bodice-shedding costume drama, this time a British historical saga about the ascension of Elizabeth I that begins with the death of her father, Henry VIII. Alicia von Rittberg plays the young Elizabeth and the British TV stalwart Jessica Raine (“Call the Midwife”) plays Henry’s last wife, the oft-married Catherine Parr. (Starz, June 12)
For a long time, Zahn McClarnon has been that guy you remember even though his name was well down the cast list: the cynical tribal cop in “Longmire,” the Comanche chief who mentors the white hero in “The Son,” the sentient robot leading his people to digital heaven in “Westworld.” He’s finally the lead in this adaptation of Tony Hillerman’s mystery novels, playing Joe Leaphorn of the Navajo tribal police. (AMC, June 12)
Jeff Bridges plays an ex-C.I.A. agent in hiding from his dark past who’s flushed out and goes on the run; John Lithgow plays the agency honcho leading the chase. It’s Bridges’s first regular role in a series, and his most extensive TV work since he made guest appearances on “Sea Hunt” with his father, Lloyd Bridges. (FX, June 16)
The “American Vandal” team of Tony Yacenda and Dan Perrault turn their satirical lens on the culture of livestream gaming and the clichés of the sports documentary in a mock-doc series about an e-sports team trying to win its first championship. (Paramount+, June 16)
Jenny Han, whose novel “To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before” inspired a film franchise for Netflix, created this series based on another of her novels. Lola Tung plays a teenager who finds that her relationship with the two brothers she always spends summer vacations with has entered a new phase. (Amazon Prime Video, June 17)
Kevin Iso and Dan Perlman return as the emotionally stunted, barely communicative roommates Kevin and Dan in the second season of this downbeat but elliptically funny comedy, the most small-bore series in the hot genre of gig-economy outer-borough sitcoms. (Showtime, June 19)
The latest of FX’s melancholy slice-of-life comedies stars Jeremy Allen White of “Shameless” (he played the brainy Lip) as a chef who tries to turn the family sandwich shop into a more serious restaurant after he is brought home to Chicago by a family tragedy. It’s also the latest FX show to run instead on the network’s corporate partner Hulu. (Hulu, June 23)
Maya Rudolph plays a tech mogul’s wife who finds out at her birthday party that her husband (Adam Scott) is cheating on her and emerges from divorce with $87 billion. This show about her very comfortably appointed midlife crisis comes from the comedy mavens Matt Hubbard and Alan Yang, who also created the Rudolph series “Forever.” (Apple TV+, June 24)
Netflix plays mix and match, setting a new version of one of its most popular shows, the convoluted Spanish caper “Money Heist” (“La Casa de Papel”), in South Korea, the country that originates many of its non-English-language hits. (Netflix, June 24)
Lena Waithe’s nuanced neighborhood melodrama, following an interlaced group of families, friends and troublemakers on Chicago’s South Side, returns for a fifth season, its third under the showrunner Justin Hillian. (Showtime, June 26)
HBO’s ferociously stylish robot drama brings its fine cast and fuzzy ideas back for a fourth season. Thandiwe Newton, Jeffrey Wright, Aaron Paul and Tessa Thompson return, as does Evan Rachel Wood, even though her character, the unapologetically vengeful Dolores Abernathy, appeared to have been erased in the Season 3 finale. (HBO, June 26)
The first season of this shaggy-dog comic murder mystery, starring Selena Gomez, Steve Martin and Martin Short as an odd trio of true-crime podcasters, hit big with people looking for something soothing during the pandemic. In Season 2, the amateur detectives will investigate the murder of the disagreeable board president of their Upper West Side co-op. (Hulu, June 28)
PBS offers a pair of travel-and-culture series with presenters from outside the travel-host mainstream. The Black writer and comedian Baratunde Thurston visits people living their best outdoor lives in places like Death Valley, Idaho and Appalachia, while the Muslim rapper Mona Haydar and her husband, Sebastian Robins, take a three-episode drive along Route 66. (PBS, July 5)
Dennis Lehane developed this fact-based mini-series about a convict, James Keene (Taron Egerton), who agrees to befriend a suspected serial killer in prison and get him to confess before he is released on appeal. The target is played by Paul Walter Hauser, the star of “Richard Jewell”; Keene’s ex-cop father is played, in one of his last appearances, by Ray Liotta. (Apple TV+, July 8)
The extremely antiheroic saga of the louche lawyer Jimmy McGill (Bob Odenkirk) enters its final six episodes. (AMC, July 11)
Season 3 of FX’s hilarious vampire mockumentary ended with several characters encoffined on a boat bound for London, Dracula-style. But early reports on Season 4 indicate that the vampires, their familiar, Guillermo (Harvey Guillén), and the newly arrived baby Colin will quickly be reunited at their Staten Island mansion for more farcical and oddly touching adventures. (FX, July 12)
Darren Star (“And Just Like That …”) and Jeffrey Richman (“Modern Family”) created this comedy starring Neil Patrick Harris as a New Yorker who finds himself back on the scene after his husband of 17 years walks out on him. (The creators’ older, possibly more relevant credits are “Sex and the City” and “Frasier,” respectively.) (Netflix, July 29)
Sterlin Harjo, working with Taika Waititi, presents a second season of his bittersweet, deeply felt FX comedy about four Indigenous teenagers (Devery Jacobs, D’Pharaoh Woon-A-Tai, Paulina Alexis and Lane Factor) who think they want to leave their small-town Oklahoma lives and carry on a low-key crime wave to finance their escape. (Hulu, Aug. 3)
More Hands, more Sers and presumably more dragons, as HBO unveils its prequel series to “Game of Thrones,” linear TV’s last monster hit. Set 200 years before the original and focusing on House Targaryen, it will greatly increase the incidence of the letter “y” in popular media: King Viserys (Paddy Considine), Princess Rhaenrya (Emma D’Arcy), Lord Corlys Velaryon (Steve Toussaint) and Rhys Ifans (as Ser Otto Hightower, the Hand of the King). (HBO, Aug. 21)
Mother (Aubrey Plaza) and daughter (Lucy DeVito) just want to live normal lives in Delaware, but father, who happens to be Satan (Lucy DeVito’s father, Danny), won’t leave them alone. Dan Harmon (“Rick and Morty”) is an executive producer of this animated comedy. (FXX, Aug. 25)
Joel Fields and Joe Weisberg, the creators of “The Americans,” team up again for an FX mini-series about a killer (Domhnall Gleeson) who kidnaps his therapist (Steve Carell) and demands to be cured. (Hulu, Aug. 30)
Nearly five years after it was announced, the series that is reputedly the most expensive TV show ever made finally comes to the screen. It’s drawn from J.R.R. Tolkien’s appendices to “The Lord of the Rings” and set centuries before the action in that book and “The Hobbit,” but the stories of elves, orcs, humans and hobbits (represented by the ancestral Harfoots) will feel familiar. The challenge: butting up against the memories of Peter Jackson’s “Lord of the Rings” films, a far higher standard, from an artistic standpoint, than “House of the Dragon” has to meet. (Amazon Prime Video, Sept. 2)
The rich get richer, casting-wise, as Andre Braugher and John Slattery join Christine Baranski and Audra McDonald in the sixth and final season of this unabashedly political legal drama. Including the predecessor series, “The Good Wife,” the story will have had a 13-season run; some performers who, like Baranski, date back to the original show, including Carrie Preston and Alan Cumming, will return for this final go-round. (Paramount+, Sept. 8)
Ken Burns takes on a thorny subject in a three-part documentary: America’s response as knowledge of the Holocaust emerged. No screeners yet, but a news release says the series will shed light on “what the U.S. government and American people knew and did — and did not do — as the catastrophe unfolded in Europe.” (PBS, Sept. 18)

The filmmaker behind “Grizzly Man” and “Fitzcarraldo” makes a late-career foray into fiction with his new book, “The Twilight World.” He feels he has finally found his medium.
“None of my characters are extreme nor strange,” Werner Herzog said. “They are dignified human beings, and they take the struggle of life as it’s thrown at them.”Credit...Robbie Lawrence for The New York Times
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
To hear more audio stories from publications like The New York Times, download Audm for iPhone or Android.
Five minutes into our interview, the filmmaker Werner Herzog revealed that he doesn’t like talking about himself, or what drives him.
“My knowledge of myself is limited, and we shouldn’t get too deep into it. I don’t want this to end up like a confessional,” he said via video last month. “I still try to avoid psychological introspection.”
Herzog steers from self-reflection in part by throwing himself into work. He’s made films at an astonishing clip — more than 70 in the past 61 years, by his count.
Now nearly 80, he’s maintaining his prolific streak. During the course of the pandemic, he completed two films and wrote two books, “a memoir of ideas” and, even more surprising, a debut novel titled “The Twilight World,” due out from Penguin Press on June 14.
“The Twilight World” blends elements of memoir, history and fiction to tell the story of Hiroo Onoda, a Japanese intelligence officer who in 1974 emerged from the jungle on an island in the Philippines, wearing a tattered military uniform and carrying a rifle held together with tree bark.
He had been hiding since 1944, refusing to believe that World War II had ended. When Onoda returned to Japan, he became a celebrity, his story of perseverance eventually inspiring feature films, documentaries and his autobiography.
Herzog met Onoda in 1997, when he traveled to Tokyo to direct an opera, and felt an instant kinship.
“It’s very hard to explain,” said Herzog, who compared the feeling to the jolt of recognition he felt when he first saw his wife Lena. “We had an instant rapport, and he understood that I was not a journalist with a catalog of questions, but a poet.”
Ever since, Herzog toyed with the idea of making a movie about Onoda, who died in 2014 at the age of 91. But Herzog felt film was the wrong medium for the story. It would be too hard to capture Onoda’s experience of living in a self-generated time warp, the way minutes would drag and years would flash by, he said. So instead, he wrote a novel about him.
“The Twilight World” is a surprising late-career turn for Herzog, who is known for art-house classics like “Fitzcarraldo” and “Aguirre, the Wrath of God,” and searching, existential documentaries like “Grizzly Man,” “Cave of Forgotten Dreams” and “Into the Inferno.” But Herzog thinks of himself primarily as a writer — he has written poetry and kept journals throughout his career — and has long maintained that his writing, not his films, will be his legacy. With “The Twilight World,” Herzog feels he has finally found his medium.
“It’s odd, but I can explain it easily in a sort of dictum: My films are my voyage, and my writing is home,” he said.
“The Twilight World,” which was translated from German by Michael Hofmann, unfolds over 132 pages. Most of the narrative takes place in the claustrophobic, delirious confines of the jungle, an environment Herzog is intimately familiar with and evokes with eerie precision.
“I function well there,” he said. “It’s a place of fever dreams.”
As he does with his documentaries, which he often narrates, Herzog inserts himself in the story as a guide. The novel begins with his account of meeting Onoda, then jumps back in time to the island, where Onoda was held captive by his own self-delusion. Even when Herzog recedes into the background, adopting the voice of an omniscient narrator, the prose is unmistakably Herzogian: “Onoda’s war is formed from the union of an imaginary nothing and a dream, but Onoda’s war, sired by nothing, is nevertheless overwhelming, an event extorted from eternity.”
“His is just one of the great inimitable voices in any form,” said William Heyward, who acquired the novel and Herzog’s forthcoming memoir, tentatively titled “Every Man for Himself, and God Against All,” for Penguin.
Herzog spoke to me over Zoom last month from Austria. He sounded slightly hoarse but seemed in good spirits, having just finished recording the audio edition of “The Twilight World,” right after narrating the German audiobook for his memoir, which comes out in August. (The English version is currently being translated but does not yet have a publication date.)
He wrote both books during the pandemic. He also recently finished work on two new films — “The Fire Within,” which Herzog described as “a requiem” for two French volcanologists who died 30 years ago in an eruption in Japan, and “Theater of Thought,” a documentary about the enigmatic nature of the brain. “It has a lot about performative life, the fiction of life,” Herzog said. “Even mice sometimes prefer a fictitious reality to the real-life reality.”
In conversation, Herzog radiates intensity. He seems incapable of small talk or explaining his craft, instead delivering a series of observations about the slippery nature of time, the mutability of consciousness and the way people (and mice, apparently) fabricate their own realities.
When asked how he arrived at the structure of his novel, which zigzags from the 1990s to the 1970s to the 1940s and then forward again, he replied with a koan-like commentary on the illusion of chronology: “We settle ourselves into a grand fiction of present time. It is a fiction. Technically present time does not exist. Our sense of present time is technically impossible, because when you lift a foot from the ground, lifting it up is already past, setting it down on the ground is already future.”
Herzog bristled slightly when I asked why he is drawn to stories of zealots who go to extreme lengths to pursue their obsessions — figures like Timothy Treadwell in “Grizzly Man,” whose quest to commune with bears ended with his being mauled to death, and Lope de Aguirre, whose mission to find a lost city of gold was chronicled by Herzog in his 1972 historical drama “Aguirre, the Wrath of God.”
“They are all family. You recognize your siblings,” he said of his subjects. “I think none of my characters are extreme nor strange. They are dignified human beings, and they take the struggle of life as it’s thrown at them.”
Herzog has an affinity for stunts, mayhem and catastrophes. He ate his boot after losing a bet. He ate maggots to coach the actor Christian Bale, who had to eat them for a scene in “Rescue Dawn.” He flung himself onto a cactus patch to cheer up a crew after a series of on-set disasters during the production of his 1970 movie “Even Dwarfs Started Small.” In the winter of 1974, he walked 600 miles from Munich to Paris to visit a dying friend, the German film critic Lotte Eisner, a journey he documented in his book “Of Walking in Ice.” He pulled Joaquin Phoenix out of a car crash in Los Angeles. Days before rescuing Phoenix, he had been shot with an air rifle while giving an interview to the BBC. (He judged the injury to be minor and continued the interview.)
His film productions have been marred by freakish accidents. While making “Fitzcarraldo” in the Peruvian jungle, Herzog insisted on hauling a 320-ton steamship up a mountain, leading to multiple injuries among the crew. The production weathered other setbacks, including two plane crashes, a fire that burned down the set and a crew member who suffered a venomous snakebite and had to amputate his own foot with a chain saw. Herzog himself has suffered for his art, contracting malaria and blood parasites on location.
His eccentricities are so intertwined with his work and public persona that at times, Herzog can seem like a caricature of himself. But some who know him or have studied his work dismiss that image as a distortion.
“The idea of Werner Herzog as a madman is such a clichéd, terrible idea,” said Paul Holdengräber, director of the Onassis Foundation, a cultural center in Los Angeles, who has interviewed Herzog and studies his work. “He’s imaginative, yes. He’s been close to madness, but he couldn’t be more in touch with the world, truly and deeply.”
Born in Munich in 1942, Herzog had a tumultuous childhood, uprooted by war and marked by poverty. His family fled Munich after the city was bombed and settled in a village on the Austrian border, where they lived without running water or mattresses. Herzog didn’t see a film until he was 11, something he used to forge his distinctive style.
“I saw cinema so late in life for the first time, I didn’t know it even existed, so I had to invent it,” he said.
Herzog fell under the spell of American B-movies like “Zorro” and began writing screenplays. He started making his first movie, “Herakles,” when he was just 19. He released his first feature film, “Signs of Life,” in 1968, to immediate acclaim from critics and prize juries, a reputation that was solidified in the 1970s and ’80s as he delivered a string of award-winning films.
For the past two decades, Herzog has lived in Los Angeles, in a bungalow in Laurel Canyon, with Lena, a photographer. Other than reading and cooking for friends, he has few hobbies, and most of his time is consumed by his work (“I’m a working man,” he said more than once).
Herzog has published a handful of nonfiction books, including “Of Walking in Ice” and “Conquest of the Useless,” an account of the calamities that befell the production of “Fitzcarraldo.”
Although he professes to have few literary influences — “My prose is somehow very much homegrown,” he said — he is a wide-ranging and passionate reader. Asked about his favorite authors, he rattled off a list that included J.A. Baker, Hemingway, Conrad, Virgil (“‘Georgics,’ not the ‘Aeneid’”), an anonymous Norse poetry collection and Friedrich Hölderlin, a German poet and philosopher (“Almost untranslatable, because he became insane fairly young”).
Though he started late, fiction came naturally, Herzog said. He began working on “The Twilight World” in the fall of 2020, when he was unable to make movies during the pandemic, and Lena suggested that he occupy himself with writing. He based the story on conversations he had with Onoda, and consulted Onoda’s autobiography to verify details.
“He lived some sort of a fictitious war, it was a figment, a fantasy, it was fever dreams in the jungle, but he solidified the fiction into a real war,” Herzog said. “It became something beyond logic, beyond our logic, but for him it had logic, and that makes him tragic.”
For Herzog, Onoda’s story represents a feat of imagination that is almost as admirable as it is delusional. It’s also, to Herzog, not strange at all.
“I do believe that to a certain degree we all live a certain fiction that we have accepted and articulated and formulated for ourselves,” Herzog said. “We are permanently in some kind of performance.”
Audio produced by Kate Winslett

The authorities said that no arrests had been made and that the shooting appeared to be an isolated event. They were still looking for the attacker, who opened fire during an argument.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
An attacker opened fire on a light rail train in San Francisco on Wednesday morning, killing one person during an argument and injuring a bystander before running out of the train, the authorities said.
The San Francisco Police Department received a call around 10 a.m. about a shooting at the Forest Hill station on the Muni Metro, the city’s public rail system, Officer Kathryn Winters told reporters on Wednesday. When the officers arrived, they found that the train had left the station and was heading toward the Castro station, one stop northeast of the Forest Hill station, Officer Winters said.
“Most of the people from the train exited the train quickly,” Officer Winters said, adding that the police were unsure of how crowded the train or station had been at the time of the shooting.
When the police arrived at the Castro station, they found two victims, Officer Winters said. The San Francisco Fire Department said in a statement on Wednesday that it treated two victims “with penetrating injuries” at the station.
One victim died at the scene, despite receiving emergency care by the police and emergency workers, and another victim was taken to a hospital with injuries that were not life threatening, Officer Winters said. Myrna Melgar, the supervisor for San Francisco’s District 7, said on Twitter that the assailant ran out of the train at the Castro station.
The shooting happened as the train was leaving the Forest Hill station, Ms. Melgar said in a later statement, quoting the police. The assailant and a victim “were in a heated verbal argument,” she said, and witnesses heard three or four gunshots. One person was killed, and a bystander was taken to a hospital with a knee injury.
“This appears to be an isolated incident,” Officer Winters told reporters at the scene, adding that no arrests had been made.
The Police Department said in a statement that the shooting did not appear to have targeted the L.G.B.T.Q. community or have any connection to Pride events taking place in the city this week.
The department did not know whether there was a relationship between the shooter and the victims, Officer Winters said.
The San Francisco Department of Emergency Management told residents to avoid the area because of police activity.
The police were working to retrieve security video recorded at the station, Officer Winters said.
The shooting happened weeks after voters in San Francisco recalled the city’s progressive district attorney, Chesa Boudin, in part over perceptions that crime in the city was on the rise.
The city has been facing persistent property crimes, especially car break-ins and burglaries, but data from the Police Department shows that many other types of crime, including homicides, have been stable or have declined during the pandemic.

On his second album, “Farm to Table,” the indie-rock singer and songwriter finds no easy comforts in his own ascent.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By chance, choice and artistic inclination, Bartees Strange has been a lifelong outlier — a position his songs grapple with, exult in and constantly question on his second studio album, “Farm to Table.”
His father served in the Air Force, often overseas, and Bartees Leon Cox Jr. was born in England and lived in Greenland and Germany, among other places, before his family settled in Mustang, Okla. He sang in church choirs with his mother, who also performed opera, and he started producing music in a homemade studio in his teens. He began releasing songs on SoundCloud a decade ago, and he played in hardcore bands in Washington, D.C. and in the self-described “post-hardcore” Brooklyn band Stay Inside.
Instead of following a Black musician’s stereotyped path into hip-hop or R&B — though he draws on both — Strange, now 33, found his own voice in indie-rock, adopting the churning guitars and destabilizing synthesizers of bands like TV on the Radio, Bloc Party, Radiohead and the Cure. Most of the tracks on his debut EP as Bartees Strange, “Say Goodbye to Pretty Boy,” which was released in March 2020 just as pandemic restrictions began, were moody, volatile, radically reworked versions of songs by the long-running indie-rock band the National.
Forging an indie-rock career is an uncharted, self-conscious path at the best of times, navigating revelation and obfuscation, rawness and craftsmanship, instincts and commercial objectives. “I could give the pain for the bankroll,” Strange sang in “In a Cab,” on his debut album, “Live Forever,” released in October 2020. Anything but tentative, “Live Forever” introduced Strange in all his multiplicity. He constructed hurtling rockers (“Boomer”) and pulsating electronic beats (“Flagey God”); he examined yearning and rage, confessions and inventions. “I lie for a living now/that’s why I can’t really tell you stuff,” he sang in “Mustang,” named after his longtime hometown.
The pandemic delayed an indie-rocker’s usual next step: touring. But by the time concerts resumed, “Live Forever” had been embraced by listeners and fellow musicians. Strange played opening slots for Phoebe Bridgers, Lucy Dacus, Courtney Barnett and the National; he recorded a fervid band performance that was released in 2021 as “Live at Studio 4”; he did remixes and guest appearances with Bridgers, Illuminati Hotties and others.
“Farm to Table” reflects all the conflicting feelings of personal success during dire times. “There’s reasons for heavy hearts/This past year I thought I was broken,” Strange sings in “Heavy Heart,” as the album begins. But the music evolves from lament to gallop, with guitars pealing and piling on as Strange glances through a whirlwind year: travel, loneliness, someone’s death, a romance, growing up: “Some nights I feel just like my dad/Rushing around,” he sings, troubled yet surging ahead.
His past also looms in “Tours,” as Strange picks an acoustic guitar and juxtaposes fragmented childhood memories of military postings and family separations — “Where is Kuwait? Is that in the States?” — with his own life on the road. Not that he’s complaining too much; in “Cosigns,” he flaunts and marvels at his ascending career, name-checking his tour mates, but he also worries over his own rising expectations. The track opens with bleary synthesizers and mock-casual rapping, then gathers echoing guitars and a heftier beat until Strange is belting, “Hungry as ever/there’s never enough!”
The album’s most richly moving song is “Hold the Line,” an elegy for George Floyd that he recorded in October 2020. “What happened to the man with that big ol’ smile/He’s calling to his mother now,” Strange sings with tender desolation, answered by a keening slide guitar; later, he imagines himself in Floyd’s place.
Nothing goes unmixed in Strange’s songs. His productions metamorphose as they unfold, restlessly shifting among idioms; his lyrics refuse easy comforts. In “Mulholland Dr.,” he sets up a skein of guitar patterns like a latter-day Laurel Canyon production, gleaming prettily even as he sings about misgivings and mortality: “I’ve seen how we die/I know how we lose.” And in “Wretched,” he’s desperately missing someone, feeling lost and abandoned, blurting out that “My life feels wrong without you.” But the music carries him, a spiraling crescendo with guitars and synthesizer swells, kicking into a four-on-the-floor beat, pumping toward a final realization: “Sometimes it’s hard, but you know I’m thankful.”

A six-episode adaptation of Tony Hillerman’s tribal-police mysteries finally puts the invaluable actor Zahn McClarnon at the top of the cast list.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
The natural way to lead a review of “Dark Winds,” which premieres Sunday on AMC, would be to note that it is a series written, directed and performed largely by Native Americans; set in the Navajo Nation and filmed on location in New Mexico; and bringing to screen the tribal police officers Joe Leaphorn and Jim Chee from Tony Hillerman’s best-selling mystery novels.
Or you could cut to the chase and just say: Oh thank God, someone finally gave Zahn McClarnon his own television show.
McClarnon, Lakota on his mother’s side, has been one of TV’s most reliable supporting players, improving one show after another in which other people got better billing. He drew notice as the killer Hanzee Dent in “Fargo” and the robot warrior Akecheta in “Westworld,” taking what were to some extent stereotypes of the implacable or noble savage and investing them with real emotion. His best showcase was in the straightforward cowboy-crime drama “Longmire,” in which he gave vivid life to a sardonic, capable, eternally frustrated tribal policeman.
He’s playing a cop again in “Dark Winds” — as he does in a supporting role in another Native American-driven series, the comedy “Reservation Dogs” — but this time he’s at the center of the action. Lt. Joe Leaphorn is in charge of a police station on the Navajo reservation; when a double homicide takes place, the F.B.I. runs the investigation, but all the responsibility and anguish are his. When the lead F.B.I. agent, played by Noah Emmerich, suggests that the murders might get more attention if Leaphorn helped with an off-reservation armored-car robbery, we see the power dynamics from the point of view of the underfunded, understaffed tribal functionary.
This latest cop doesn’t come with the smirk McClarnon wore in “Longmire” or the blissed-out equanimity he affects in “Reservation Dogs,” but Leaphorn is brought to life with the same quiet assurance McClarnon brings to every role. The lieutenant is all business, a classic western lawman with the usual laconic manner and intense loyalties — notably to his wife, Emma (Deanna Allison), and his sergeant Bernadette Manuelito (Jessica Matten) — and a less-typical weariness, deep but lightly carried, of living and working as a second-class citizen.
McClarnon, with his marvelously expressive face and wiry but deliberate physicality, can communicate Leaphorn’s fears and frustrations with few if any words. His looks and movements tell the story when Leaphorn has to bring the bodies of the murder victims back from the city where they were sent to be autopsied because the F.B.I. can’t be bothered. But McClarnon can just as easily bank his intensity and display a relaxed humor, as in a scene in which the Leaphorns invite Joe’s new sergeant, Chee (Kiowa Gordon), to dinner and fuss over him like a prodigal son.
“Dark Winds” is inspired by the third of Hillerman’s tribal police mysteries, “Listening Woman,” and some of that novel’s major plot points — the double murders, the armored car robbery, Leaphorn’s narrow escape from a dangerous siege in a system of caves — have been retained. The show’s creator, Graham Roland (“Fringe,” “Tom Clancy’s Jack Ryan”), has changed a lot, however, primarily by incorporating Chee, who doesn’t appear in the novel.
Having Leaphorn and Chee meet and immediately work together in father-and-rebellious-son fashion — they didn’t collaborate until the seventh novel in the series — is a concession to the ensemble-drama format. It’s easy to accept, though, because Gordon brings sensitivity and some moody smolder (he played a wolf in three “Twilight” films) to the ambitious, conflicted Chee.
The performances of McClarnon, Gordon and Matten shine through a fair amount of stiff dialogue and convoluted, not always convincing plotting; the role of the supernatural, in particular, feels less intriguing than simply unresolved. But “Dark Winds” has a sensibility that draws you in and compensates for the lapses in storytelling. The visual evocation of the Southwestern landscape and reservation life — Chris Eyre (“Smoke Signals”) directed four of the six episodes — is striking, and the show steadily builds a genuine sense of an embattled, deeply intertwined community.
It might seem that there are more call-outs to historical crimes than a short-season murder mystery can handle; in addition to the inescapable themes of economic and judicial inequality, the story ties in the involuntary sterilizations of Indigenous women and the shipping out of children to oppressive white boarding schools. On the other hand, if you’re not sure that you’ll get a second season, it makes sense to hit as many notes as you can while you have the chance.
Not everyone connected to “Dark Winds” is Native American, beginning with Hillerman (who died in 2008) and including the executive producers Robert Redford and George R.R. Martin, who were crucial in getting it made. (Redford also backed an earlier Leaphorn and Chee feature, in 1991, and a 2002 series of TV movies.) But Roland, Eyre, much of the cast and all of the writers are Native, and it makes a palpable difference in the show. With “Dark Winds,” “Reservation Dogs” and “Rutherford Falls,” shows featuring Indigenous communities make up one of current TV’s most distinctive subgenres.

Our critic recommends old and new books.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
The other night I watched “Game 6,” a movie written by Don DeLillo and released in 2006. It features Robert Downey Jr. as a theater critic named Steven Schwimmer who goes to plays with a gun tucked into his pants. Why? Because for Schwimmer, criticism is as high-stakes as any job can get. (This belief is presented as evidence of his delusional nature.)
The character has other quirks, like an apartment without a toilet and a preference for wearing white face paint. It’s not a flawless film, but it features several excellent deadpan comic exchanges, like this one:
Wife: I’ve been speaking to a prominent divorce lawyer.
Wife: He has his own submarine.
Plus, it has the signature DeLillo effect of altering reality’s texture. Below are two books that do the same, albeit with different instruments and outcomes.
In your face and out of your life,*
*Another line from “Game 6”
In 2015 I bought a vintage button on eBay (the kind you pin to your jacket) that said: You’re just jealous because the little voices talk to me. The seller had included a note that read: “THEY TALK TO ME TOO!!!” We logged positive feedback for each other on eBay. All in all, it was among the most satisfying mental-health-related transactions of my life.
Anyone who has combusted into a ball of fire while haggling with an insurance company over matters of the mind will require a minimum of 10 fresh highlighters while reading Andrew Scull’s “Desperate Remedies,” an intensely skeptical history and analysis of psychiatry. The gist of his argument is: Although there have been undeniable advancements, mental illness remains baffling, and no discipline has done a great job of treating symptoms and understanding causes. To get there he journeys through neurology, genetics, anthropology, dentistry, lobotomies, asylums, drug therapies, CBT, ECT, Robert Redford’s 1980 directorial debut, “Ordinary People” … and, as they say, everything in between.
Scull, a professor of sociology, has written the best kind of “feel-bad” book, lashing offenders left and right with his whip of evidence. Whether the vitriol resonates or alienates will depend on your matrix of experiences and beliefs. What a polemic!
Read if you like: Rachel Aviv’s writing, Danielle Carr’s excellent piece on Scientology’s anti-psychiatry museum, Upton SinclairAvailable from: Harvard University Press
How can such a tiny novella contain so many lessons in perception? The vessel is a schoolboy named Carlos, whose father owns a soap factory in Mexico City in the late 1940s. One of Carlos’s friends lives in a slum built out of scrap lumber. Another friend lives in a mansion with a wine cellar; he’s been sent to Carlos’s school so he can get to know the people who will become his servants. Part of the story is about that turbulent span of a child’s life where he figures out his place in a class system: If he’s rich compared to some kids and poor compared to others, that means … what exactly?
The main event is Carlos’s crush on Mariana, the 28-year-old mistress of a high-ranking government official. When he confesses his enchantment, Mariana kindly rebuffs the boy. But somehow Carlos’s family finds out and he is sent to a priest, who asks prurient questions, and then to a psychiatrist, who diagnoses an “inferiority complex.” All of this in about 70 pages of deep submergence in experience and sensation.
Read if you like: François Truffaut’s “The 400 Blows,” the films of Robert Bresson, Roland Barthes, Carlos FuentesAvailable from: New Directions (o en español aquí)
Find out whether Surrealist art can KILL FASCISTS?
Discover why 11 men turned blue after eating TOXIC OATMEAL at the same restaurant in 1944? (This is an article, not a book — though I’d love to commission an entire volume of food poisoning case studies exactly like it.)
Defer to good ol’ Iris Murdoch for a terrific description of BEING DUMPED? (“His sudden decision not to see her anymore was utterly incomprehensible to the girl, it was a death sentence from a hidden authority for an unknown crime.”)
Sign up for Read Like the Wind
Plunge further into books at The New York Times or reviews by Molly Young
See past editions of Read Like the Wind
Friendly reminder: check your local library for books! Many libraries allow you to reserve copies online. Send newsletter feedback to RLTW@nytimes.com

The couple, who star on the popular show “Chrisley Knows Best,” used money from fraudulently obtained loans on luxury cars, designer clothes, real estate and travel, the Department of Justice said.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Todd and Julie Chrisley, the stars of “Chrisley Knows Best,” a reality TV show in which the couple project themselves as real estate moguls who judge PG-rated family squabbles according to strict standards for comportment, were convicted on Tuesday of conspiring to defraud banks out of $30 million and avoiding years of tax bills, the Department of Justice said.
After a three-week trial in Federal District Court in Atlanta, a jury found the Chrisleys guilty on all counts — jointly, eight counts of financial fraud and two counts of tax evasion, with Ms. Chrisley also being convicted of additional counts of wire fraud and obstruction of justice.
Their accountant, Peter Tarantino, was found guilty of filing false corporate tax returns for the Chrisleys’ company.
“When you lie, cheat and steal, justice is blind as to your fame, your fortune, and your position,” Keri Farley, special agent in charge of the F.B.I. in Atlanta, said in a statement.
The Chrisleys could each be sentenced to as much as 30 years in prison. U.S. Judge Eleanor L. Ross of the Northern District of Georgia set sentencing for Oct. 6.
“Disappointed in the verdict,” Bruce Howard Morris, a lawyer for Todd Chrisley, wrote in an email on behalf of the couple. “An appeal is planned.”
Lawyers for Mr. Tarantino did not immediately reply to requests for comment.
Despite the Chrisleys’ self-presentation as self-made businesspeople, their wealth depended in large part on fraud, according to the indictment against the couple.
They obtained loans, for example, by using a bank statement saying they had $4 million at Merrill Lynch when they did not even have an account with the bank, the indictment said. Mr. Chrisley directed his accountant to perform actions he himself suggested would be “crooked,” and Ms. Chrisley repeatedly used glue and tape to falsify documents, according to the indictment.
The couple used money from loans for “luxury cars, designer clothes, real estate, and travel,” the Department of Justice said, even as they also filed bankruptcy and walked away from more than $20 million in loans. They did not pay the Internal Revenue Service in a timely manner for the 2013 through 2016 tax years, the indictment said.
NBC Universal announced last month that “Chrisley Knows Best” had been renewed for a 10th season. The network also said that “Growing Up Chrisley,” a spinoff starring two Chrisley children, Chase and Savannah, had been renewed for a fourth season, and that a new series, “Love Limo,” a dating show hosted by Todd Chrisley, would begin next year.
The release described “Chrisley Knows Best” as USA Network’s “most-watched current original series,” with an average of 1.8 million total viewers.
A spokesman for NBC Universal declined to comment on the verdict or on the company’s plans regarding any of the shows. The second half of Season 9 of “Chrisley Knows Best” is still scheduled to air starting June 23.
Following a proven American formula, the show depicts a family with traditional values and a down-home style of self-expression who just happen to be fantastically rich.
In the show’s trailer, Mr. Chrisley describes himself and his wife as people from a “small rural town” who now live in a “gated neighborhood” outside Atlanta alongside “celebrities.” Their “main home” is 30,000 square feet, they spend at least $300,000 per year on clothes and Mr. Chrisley earns “millions of dollars a year” — but the Chrisleys still face the same issues as families making $40,000, he says.
Mr. Chrisley plays the controlling and fastidious patriarch, the sort of father who responds to his son’s misbehavior by throwing his laptop into the pool. His wife’s role is to comment sarcastically yet forgivingly about her husband’s foibles.
The Chrisleys join a growing roster of reality TV stars who have gotten into legal trouble.
In 2018, Michael (The Situation) Sorrentino, an actor in MTV’s “Jersey Shore,” was sentenced to eight months in prison for violating federal tax laws, and in 2014, Joe and Teresa Giudice, two stars of “The Real Housewives of New Jersey,” were sentenced to prison after pleading guilty to bankruptcy fraud, among other charges.

The group lost its lead singer just as it was gaining widespread acclaim. Its members have come up with an unusual solution.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
MANCHESTER, England — Last month, the six members of Black Country, New Road were joking around in a cramped rehearsal room about to try something new: everyone singing lead vocals.
First, Tyler Hyde, the group’s bassist, sat forward and sang — her voice jumping between a smooth pop cry and a raucous shout. Next May Kershaw, usually on piano, took over, her voice gentle and brittle like a folk singer’s. Then Lewis Evans, the saxophonist, crooned two songs.
“Dope as hell,” Charlie Wayne, the band’s drummer, said as Evans finished. Evans didn’t seem too sure. “I was a bit too slow!” he said, sounding frustrated.
Just six months ago, Black Country, New Road, one of Britain’s rising rock acts, was a very different proposition. Back then, lead vocals were the domain of just one frontman: Isaac Wood, an intense and sometimes anxious-sounding singer, whose lovelorn lyrics helped Black Country, New Road win fan and critical devotion. The group’s debut album, “For the First Time,” was nominated last year for a Mercury Prize, Britain’s most important music award. Its second, “Ants From Up There,” was named a New York Times Critic’s Pick.
But just before New Year’s Eve, Wood sent his bandmates a Facebook message. He couldn’t be in the public eye anymore, he said. The stress of pouring his heart out onstage was too much. He was leaving.
Wayne said that when that message arrived, the band’s first thought was “the safety of our friend.” But once that was assured — Wood is in a much better place now, Evans said, happily working in a cake shop — the remaining members had to decide what to do next.
Several of the bandmates gathered to discuss that moment in a sunny yard after the rehearsal last month. Splitting up was never an option, Kershaw said, since “playing together is so important to us.”
The bandmates seemed to disagree on how hard restarting had been, though. When Evans said that beginning again after Wood’s departure “didn’t feel like a big deal,” Hyde and Kershaw gave each other confused looks, and laughed nervously. But his departure did make everyone appreciate more fully just how much pressure a band’s lead singer can be under. So they found a solution: share the load.
At Wood’s urging, they kept the band name but decided to stop playing the tracks he had sung (Wood did not respond to requests for comment for this story). This meant that, before the rehearsal, the musicians had spent five intense, fun, but occasionally stressful, months writing nine songs to fulfill European festival dates this summer. Without the income from those appearances, Evans said, they would have had to get jobs, so they would have hardly been able to play together at all.
The growing financial and emotional pressures on musicians have long been the focus of media attention in Britain. In 2017, Help Musicians, a nonprofit, set up a 24-hour help line to offer support for those with mental health issues or financial anxieties. Such worries only grew when the pandemic shut live venues, while the cost of living crisis has caused further concerns.
Wood’s departure illustrated those pressures, said John Doran, a music journalist who has long championed Black Country, New Road. Being in a successful indie band could once lead to a good lifestyle. Now, Doran said in a telephone interview, acts exhaust themselves “to maybe one day have a mortgage and not need a side job.” It’s “no wonder musicians are under so much stress,” Doran added. “I do not envy them that at all.”
This is, in fact, the second time the members of Black Country, New Road — all still in their early 20s — have had to restart.
Four years ago, almost all of them were playing in another act, called Nervous Conditions, which was on the verge of breaking through in Britain’s competitive indie music scene. With only a couple of tracks online, taste-making websites declared the group one of the country’s “most exciting propositions,” and representatives from record labels flocked to its shows. But then its frontman, Connor Browne, facing anonymous accusations of sexual assault, issued a statement apologizing for the hurt caused, and the group disbanded.
Hyde said that the bandmates had learned lessons from that moment. After the split, “the whole ethos became, ‘We’re doing this for us and because we want to,’” she said. Since then, the band has rewritten songs and changed lyrics whenever they’ve become bored of them, she added.
When asked how they managed to keep reinventing themselves, the musicians said that having so many band members with different interests helped. But for the group’s fans, other factors were more important. Geordie Greep of black midi, a London-based band that is touring the United States with Black Country, New Road in September, said in a telephone interview that the group’s members were virtuosic musicians. That gave them the ingenuity to keep changing their style, he said.
The members of Black Country, New Road — most of whom have known each other since they were in high school — also clearly had a strong communal bond, Greep added. “These guys genuinely go out of their way to just hang out as friends,” he said, sounding a little bemused. Most bands, including his own, don’t do that, he noted.
Even for such a close group of musicians, the process of stepping up to lead vocals has not always been easy. Evans said that he “got shakes” the first time he sang a track he’d written to his bandmates. Kershaw said that she had found it “nerve-racking,” and told everyone “not to worry” if they thought her tracks weren’t “the right vibe.” She squirmed on her seat as she recalled the memory.
But with shows looming, the band members had to overcome their nerves again to sing in front of paying audiences. A few days later, the band walked onstage at the Pink Room, a music venue in Manchester, northern England, filled with 250 people (the group canceled a sold-out 1,800-capacity show in the city shortly after Wood left).
If Evans was still nervous, he did not need to be. As soon as he started playing a jaunty saxophone melody to open the track “Up Song,” he was greeted by whoops from the audience. When the band got to the raucous chorus, the crowd started jumping up and down and chanting along, as if they’d heard the song hundreds of times. “Look at what we did together,” the band sang in unison, “BC, NR/Friends forever.”
A few tracks later, even the bar staff fell silent as Kershaw sang “Turbines/Pigs,” an eight-minute song in which she plays a gentle piano melody while singing, “Don’t waste your pearls on me/I’m only a pig.”
After 45 minutes, the band walked offstage with a few polite waves goodbye. Some fans shouted for more, until they realized that Black Country, New Road couldn’t come back for an encore even if they wanted to. The new incarnation had played all the songs it had.

His daughter’s experience wearing a bikini on a beach in 1960 inspired him to write a novelty song that became a No. 1 hit.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Paul Vance, who described the uncertain path of a girl in a risqué two-piece bathing suit as she advanced from a locker to the shore in the novelty hit song “Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow Polka Dot Bikini,” died on May 30 in West Palm Beach, Fla. He was 92.
His daughter Paula Vance confirmed the death, at a nursing facility.
It was Paula, who at 2 years old, inspired the song. On a family trip to the beach in 1960, she wore one of the itsy bitsy teenie weenie yellow polka dot bikinis that her Aunt Lena had made for her and two of her cousins. But her shyness made her retreat, at first, because of the reaction of two boys who exclaimed that she was wearing no clothes.
When she re-emerged, she wrapped herself in a blanket before venturing into the water. While in the water, the bottom of her bikini fell off. Heading home, the lyrics to “Itsy Bitsy” started coming to Mr. Vance. He called Lee Pockriss, his songwriting partner on a number of hits.
“I sang the lyric on the phone and by the time he got to my office a couple of hours later, he had 90 percent of the tune written,” Mr. Vance was quoted as saying in the obituary for Mr. Pockriss in The Los Angeles Times in 2011.
The song was soon recorded by Brian Hyland, a 16-year-old heartthrob from Queens, and it spent 15 weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, including one week at No. 1. Before introducing Mr. Hyland on his Saturday night prime-time TV show — where a little girl would re-enact Paula Vance’s experience on a set with a bath house and mock waves — the host Dick Clark called “Itsy Bitsy” the “hottest or coolest record in the country, the biggest thing around.”
“Itsy Bitsy” endured longer than its time on the charts, though. It has been covered dozens of times by artists as diverse as Connie Francis, Kermit and Miss Piggy, and Devo and used in commercials for products like Yoplait Light and Special K cereal.
Joseph Philip Florio was born on Nov. 4, 1929, in Brooklyn to Philip and Concetta Florio. His father delivered ice in a horse-drawn wagon. His mother was a homemaker.
He began writing lyrics when he was 13 but had no clear path to being a composer. He described himself to The Palm Beach Post in 2015 as a “dese, dose and dem” guy who avoided falling in with the Mafia. Instead, he served in the Army at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., then opened a junkyard and auto salvage business. He was already in his mid-20s when he met Mr. Pockriss, a composer who had done graduate work with Aaron Copland.
“It’s an ideal professional combination,” Mr. Pockriss told The Associated Press in 1960, adding: “He understands the public. I understand the profession.”
Their 1957 song “Catch a Falling Star” was a hit for Perry Como in 1957 and the first record certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America.
The success of “Catch a Falling Star” let Mr. Vance focus on songwriting, and he changed his name to sound less ethnic. With various collaborators, including Mr. Pockriss, he wrote songs originally recorded by Johnny Mathis, Paul Anka, Tommy James and the Shondells, and Patti Page.
Mr. Vance cajoled Clint Holmes into recording his and Mr. Pockriss’s song “Playground in My Mind” by following him into a men’s room to make his pitch, at a venue in the Bahamas, where Mr. Holmes was performing. Speaking to The Palm Beach Post, Mr. Holmes said of Mr. Vance, “His enthusiasm struck me more than the song.” The song, though, became Mr. Holmes’s only top 10 hit.
While still writing songs, Mr. Vance owned and bred horses for harness racing.
In addition to his daughter Paula, he is survived by another daughter, Connie Vance Cohen; a son, Joseph; a sister, Joanne Florio, a singer; nine grandchildren; and 11 great-grandchildren. His wife, Margaret (Curte) Vance, died in 2012. His son Philip died in 2009.
Mr. Vance was erroneously reported to have died in 2006 when the wife of a man named Paul Van Valkenburgh, who had indeed died, asserted that her husband had written “Itsy Bitsy” under the name Paul Vance. The obituary, by The Associated Press, was picked up by many news outlets, including The New York Times. (Corrections ensued, and The Times published a corrective article.)
But the false report shook up Mr. Vance’s family and friends. His music publisher confirmed that Mr. Vance, not the deceased man, was the songwriter and that he was still collecting royalties.
But as Mr. Vance told The Orlando Sentinel in 2006, some people still called thinking he was dead, and he would inform them: “This is Heaven. Who do you wish to speak to? Paul Vance? Oh, yeah, he just got up here.”

With panels, performances and parties around New York City, June can be an opportunity to reflect and to appreciate community.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
For many New Yorkers, June — Pride Month and home to Juneteenth — can be a time for reflection and reconnection. The month is a time to both celebrate and meditate on queer and Black culture through a variety of events.
Juneteenth, observed on June 19, marks the day in 1865 when news of the Emancipation Proclamation finally reached enslaved African Americans in Galveston, Texas — nearly two and a half years after Abraham Lincoln abolished slavery.
In 2020, as protests swept the nation after the killings of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbery, Juneteenth became a holiday in New York State; it became a federal holiday last June. But for years, people have been finding ways to commemorate and honor the importance of the day.
“It’s more than celebrating the holiday,” the author, chef and artist Lazarus Lynch told Gina Cherelus, a Styles reporter for The Times, in 2020. “It’s celebrating life and the existence of life.”
June is also Pride Month, commemorating the Stonewall uprising, which began around 1 a.m. on June 28, 1969, and continued for six days. It has a special resonance in New York, where it all started. “All the Prides we have in the world, it started here,” Frits Huffnagel, the chairman of Amsterdam Pride, told Michael Gold, a Times reporter, in 2019. “We are all standing on the shoulders of the people that were here.” Both holidays can be fraught for those who lament their commodification. For others, they are a time to honor achievements and publicly come together in ways that would have been unthinkable during eras past.
This summer, in New York City, there are many ways for people to celebrate or contemplate the meaning of Juneteenth. Earlier in the week, there will be events around the city, including a screening of the Oscar-winning documentary “Summer of Soul” at Marcus Garvey Park in Harlem on June 17.
On the actual day, there will be a Juneteenth Unityfest concert in Prospect Park; Lincoln Center’s Juneteenth Celebration featuring live music and a silent disco; a Juneteenth program at Tribeca Film; comedians, storytellers and performers at the fourth Annual Juneteenth Jubilee at The Bell House in Gowanus; and artist performances in Central Park exploring the history of the pre-New York City African American community of Seneca Village.
There will be the Brooklyn Pride Parade on June 11 and the New York City Pride March on June 26. There will also be the annual New York City Dyke March — which is pointedly a protest, rather than a parade — on June 25, and a Queer Liberation March hosted by the Reclaim Pride Coalition on June 26.
For those who like to dance, Bubble_T, the queer Asian dance party, is hosting a fifth anniversary celebration at the music venue and arts space Elsewhere on June 10; Hot Rabbit, a group that organizes L.G.B.T.Q. events, is taking over Lot 45 with Dave’s Lesbian Bar on June 11; and Papi Juice, the art collective for queer and trans people of color, is throwing a celebration at the Brooklyn Museum on June 11.
Lincoln Center has an assortment of Pride events planned as part of its Summer for the City series, including a tribute to Paradise Garage on June 22 and a ball on June 24. On June 23, Elsewhere is hosting the queer hyperpop party SKSKSKS, and throughout the weekend of June 26, Hot Rabbit is throwing events around the city. Pride Island, which is bringing Lil’ Kim, Kim Petras and other musicians out to Governors Island, is on June 25 and 26.
There are also queer teen nights at the Whitney Museum of American Art and the Brooklyn Museum; queer art chats at the Museum of Modern Art; and queer films being shown at theaters like Nitehawk Cinema, which is screening a “Be Gay, Do Crime” series, and Metrograph, which is showing movies featuring “The Dyke Bar in Cinema.”
Celebrating both Juneteenth and Pride Month can come in many forms — including visiting Black- and/or queer-owned restaurants and bars. Here are a few to consider for your next meal or drink.
A great place to celebrate Juneteenth is Charles Country Pan Fry Chicken, the longtime soul food restaurant run by its chef and owner, Charles Gabriel. It has recently reopened on the Upper West Side and is still serving some of the city’s best fried chicken.
At Cheryl’s Global Soul, a longstanding soul food restaurant in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, the chef Cheryl Smith showcases the ways soul food can evolve and mesh with flavors from communities in proximity to it. Don’t miss the tamarind or jerk wings.
Although not Black-owned, Cadence is serving some of the city’s best vegan soul food from the chef Shenarri Freeman, a Virginia native and vegan. (Think collard green wraps with succotash, chickpea miso broth and amaranth.)
And don’t limit yourself to restaurants: A visit the Museum of Food and Drink to see its latest exhibit, “African/American: Making the Nation’s Table,” on view until June 19, would also be a great way to celebrate — and to understand Black contributions to America’s food culture.
For Pride Month, consider queer-owned restaurants like Superfine in Dumbo, Brooklyn, an art gallery, music venue and restaurant that supports L.G.B.T.Q. causes in a casual atmosphere. It’s a perfect spot for brunch, followed by a walk to the East River to see the Manhattan skyline.
Technically a coffee shop, Kopitiam on the Lower East Side is also a casual Malaysian cafe with a menu of small plates and entrees meant for sharing. Perpetually busy and beloved, it’s a perfect place to spend an afternoon or have a late lunch.
Van Da, owned by the chef Yen Ngo, is a modern Vietnamese restaurant highlighting regional Vietnamese cooking. Don’t miss the savory and pleasantly sticky pork and shrimp tapioca dumplings.
Korsha Wilson and Patrick Hays contributed reporting.

In a new short film, Warsaw residents express their deepest worries and anxieties.
In a new short film, Warsaw residents express their deepest worries and anxieties.
In a new short film, Warsaw residents express their deepest worries and anxieties.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Mr. Zmuda is a documentary filmmaker.
When I started working on the short documentary above a couple of years ago, I saw the world as a relatively calm and stable place. The fears expressed by the people I interviewed were largely private, individual concerns. We had no idea of the global pandemic lying in wait for us.
Then our world changed completely. The pandemic transformed our everyday lives and caused millions of deaths. Russia invaded Ukraine, just over the border from my home country, Poland, where this documentary was filmed. The world seems ever more unstable and threatening.
In light of all that, some of the fears expressed in the film feel to me like dispatches from a simpler time, while others seem eerily prescient. Did people somehow sense that the world was teetering on a precipice?
My hope is that the vulnerability and honesty displayed here reach across time and borders. When you look at these people and listen to their worries, do you see your own fears reflected?
Bartlomiej Zmuda is a filmmaker based in Poland.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Op-Docs is a forum for short, opinionated documentaries by independent filmmakers. Learn more about Op-Docs and how to submit to the series. Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

Ukraine’s casualties in the war against Russia are a closely guarded secret. But those who have been in the trenches along the front line know how relentless the fight has become.
Open graves at a military cemetery outside the city of Dnipro in eastern Ukraine.Credit...
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
DNIPRO, Ukraine — Nearly 600 graves stretch to the edges of the military cemetery outside the city of Dnipro, marked by ranks of yellow and blue Ukrainian flags snapping in the wind.
The graves represent just a small percentage of the thousands of Ukrainian soldiers who have died in eight years of war since Russia first began to annex parts of their country in 2014, but the rapid expansion of this graveyard in eastern Ukraine is telling.
Almost half the graves are fresh. Draped in wreaths of artificial flowers or marked with a wooden cross stuck in the bare mud, they belong to soldiers killed in the last three months, since Russia began its large-scale invasion of Ukraine.
“There would not be anything here at all, if they had not come,” Viktoria Martynova said of the Russians. “We did not attack anyone. We were living in our own country, in our homes, on our own land.”
Her husband, Oleksiy Martynov, an electrician, lay in one of the new graves. He enlisted on the first day of the war and was killed in a mine explosion near the Russian border in April, barely six weeks later.
The number of Ukrainian casualties remains a closely guarded secret. The media-conscious government of President Volodymyr Zelensky has carefully controlled the flow of information in an apparent attempt to keep public morale high. Hospitals and military officials are forbidden from disclosing casualty numbers. Reporters are generally not permitted to visit the front line in Ukraine and photographs and videos showing wounded and dead soldiers are rare.
Yet with Russian artillery pounding its forces in the east, Ukraine is seeing casualties mount at such a rate that last week Mr. Zelensky said the army was losing 60 to 100 soldiers a day, and for the first time visited troops on the front lines.
For the men at the front, the strain is visible: in the dead-tired eyes of a police chief after another day leading his men in a bombarded city; in the blank stare of a commander who had just lost one of his best soldiers; and in the tense look of a group of soldiers heading for the first time to ground zero, as they call the frontline trenches.
Those soldiers are facing perhaps the most grueling weeks and months of the war as they try to stem, and survive, the Russian onslaught.
The nature of the fight has changed for the Ukrainians from up-close urban fighting and hit-and-run attacks on Russian armored columns around Kyiv, at which they excelled, to long-distance artillery battles and airstrikes on the eastern front, where Russia’s superior firepower gives it the upper hand.
Soldiers who served in the trenches last week near the village of Dovhenke near the contested region of Donetsk described hiking to positions and digging in as tank shells, mortars and cluster bombs landed around them.
“We were digging in on our knees and in the mud because it was raining,” said Samara, 48, the deputy leader of a unit who has completed five rotations on the front line. Like most soldiers he asked to be identified by his code name for security reasons.
“The last 48 hours we did not have moment of silence,” he said.
A tank blasted at their positions for five hours, then Russian infantry began an assault on foot, he said. Ukrainian snipers stalled the infantry advance and soldiers managed to lay a mine in the tank’s path, but the men in the trenches could do little but wait it out, he said.
“When a tank is firing you have to hide,” he said. “It’s a difficult situation.” His tin cup was punctured with several shrapnel holes. “I left it outside the trench,” he said, laughing. “I did not lift my head to see how it happened.”
No one sleeps during the 72-hour stint at “zero,” he said. The army had tried different lengths of rotations and determined that three days was the limit men should do before swapping out, he said.
Several soldiers said one of the hardest parts was digging in.
“We only had one spade and it was not very good,” said a 19-year-old soldier who uses the code name Air. At first things were quiet, so the men sat around joking and smoking as if on a camping excursion, he said.
They had dug a shallow trench, enough to lie in, but when the shelling started it proved barely enough. “The only thing you think about is why we dug so little,” he said. “We did not panic but my heart was beating so fast.”
Mortars and cluster bombs landed as close as 10 or 15 meters away, he said. “When you lift your head, you understand you are in a fog and you smell the gunpowder.”
One soldier, Vadym Melnyk, 40, who holds a doctorate in economics and teaches at Kyiv University, said he was disappointed not to see any evidence of Western-supplied weapons during his first rotation at the front last week.
“Unfortunately I didn’t see any,” he said after his return. “And that place now is one of the most difficult on the front.”
Tasked with holding positions against a Russian attack, the unit was armed only with Soviet-made assault rifles and anti-tank weapons, he said. They did not even have American-made Javelin missiles, which have been sent in large numbers to Ukraine, he said.
The Russians, he said, had much greater firepower, including multiple rocket launcher systems, tanks and big caliber guns. “They used everything they had,” he said. “They were firing at us without any problems.”
He said he was troubled that for two days their unit was under fire from the same Russian mortar position but Ukrainian artillery forces did not seem to do anything to knock it out.
Planes dropped cluster bombs overhead but luckily for the unit the canister opened at some distance away and the bomblets did not reach their positions, Mr. Melnyk said. He also said he saw white phosphorus dropped in the woods near their positions. It looked like a firework salute, he said, adding that a soldier in a friend’s unit had lost his sight from horrific burns.
The fighting at Dovhenke, which lies south of the town of Izium, has been particularly intense in recent weeks as Russian forces punched their way south in a move to seize the last part of the Luhansk region. Russian forces captured the village at the end of May and have continued pushing toward the town of Sloviansk.
Airstrikes remain persistently devastating, and Ukraine seems to have little defense against them, commanders and soldiers said. One soldier said his regiment lost 28 men in one night of bombardment by Russian jets last week.
Yet those who survive a close call said it inspired a greater determination. No one was ready to quit in his unit, Mr. Melnyk said.
“Everyone stayed until the end of the rotation,” he said. The group included 19- and 20-year-olds, and men in their 50s, including a former convict and men with doctorates. “It’s such a crazy mix but everyone feels the same — we must be there, we must fight and we must win.”
He was aware of the mounting casualties, he said, but the Russians lost men, too.
“If you want to win you should fight,” he said. “We don’t have another way.”

A Russian court said the trial for the U.S. basketball star Brittney Griner will begin on Friday and she will remain in custody until it ends, her lawyer, Aleksandr Boikov, said on Monday.
Ms. Griner appeared in the Khimki city court near Moscow for a preliminary hearing. She did not speak following her court appearance, according to a video from outside the courtroom that was posted by the official state news agency TASS.
The W.N.B.A. star, who had played for a Russian team during the off-season, was detained in a Moscow airport on Feb. 17, ensnaring a U.S. citizen’s fate in the confrontation between Russia and the West over Ukraine.
Russian officials said they had found vape cartridges bearing traces of hash oil in Ms. Griner’s luggage when she passed through a security checkpoint. The drug charges levied against her carry a sentence of up to 10 years in a penal colony.
Mr. Boikov said that he expected the trial to take up to two months, depending on the court’s workload. He also said Ms. Griner was well and has no complaints about her treatment in the pretrial detention center.
“It is hot in Moscow, so she feels that too, especially while being transported to the court,” Mr. Boikov said in a phone interview.
Ms. Griner, a seven-time W.N.B.A. All-Star center for the Phoenix Mercury and a key figure in two champion Olympic teams, was detained a week before the invasion of Ukraine, but Russian officials did not reveal her arrest until after the war begun.
Word of her arrest came when Russia-U.S. relations were hitting one low point after another, and her detention raised fears that she could become a bargaining chip, perhaps to be exchanged for high-profile Russians in U.S. custody. In recent years, U.S. officials have accused Russia of detaining and sentencing American citizens on trumped-up charges.
Last week, dozens of organizations representing people of color, women and L.G.B.T.Q. voters called on President Biden to strike a deal for her release.
Dmitri S. Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesman, said in an interview with MSNBC this month that Ms. Griner was not being held hostage and was being held accountable for violating Russian law.

In this new HBO series by Olivier Assayas, a continuation of his self-referential cult film from 1996, past and present are inextricably intertwined.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Most shows fall within recognizable categories: original stories, spinoffs, docudramas or, increasingly, reboots and revivals.
Then there is “Irma Vep.” Olivier Assayas’s new HBO series, starring Alicia Vikander, is more like a braid in which the past and the present are inextricably intertwined. Its origins go back more than a century, though it will be more helpful to start our story in 1996, when a film bearing the same title came out.
Back then, Assayas was a former critic turned filmmaker with a handful of intimate art-house dramas under his belt. “Irma Vep” brought him international acclaim.
Not because it was a commercial hit, mind you. The movie “didn’t make exactly a splash at the box office,” the French writer-director said in a video conversation from his office in Paris last month. “It didn’t do that great.”
What “Irma Vep” had in spades, however, was cool.
This was thanks partly to its meta subject matter. The real-life Hong Kong action star Maggie Cheung — to whom Assayas was later married for a few years — played a version of herself shooting a remake of “Les Vampires” (1915-16), a French silent film serial, by Louis Feuillade, about a disguise-loving criminal named Irma Vep.
And then there was Assayas’s fingers-in-socket style, which generated such memorable scenes as Cheung anxiously fidgeting in a black latex catsuit as Sonic Youth rained electricity on the soundtrack.
“I think it’s a movie that a lot of people hold dear, especially because it’s about cinema,” Ravi Nandan, the head of TV at A24, the production company behind the series, said on the phone from Los Angeles. “So people inside of filmmaking, both Hollywood and independent cinema, have all seen it and loved it.”
“It’s sort of like a touchstone in that Truffaut, ‘Day for Night’ sort of way,” he added.
The series, which premieres Monday on HBO, is not a sequel sliced up into eight episodes; Assayas goes for a literary analogy when trying to explain the project’s nature. “Turning ‘Irma Vep’ into the new ‘Irma Vep’ is like moving from poetry to novel — and to a thick novel,” he said. (While the show works on its own, the matryoshka doll structure is more rewarding if you have seen the movie, which is currently streaming on HBO Max and the Criterion Channel.)
That this was not a rehash was among the reasons Vikander signed on. “He was like, ‘No, no, it’s just a continuation of it — I’m not finished with it yet, that’s why I’m interested in doing it,’ ” she said in a video chat from London, recalling Assayas’s pitch. “I could see that he had that small fire within him.”
Another reason was their friendship: The pair met when he thought he had to recast his 2016 film “Personal Shopper” because its intended lead, Kristen Stewart, had a scheduling conflict. In the end, Stewart was able to free herself and make that movie, but Assayas and Vikander stayed in touch. When the series took shape, the Swedish actress was his first choice for the lead character of Mira, a Hollywood star who goes to Paris to shoot a remake of an old silent film serial about — well, you’ve heard this one before.
“I had a feeling that she had not unleashed her full potential,” Assayas said of Vikander. “I thought she’s funny, she’s smart, she’s quick, she has this profound understanding and love of movies. I felt that the combination of us two, something could happen.”
Vikander, who first drew wide notice for playing an android in “Ex Machina” and won an Academy Award for the period drama “The Danish Girl” (2015), is not generally known for lighthearted material. So, the comic dimension of “Irma Vep” was part of the attraction.
“I was longing to do that,” she said, laughing in delight. “And I think Olivier knew that from knowing me, my private persona. He was like, ‘Yeah, you need to let that out more.’ I think that this is just the beginning.”
In the show, the humor usually bubbles up in conjunction with the antics of the French cast and crew Mira is working with, led by the mercurial René Vidal (Vincent Macaigne), a neurotic, cinema-obsessed director who has already made a movie about Irma Vep (starring a Chinese actress named “Jade Lee” as a stand-in for Cheung) and is now back at it with a series. Amusingly, Macaigne’s speaking cadence often sounds like Assayas’s, and while the director agrees that he’s partly written himself into René, he said he is nicer.
“I don’t scream at people, you know,” he said, laughing. “I don’t attack my actors.”
Still, it’s clear that parallels between art and life are woven into the new show’s fabric. And each iteration of “Irma Vep” brings additional, increasingly complex ripples of self-reference. “I’m part of the story of the character Irma Vep in the sense that it starts with Louis Feuillade in 1916, and it travels through cinema up to the present,” Assayas said.
“I like the idea of layers of time combining in the movie, which is not something you can do very often,” he continued. “And there is the relationship to my own work, how it ages, how I interact with myself a quarter of a century apart, how the events surrounding the film — which, to be transparent, is my marriage to Maggie Cheung — is also something that echoes very profoundly and essentially with the goings-on in the series. And how also modern cinema has a dialogue with silent film.”
As for Mira, many viewers might assume she’s a stand-in for Stewart — we first see Mira arriving in Paris wearing shades and a slouchy beanie, nursing a broken heart after being dumped by her girlfriend. It’s a resemblance Assayas both soft-pedals and does not refute.
“There’s a little bit of it but not really,” he said. “This was written with Alicia in mind, but then you can’t escape the fact that my experience of an American movie star is Kristen Stewart. I don’t know that many of them, and she’s a friend, and I love her and I admire her. So yes, there must be elements of Kristen — Kristen is haunting the film.”
As for Vikander, her identification with her character also had limits. “Probably one of the things with Mira that I can mostly relate to is maybe her passionate love for cinema,” she said. “But it was also fun doing it with a character that is quite different from me.”
But the new “Irma Vep” is more than a series à clef, or a mere patchwork of references to other stars and other films. Under its playful manner and some very funny side plots — one, in particular, involves the need to source crack cocaine for an addled actor — Assayas continues to explore what was at the heart of the 1996 movie.
“The series is about the thin line between reality and fantasy; it’s about how we all live simultaneously in a material world and an immaterial world,” he said. “When you’re directing, when you are acting, you are playing a dangerous game, in a certain way, with your identity — you are being yourself and you are being someone else, and you struggle to bring out as much truth as you can.”
For Mira, a passageway between her regular life and the land of make-believe is Irma Vep’s catsuit, here rendered not in latex but in a silky fabric closer to the serial’s version. As with the fictionalized Cheung in 1996, the costume connects Mira to Irma. (By now you surely have noticed that their names are an anagram, which is yet another reference to the source material.)
It comes as little surprise to learn the catsuit’s spell worked on the series’s star, too. “You’re extremely visible because it’s so body-tight, but I also feel like a ninja — I just disappear,” Vikander said. “When I was in this whole black thing, I really immersed and really enjoyed doing it. It felt like the physicality of the part.
“It was one of those things that I had thought about a lot, but when I first tried on the costume,” she continued, snapping her fingers, “she just appeared.”

I’m a deputy editor on The Times’s Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I’m the assistant classical music and dance editor on The Times’s Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching and reading.
I’m an editor on The Times’s Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I'm a photo editor on The Times's Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I’m the assistant film editor on The Times’s Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching and listening to.
I’m a European culture reporter. Here are five things I've been watching and listening to.
I’m a designer on the print features desk. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I'm a Culture reporter. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I’m a critic-at-large on the Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I’m a senior staff editor for Arts & Leisure. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I'm The Times’s Arts & Leisure editor. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I'm an editor on the Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I’m an editor on the Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to.
I’m a senior news assistant on The Times’s Culture desk. Here are five things I've been watching, reading and listening to lately.

Lars Kepler, the pen name of a husband-and-wife crime fiction-writing team, is Sweden’s best-selling author. Here, they recommend books that take readers beyond fictitious murders to the soul of the city.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
This story is part of a new series exploring the world through books. We’ve asked some of our favorite writers to recommend reading that helps you get to know their cities and tips on literary landmarks to check out. We’ll be traveling the world with them for the next few months, from Madrid to Mexico City to Istanbul and beyond. Sign up for the Books newsletter to make sure you don’t miss any stops!
To begin with, let us make it clear to everyone who has read our books that Stockholm is a very safe city, usually completely without serial killers. But our capital is not harmless — at least not in literature.
Authors have written about the light of snow and the winter darkness in the alleys, the melancholy of the short summer and the sadness of the autumn. Thanks to crime writers from Maj Sjöwall and Per Wahlöö and beyond, there is probably not a street or park in the city where a fictitious murder has not been committed (and we acknowledge our extensive contribution).
Stockholm is situated in the passage between one of Sweden’s largest lakes and the Baltic Sea and has been settled since the Ice Age. The Riddarholmen Church, from the 13th century, is the oldest completely preserved building here. It is surrounded by medieval buildings, which in turn are surrounded by beautiful houses and theaters from the 19th century.
Although Stockholm is one of the most modern cities in the world (for example, we don’t use cash), the past is always present. We live on Oden Street. Near us, in the square next to the Royal Palace, the Stockholm Bloodbath took place in 1520, when about 100 aristocrats were executed. The amazing warship Vasa, which sank after traveling just 1,400 yards on her maiden voyage in 1628, can be seen intact at the Royal National City Park. The well-preserved city of Birka, a Viking-age trading center, is very close by, and many gods from Old Norse mythology, such as Thor, are buried — according to tradition — in the nearby city of Uppsala.
Authors have always been drawn to this city, which is the home of Sweden’s major publishers, the Nobel Prize and the Royal Dramatic Theater. This is where artists gather; where music is created; where film productions with Greta Garbo, Ingrid Bergman and Ingmar Bergman took off once upon a time; and where David Fincher shot the American version of “The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo.”
If you can get your hands on “Fredman’s Epistles and Songs” you will get a look straight into the Swedish soul, if there is such a thing. The author, Carl Michael Bellman, is our own burlesque, tragic, poetic version of Shakespeare.
Another warm-up reading tip is a novel by Selma Lagerlöf, the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature, in 1909: “Thy Soul Shall Bear Witness,” a ghost story about a very bad man who dies on New Year’s Eve. He is the last person to die that year, and is doomed to carry the souls of the dead in his cart until he finds forgiveness and tries to mend what he has broken.
“Doctor Glas,” by Hjalmar Söderberg, is an iconic read — a classic book that is relevant for new generations of readers again and again, with its cocktail of perversions, oppression of sexuality, murder and melancholy in the city of Stockholm. You can even take an “audio walk” of “Doctor Glas ” when you arrive, where you listen to the book at the exact places that are described in it.
The amazing archipelago of Stockholm, with all its islands, beaches, cliffs, restaurants and sailboats, is really worth at least a day. In Sweden we have what we call the everyman’ s right, which is the general public’s access to wilderness, whether it is public or privately owned land, granted by our constitution. You may camp and fish almost anywhere you want.
But if you don’t have the time, read “Harbor” by John Ajvide Lindqvist, the author of “Let the Right One In” and our own Swedish Stephen King. “Harbor” is set in the archipelago and has all the great ingredients you need for a horror story.
Why not a book by the Swedish poet Tomas Tranströmer? He won the Nobel Prize in 2011 and is considered a modern icon. His poetry seems simple, but it opens doors to the enigma that life is.
August Strindberg’s ghost walks the streets of Stockholm. There is a giant statue of the misogynistic, hateful, legendary but brilliant author, who wrote the novel “The Red Room” and the naturalistic play “Miss Julie,” in the Tegnérlunden park, and his words are quoted on the asphalt of Drottninggatan, the street where he lived during the last years of his life in a building known as the Blue Tower. If you can, you should visit: Standing there looking at Strindberg’s desk, with his pens, papers and books, gives writers a certain familiar feeling of discipline, dreams and isolation.
The Nobel Prize banquet is held every year at Stockholm City Hall, a beautiful building by the water in the middle of the city. In the cellar of the restaurant Stadshuskällaren you can try any of the dinners that were served at past banquets since 1901. Maybe you’d like to try the dinner served when Ernest Hemingway was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1954: smoked trout with cream-stewed spinach; beef tenderloin with artichokes, truffles and mushrooms; and pear with pistachio ice cream and chocolate sauce. Just remember to book your visit in advance.
On Dalagatan, a street in our part of the town, you can visit the humble apartment of Astrid Lindgren, who wrote “Pippi Longstocking” and many other legendary children’s books.
The National Library has built a space deep below the ground that is an exact copy of the home of the poet Nelly Sachs, who won the Nobel Prize in 1966. Visiting her “cabin” — an utterly small place where she sat and wrote in the darkness, trying not to disturb her ill mother — is very moving and strangely chilling.
The House of Culture is a modernist meeting place in the middle of the city with art exhibitions, cafes and restaurants, theater, music and an international writers’ scene that has drawn authors such as Jonathan Franzen, Richard Ford, Margaret Atwood, Susan Faludi, Emma Cline, Philip Pullman, Hilary Mantel, Paul Auster, John Irving, Joyce Carol Oates and Dennis Lehane. It is, in a way, a socialistic vision of how culture doesn’t need grand salons or bourgeois interiors, and is the result of a desire to bring culture to where workers and families pass by every day. Anyone can stroll in, curl up with a book, have a coffee, play some chess or visit an exhibition.
Crime fiction by Maj Sjöwall and Per Wahlöö
“Fredman’s Epistles and Songs,” Carl Michael Bellman
“Thy Soul Shall Bear Witness,” Selma Lagerlöf
“Harbor” and “Let the Right One In,” John Ajvide Lindqvist
“The Red Room” and “Miss Julie,” August Strindberg
Lars Kepler is the pen name of Alexander Ahndoril and Alexandra Coelho Ahndoril. Their crime fiction Joona Linna series, which includes novels such as “The Sandman” and “The Rabbit Hunter,” has been translated into 40 languages.

In his comprehensive study of the national anthem, a historian and musicologist examines our complicated relationship to a famously challenging song.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.
O SAY CAN YOU HEAR? A Cultural Biography of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” by Mark Clague
Mark Clague knows everything about “The Star-Spangled Banner,” including how you feel about it.
He knows of every tribute, genuine and forced, and he’s read all the criticisms of the national anthem’s jingoism, its triumphant militarism and its original lyrics’ inclusion of the word “slave,” but not the word “America.” In fact, his knowledge of the song’s history and its uses, benign and otherwise, is so comprehensive that I was surprised he didn’t quote my personal favorite, delivered by Belize in “Angels in America,” when he claims the slaveholder who wrote the national anthem “knew what he was doing. He set the word ‘free’ to a note so high nobody can reach it. That was deliberate.”
Clague, an associate professor of musicology and American culture at the University of Michigan, has produced a work so encyclopedic, its chapters can be read per your inclination — if you are most interested in, say, what the anthem has represented to African Americans, turn to Chapter 8, “The Anthem and Black Lives.” But I recommend reading them in order, because doing so also proves the book’s thesis: that, contrary to popular myth, “The Star-Spangled Banner” was not forced on Americans by some imperious authority, but chosen by us, en masse and over decades. When Congress proclaimed the song America’s official national anthem in 1931, almost 120 years after its composition, it was acknowledging a battle that had been won long before. The question, which this immensely interesting and readable history sets out to answer, is how that victory was earned.
The lyrics were composed by the lawyer, politician and amateur poet Francis Scott Key while held prisoner by the British in Baltimore Harbor during the War of 1812. The British, having already burned much of Washington, D.C., had turned to Baltimore. The British Navy had brought their most terrifying weapons to bear, the “bomb ships” — those “bombs bursting in air” — and if Fort McHenry were to be neutralized, British troops would freely enter Baltimore, and surely burn it to the ground.
Clague even creates a detailed military map of the engagement to demonstrate how “perilous” that fight really was. The first verse, the only one now sung, ends, as every child knows, with a question:
“Oh, say does that star-spangled banner yet wave/O’er the land of the free, and the home of the brave?”
In the complete version, Key details his relief at finally seeing the flag, and rejoices in the promise of future victories. But those three verses are rarely sung, and leaving the question unanswered might be the secret to the song’s hold on the American public. It is not an anthem that, like “La Marseillaise,” calls for our enemy’s “impure blood to water our fields.” Rather, it’s a song for a country that is still in the fight, for its existence and its ideals, and it offers an invitation to any and all — the “you” of the first line —- to join that fight, even if in Key’s time the “you” was hardly inclusive.
Contrary to myth — again! — the lyrics were not later set to the tune of a drinking chantey. In fact, Key wrote his lines to fit the popular, pre-existing “Anacreontic Song.” As musical scores were difficult to print, alternative lyrics to known melodies were the primary means of disseminating music. This one had been commissioned by a musical London gentlemen’s club; composer John Stafford Smith had crafted a challenging tune designed to allow soloists to show off their virtuosity. (Belize was more right than he knew.) There were countless lyrics set to the melody, one of America’s first viral sensations.
The rise of “The Star-Spangled Banner” from popular hit to de facto and then official national anthem is, naturally, tied up in war. It became immensely popular in the North during the Civil War, and thus forbidden by the Confederacy, which rejected both the song and the flag. Union prisoners sang it to raise their spirits in Southern camps, and Union brass bands — playing in combat! — deployed it to rally the troops. By World War I, Americans were expressing fervor for the song whether they felt it or not. Geraldine Farrar, a singer with connections to Germany, became the object of fury when she remained seated during the playing of the anthem, perhaps the first American to be threatened with professional extinction for not performing the required genuflection. Soon, she too was belting out the anthem in concert, literally wrapped in a flag.
Colin Kaepernick, the latest prominent American to be punished for not demonstrating the required devotion, gets surprisingly little attention here, but that’s only because he is far from the only athlete to suffer for his heresy. The sprinters Tommie Smith and John Carlos were thrown out of the Mexico City Olympics in 1968 for daring to raise their fists during their own medal ceremony, and Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf, of the Denver Nuggets, was suspended by the N.B.A. in 1996 — not because he knelt or raised a fist or finger while the anthem played but simply because he remained in the locker room. After the uproar, he agreed to come out and bow his head, but that wasn’t enough to calm outrage; he was out of the league within two years (with a brief return in 2000) and, to date, has not starred in a Nike ad.
While he details these many instances, Clague has no patience for anyone who demands such reverence from others, and he’s no fan of the jingoistic military displays that often accompany performances at major public events. But he reveres the anthem itself, and he makes the strongest case for the song in his detailed analysis of what he calls its most successful modern rendition, Whitney Houston’s performance at the 1991 Super Bowl.
It’s fascinating to hear the “Original 1813 version” of the song, and only then watch Houston’s. The 19th-century original has the 3/4 rhythm of a waltz, a mildly monotonous buggy ride through ornate language, enlivened slightly by a chorus. It is also performed by an all-white ensemble, a perhaps unconscious nod to the fact that Key wrote of “the land of the free” while claiming as property other human beings.
Houston’s version, though, is transformed by artistry and personality and musical genius. She has changed the time signature to 4/4, and imbues the melody with the ornamentation of jazz, blues and, most important, gospel. By the time she gets that highest “FREEEE” she not only reaches but goes above it, expressing ownership of the word and the gesture. While the lyrics may remain as written, the meaning of a crucial word in the first line — “you” — has been wrenched from past to present to be addressed, at last, to all of us.
Acknowledging a historic moment. In August 2019, The New York Times Magazine launched the 1619 Project, spearheaded by Nikole Hannah-Jones. The project explored the history of slavery in the United States and was released to coincide with the anniversary of a ship carrying the first enslaved Africans to the English colonies.
The enslavement legacy. The project made a bold claim: that the experience of slavery is inextricable from American history. It prompted praise, criticism and debate.
The project’s impact. With its examination of how the legacy of slavery continues to shape life in the United States, the project started in-depth conversations about how American history is taught and written.
Awards and controversy. Ms. Hannah-Jones, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 2020 for the project’s opening essay, has faced backlash from conservative groups over her work. In 2021, some board members at the University of North Carolina reportedly opposed her appointment to tenure position due to her involvement in the 1619 Project.
Expanding the initiative’s reach. Since its launch, the 1619 Project has expanded to include a podcast on how slavery has transformed America, and two books out on Nov. 16.
So: Does that star-spangled banner yet wave o’er the land of the free and home of the brave? Not yet, perhaps. But listening to a descendant of the enslaved claiming the song of a slaver, you want to believe it someday might.
Peter Sagal is the host of NPR’s “Wait Wait … Don’t Tell Me!” His latest book is “The Incomplete Book of Running.”
O SAY CAN YOU HEAR? A Cultural Biography of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” by Mark Clague | Illustrated | 325 pp. | W.W. Norton | $28.95

The indie-pop band was dropped by its major label early in the pandemic, then scored a TikTok hit with “Silk Chiffon,” featuring a verse from its new label boss: Phoebe Bridgers.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
The members of Muna kept calling themselves “impenetrable.” They were sorry about this, they insisted, as each lurched into the frame of a video call from a backyard in Los Angeles, ping-ponging inside jokes and rearranging themselves into different configurations.
The indie-pop trio of Katie Gavin, 29, Naomi McPherson, 29, and Josette Maskin, 28, operate on a frenetic frequency and have easy access to their emotions. By the end of the call to discuss their new album, out Friday, all three had teared up and begged themselves out loud to stop crying. The constant churn of promotion was adding up: “That’s why we’re chaos vibes,” McPherson said, dangling a whorl of curly hair over the screen.
Any album release brings some chaos. For Muna, though, sending its third, self-titled album into the world means starting all over again. The group played at Lollapalooza and appeared on Jimmy Fallon’s show before its debut album, “About U,” came out in 2017, then opened for Harry Styles and followed up with a 2019 LP called “Saves the World.” But its label, RCA, dropped the band months into the pandemic, citing cost-cutting necessities.
Muna was devastated. Then it went back to work. A friend of a friend, someone the members knew through what Gavin called “the lesbian Los Angeles support group,” rented them a studio in her basement for next to nothing, and the band started showing up every day. The songs it worked on there would become its most pop-oriented and propulsive yet. One of them became something the band had never had before: a viral hit.
“Life’s so fun, life’s so fun,” Gavin lilts on “Silk Chiffon,” which features Phoebe Bridgers and has caromed across TikTok, soundtracking cookie dough tutorials, hangovers and odes to crushes. The rest of “Muna” is filled with fizzy songs about twirling through gay bars and rollerblading through the night that barrel over slick, sputtering synths. Buoyed by the success of “Silk Chiffon,” the band is now on the verge of breaking out of its cult following and bringing its anthems about queer joy to a wider audience. But joy isn’t straightforward for Muna, either in its music or in its members’ lives.
“Obviously, everything is going really well,” McPherson, who is nonbinary, said, prodding a toothpick between their teeth. “Which is when the demon wants to punish you.”
Muna got its start at the University of Southern California, where McPherson spied Gavin biking through campus and murmured to their friend, “That girl is cool.” The feeling was mutual; they bonded, and Gavin introduced McPherson to Maskin at a party. Almost immediately, they started making music, workshopping guitar chords between classes. Gavin sings lead vocals, plays guitar and helps produce; Maskin (guitar) and McPherson (guitar and keys) work on production.
Nearly a decade later, one part of their songwriting process is the same: Muna knows when to stop. The band likes to put in what McPherson calls “princess work”; they tinker with songs for a few hours each day, and quit just when a track starts to click into place. “You try to retain the magic,” Maskin said.
The group spends the rest of its time hanging out — watching YouTube, doing bits. The easy intimacy, the way they finish each other’s sentences or can communicate with an eyebrow raise, is central to their process. It also takes work. Gavin and McPherson dated for years, and when they broke up, Maskin threatened to quit the band if they didn’t go to therapy. (The trio has also gone to what they call “band therapy.”)
Recording can be stressful. “I would record all my vocals alone in a closet if I could,” Gavin said, after the band relayed that it had to redo the song “Solid” five or six times because she kept cooing the lyric, “My baby’s so solid,” in a way that sounded like, “My baby’s a salad.” But Muna has learned to hype one another up and not overwork the music.
“At some point, you’re going to have song dysmorphia where you’re like, ‘I don’t know if this is going to sound good, you guys,’” McPherson said.
“Muna” is a shift for the band, a step further into glitzy, shimmering pop. “At RCA, we were like, ‘We’re staying true to ourselves, we’re going to make interesting, indie-pop music, we’re not here to make hits,’” McPherson said. “And then the moment we leave, we’re at an indie label and we’re like, ‘Here’s our poppiest song ever.’”
The small label is Saddest Factory Records, which is run by Bridgers, the indie-rock breakout star. The band refers to her as “Papa,” and she sings a giddy verse about straggling stoned through the aisles of CVS on “Silk Chiffon.”
Another indie powerhouse, Mitski, left fingerprints on the album, too. She had first met the band at a festival. “We just started chatting, which is rare for me, because I’m very introverted and don’t just ‘start chatting’ with people,” Mitski wrote in an email. “It’s a testament to how friendly and kind they are.”
Mitski came to McPherson and Maskin’s apartment in Highland Park and made them tea while they listened to disco. (Their downstairs neighbor kept texting them to be quiet.) “You have no idea/the things I think about you when you aren’t here,” Gavin sings on “No Idea,” the gradually building song that emerged from that session. “Mitski is the sexiest songwriter that I know,” she said.
Like most songs on the record, “No Idea” toys with the gap between perception and projection, the clarity and confinement that come with claiming a label. “She is not a mirror in which you reflect,” Gavin coos over a thrash of guitar on “Solid.” On the slower, Shania Twain-indebted “Kind of Girl,” she gets more explicit: “I’m a girl who’s learning everything I say isn’t definitive,” Gavin sings.
The album oscillates between dance-floor anthems and lyrics about meditation, coruscating synths and twinges of twang. “The album is kind of disparate sonically, disparate in terms of what the songs are saying, but the connective tissue is self-definition and agency and identity and interrogating those things,” McPherson said. “And also knowing that nothing is fixed.”
While the band’s circumstances have changed, Gavin isn’t letting go of its past. “I don’t want this era to be, ‘Oh, we used to be one way, and now we’re another way, and everything’s great now,’” she said. “We are who we are, but it’s the compassion we have for ourselves, the awareness we have.”
Earlier this month, the trio returned to “The Tonight Show,” and Gavin felt some of the panic she had experienced when the band first played there in 2016. The band members spent the cab ride to the hotel after the taping processing their performance. They talked about the significance of doing the show, how Gavin was feeling, what they hoped the album could do for them, if it could help them keep making music for as long as possible “and not have as much existential stress as we have now,” McPherson said.
The driver eventually chimed in. “He said, ‘In my 20 years of driving, I’ve never heard people be so kind to each other,’” Gavin recalled. She and McPherson were wedged onto a bed in their hotel, beaming at a laptop screen; Maskin was in her room down the hall, packing and peeling a banana. “It just felt like the cheesy thing where — it’s a feat to do these big moments, but I do think that, like, the bigger thing —.” She paused. “I’m such a cheese ball.”
Gavin rolled her eyes. “I do think that the bigger feat is having these friendships with each other.”
All three went quiet for a second. Then they started giggling, faintly and then furiously.

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Harry Styles’s third album, “Harry’s House,” just debuted at the top of the Billboard chart with the year’s biggest opening-week sales: 521,500 equivalent album units. His upcoming tour will feature 15 performances at Madison Square Garden in New York, and 15 performances at the Kia Forum in Inglewood, Calif. By most conventional metrics, Styles is one of pop’s biggest stars.
And yet his music has not always been as successful as his celebrity might suggest — he has had just six Top 10 hits. He makes 1970s-style pop that is largely out of step with the current landscape, and he often draws more attention for his intense charisma and his gender-fluid sartorial flair than for his songs.
On this week’s Popcast, a conversation about Styles’s sometimes circular musical journey, the ways his time in One Direction helped shaped his public image and how internet fandom has bolstered his career.
Kaitlyn Tiffany, a staff writer at The Atlantic and the author of “Everything I Need I Get From You: How Fangirls Created the Internet as We Know It”
Lindsay Zoladz, who writes about music for The New York Times and others
Connect With Popcast. Become a part of the Popcast community: Join the show’s Facebook group and Discord channel. We want to hear from you! Tune in, and tell us what you think at popcast@nytimes.com. Follow our host, Jon Caramanica, on Twitter: @joncaramanica.

What is the role of choreography on Broadway? Two musicals, “MJ” and “A Strange Loop,” shed light on the dancing body.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Don’t get me wrong: The musical “MJ” is a misfire on so many levels that it’s hard to know where to begin. “Thriller” looks like a scene out of “Cats.” The segment showing Michael Jackson’s dance influences — the Nicholas Brothers, Fred Astaire, Bob Fosse — is so poor in terms of skill level that I felt sorry for dance, the art form. Irritatingly, yet predictably, the show, directed by the ballet choreographer Christopher Wheeldon, has been nominated for 10 Tony Awards. It will run for ages. Michael Jackson — for all his flaws — is still Michael Jackson.
But the production does have something to show about Jackson’s dancing body in all of its articulate anxiety. It made me think: What happened to that body when the boy became a man? How did his dancing change? Was something of his internal landscape exposed in his dancing for all to see? Did we ever really see it?
When he was alive and building his pop canon of music and dance, it wasn’t always so easy to grasp how, beyond the nervous twitches of the choreography, his spirit was reflected in his dancing. So much about him was wrapped up in the fashion of the moment that you could forget about his body. (You couldn’t, after all, ignore the ever-morphing features of his face.) There were so many distractions along the way — the skin, the plastic surgery, the allegations of molestation against him.
He was always hiding. His costumes were armor, masking his body, his interior life and even, for all of his extraordinary prowess, his physicality. In a sense, he made it possible for his impersonators to exist by crafting and perpetuating a Michael Jackson that anyone could borrow and put on. Like a rhinestone glove. Or a moonwalk.
The Broadway musical tries its best to focus on Jackson, the perfectionist artist, MJ, as the adult Jackson is listed in the Playbill. By contrast, the role of Little Michael makes the adult seem more fragile and more bizarre. (There’s a third Michael, too, in between them in age; he makes less of an impression.) You can’t help but notice the dramatic, drastic changes that his dancing body displayed over time. From his childhood as the youngest brother in the Jackson 5 to the final rehearsals for his Dangerous tour of 1992, the moment that frames the show, we see the way turmoil ripples through his body. For Little Michael, tormented by his father, dance is an escape; for the older MJ, it’s a way for his body to scream in ways he couldn’t with words. His voice, high and whispery, never had the same emphatic force.
The older MJ, in the show, fights for rigid precision — movement phrases are knotty, spiky, full of angles, while Little Michael is smooth and enviably relaxed. (Obviously, dance styles changed drastically during that time, but the contrast seems as emotional as it is physical.) Two young boys alternate as Little Michael, Walter Russell III and Christian Wilson. I can only speak for Wilson, whose performance I saw, but it was his dancing that repeatedly snapped me back to attention.
As a musical, “MJ” can feel as distant and as inaccessible as a music video. Wilson’s presence — his ease, his winning blend of naïveté and wisdom — brought it to life. Even during the curtain calls, his hips kept flowing, perhaps more quietly, more internally than when he was in character, but he never lost hold of his gentle yet powerful groove.
That unselfconscious fluidity throws into relief the rigidity and the constraint of MJ, as played by Myles Frost. Frost’s dancing accuracy is extraordinary; it reveals a body turning in on itself and hardening — lonely, brittle, concave. The tipped hat and rounded shoulders weren’t just about Jackson imitating one of his idols, Bob Fosse. Weren’t they also a way to hide (and guard) himself from the world?
Jackson’s music was pop, but the way he used his body had such a hard edge that to watch footage of his actual Dangerous tour is to see something related to punk — not in sound, but in angst and speed, anger and attack. The tone is confident and clipped, but beyond the gleaming exterior, you sense pain. Did he even want to move in front of people? I can’t decide. At the start of a performance in Bucharest, he stands still, in profile, with his arms tense at his sides, for what seems like ages while the camera pans to a crowd on the brink of hysteria.
It’s impossible to know who Jackson really was. “MJ” delivers yet another impersonation of the man we saw onstage and in videos. Often a dancing body reveals a certain truth about a person, but in Jackson’s case dancing might have been one more thing to hide behind, like another costume; it was a place he could control his body. He could be himself or the person he wanted to be: strong, powerful, sexy. Maybe the dancing body was the man, or his fantasy of himself.
I don’t want to honor the choreographic approach in “MJ,” which is mostly cartoonish. But watching the dancing left me thinking about Jackson and what dancing became for him — something he was chained to, rather than a way to break free of the box he found himself in.
There is also another musical on Broadway, “A Strange Loop,” in which the main character’s dancing body is tied to his psyche. Directly. The choreographer responsible for it, Raja Feather Kelly, was left out of contention for a Tony Award. At the same time, Wheeldon of “MJ” is nominated for best choreographer, but with no mention of Rich and Tone Talauega, two brothers who danced with Jackson and created Jackson’s movement in the show.
Kelly is a bewildering omission: His intricate choreography is a sparkling, distinct part of what defines Usher, the main character, in the Pulitzer Prize-winning musical by Michael R. Jackson. (Yes, the name thing is weird, too.)
There are plenty of dance moves in “A Strange Loop,” but there’s also something more nuanced: the choreography of behavior. Everything the characters say and do has been treated with a gesture or with a movement phrase, rendering it not only multilayered and original, but wholly virtuosic as gesture slides in and out of recognizable dancing.
In “Intermission Song,” Usher (Jaquel Spivey) is surrounded by this thoughts, six performers who act out his worries as he creates what he refers to as a “big, Black and queer-ass American Broadway” show. A dance break puts them in motion. They may hit the same accents, but they act as individuals. Toward the end of “Memory Song,” they lift their arms — slowly, purposely while keeping the rest of their body still. It’s balletic, as reverent as the opening prayer in George Balanchine’s “Mozartiana” and a choreographic feat built on a grace and tension born from control. It’s about their dancing bodies. The show wouldn’t be the same without it.
While the dances in “MJ” feel, to a large extent, like facsimiles of videos, “A Strange Loop” brings up, once again, the question of what choreography is and what it can be. If Kelly’s approach is subtle, there’s a reason for it: Michael R. Jackson’s expression of queerness, big and Black, lives in both the mind and the body. The choreography is intentional; it’s part of the fabric of each character. It not only unlocks the potential of dance in musical theater, it expands how a story can be told.

Judy Huth, who is suing Mr. Cosby on sexual assault grounds in a civil case, took the stand in California to begin describing an encounter with the entertainer that took place decades ago.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
By Graham Bowley, Lauren Herstik and Douglas Morino
Judy Huth took the stand in Santa Monica on Monday to describe a moment in 1975 when, as a teenager, she said she met Bill Cosby in a California park where he was making a film.
Days later, at his invitation, she said, she and her friend went along to his tennis club and then ultimately to the Playboy Mansion in Los Angeles.
“It was an adventure,” Ms. Huth said. “We were kids. He was a celebrity.”
But later that day, the man she had admired as a famous comedian molested her, she said, after taking her to an isolated room at the mansion. Ms. Huth said she was 16 years old at the time.
Mr. Cosby has denied he sexually assaulted Ms. Huth or any of the other women who have come forward in recent years to accuse him of sexual misconduct. He has said any relationship was consensual.
But Ms. Huth, 64, has sued Mr. Cosby for sexual assault, and her account, which was not finished on Monday, is the centerpiece of her case against the entertainer, which completed its fourth day of testimony.
Ms. Huth testified that she and her friend had been impressed when they saw Mr. Cosby — along with other movie stars — in a park in San Marino on the set of the film “Let’s Do It Again.”
According to her account, Mr. Cosby gave the two teenagers alcohol at a house where he was staying, telling them to drink if he bested them in a game of pool, and then asked them to follow him in a car to the mansion.
“Are you girls ready for your surprise?” he said, according to Ms. Huth. “I had no clue what it could be,” she said.
Her lawyers showed the jury a photograph of Ms. Huth standing with Mr. Cosby in the game room at the mansion, taken, she told the court, “before he molested me. It happened 15 minutes after.”
Ms. Huth’s testimony was interrupted by the end of the court day before she was able to discuss what she has, in court papers for her case, accused him of doing: placing his hand down her pants and then forcing her to fondle him.
The impact of that event, her lawyers have told the court, included depression and anxiety. She had experienced a happy childhood, she said, growing up in Temple City, Calif. But her lawyers said that the incident had derailed her and that she didn’t earn her high school diploma until she was 60.
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers have disputed Ms. Huth’s account, suggesting that their meeting actually happened years later, when she was an older, and willing, visitor to the mansion who by her own account did not flee after the encounter but stayed on for hours, swimming in the pool and watching a movie.
Ms. Huth’s lawsuit, filed in 2014, was largely on hold while prosecutors in Pennsylvania pursued Mr. Cosby, 84, criminally on charges that he had sexually assaulted Andrea Constand, a former Temple University employee.
But Mr. Cosby’s 2018 conviction in that case was overturned last year by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court on due process grounds, and Mr. Cosby walked free after serving nearly three years of a three- to 10-year sentence.
Earlier on Monday, Mr. Cosby’s lawyers had cross-examined Donna Samuelson, Ms. Huth’s friend who accompanied her to the mansion. She had told the court last week that Ms. Huth had been distraught after her encounter with Mr. Cosby but that Ms. Samuelson persuaded her to stay.
Mr. Cosby’s defense tried to undermine the credibility of that account, suggesting that the two friends had coordinated their stories before Ms. Huth first went to the police in 2014. (Prosecutors ultimately declined to file criminal charges because the statute of limitations had passed.)
But Ms. Samuelson said she had simply misremembered when she had initially reported to authorities that Ms. Huth was 15 at the time, not 16 as Ms. Huth now says.
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers showed a layout of the game room at the Playboy Mansion and said that Ms. Samuelson had been wrong to say a person could access the bathroom only through an adjoining bedroom.
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers also said it was impossible for Ms. Samuelson to have played the arcade game “Donkey Kong” there in 1975, as she has testified in a deposition. The game was not released until six years later.
Ms. Samuelson said she meant that she had played a game like Donkey Kong.
She denied that she and Ms. Huth had coordinated their accounts before Ms. Huth went to the police in 2014. “We were not putting anything together,” she said. “We were just telling our memories.”
Jennifer Bonjean, a lawyer for Mr. Cosby, also brought up the subject of race in a way that suggested Ms. Samuelson was motivated to take down Mr. Cosby because he is Black. She said, for example, that Ms. Samuelson, in her pre-trial deposition, had described the décor of his house in Los Angeles as “jungly” and “African,” referring to the leaf print on the wallpaper.
“It wasn’t atypical for people in your friend group to use racial slurs like the N-word,” the lawyer asserted.
Ms. Samuelson said she never did that.
“I am not racist,” she said.
Mr. Cosby’s lawyers have noted in court proceedings that Ms. Huth’s recollection of when her encounter took place has changed: While she initially said it had happened in 1974, when she was 15, she more recently concluded it was in 1975, when she was 16. The law in California classified a 16-year-old as a minor. In disputing Ms. Huth’s account, Mr. Cosby’s lawyers have suggested they met years after the time she said they did, when she was no longer a minor.
Last week, Ms. Huth’s legal team introduced two other women who testified about encounters with Mr. Cosby. Kimberly Burr testified that she was 14 years old when he tried to kiss her in his trailer on the set of “Let’s Do It Again” in 1975 as well.
Margie Shapiro testified that she was 19 that year when Mr. Cosby met her at the doughnut shop where she was working and invited her to the set of another movie he was filming in Los Angeles. Later that day, according to her testimony, she went to his house and then they went to the Playboy Mansion, where, she said, he drugged and assaulted her, an accusation that Mr. Cosby denies.
Mr. Cosby is not expected to testify at the trial, having asserted his Fifth Amendment rights. But lawyers for Ms. Huth deposed him several years ago, and a portion of that testimony is expected to be presented in court before the conclusion of the trial, which is expected to last through the week.

“A Strange Loop,” a scalding story about a gay, Black theater artist confronting self-doubt and societal disapproval, won the Tony Award for best new musical Sunday night, giving another huge accolade to a challenging contemporary production that had already won a Pulitzer Prize.
The soul-baring show, nurtured by nonprofits and developed over many years, triumphed over two flashy pop musicals, “MJ,” a jukebox musical about the entertainer Michael Jackson, and “Six,” an irreverent reconsideration of Henry VIII’s ill-fated wives, in a six-way race.
“A Strange Loop” garnered widespread praise from critics; on Sunday night, Michael R. Jackson, the writer who spent nearly two decades working on it, acknowledged how personal the project was as he collected his first Tony Award, for best book of a musical.
“I wrote it at a time when I didn’t know what I was going to do with my life,” he said. “I didn’t know how I was going to move forward. I felt unseen. I felt unheard. I felt misunderstood, and I just wanted to create a little bit of a life raft for myself as a Black gay man.”
The ceremony — the 75th Tony Awards presentation — provided an opportunity for Broadway to celebrate its return and its perseverance, hoping that a dash of razzle-dazzle, a dollop of contemporary creativity and a sprinkling of nostalgia will help lure theatergoers back to a pandemic-scarred industry now in full swing but still craving more customers.
The season that just ended was a tough one: It started late (most theaters remained closed until September), and was repeatedly disrupted (coronavirus cases obliterated its old show-must-go-on ethos, prompting cancellations and performer absences). With tourism still down, it was also short on audience.
“Our industry has been through so much,” Marianne Elliott, who won a Tony Award for directing a gender-reversed revival of the Stephen Sondheim musical comedy “Company,” said in her acceptance speech. “It felt at times that live theater was endangered.”
But in the glittering ceremony at Radio City Music Hall in Manhattan, a parade of performers celebrated all that went well: Theaters reopened, long-running shows returned, and an unusually diverse array of plays and musicals arrived to entertain, provoke and inspire theatergoers.
The best play Tony went to “The Lehman Trilogy,” a sweeping saga about the rise and fall of the Lehman Brothers banking business. Using three shape-shifting actors, contained within a spinning glass box of a set, the play journeyed all the way from the Wall Street giant’s humble origins in 1844 to its ignominious collapse in 2008. The show, written by Stefano Massini and Ben Power, picked up not only the Tony for best play, but also for the play’s director, Sam Mendes; its set designer, Es Devlin; and the great British actor, Simon Russell Beale, who thanked audiences for showing up, despite pandemic protocols and public health concerns.
“You trusted us,” he said. “You came with open arms. It wasn’t easy at that point to come to the theater because of all those regulations. But you welcomed us.”
“The Lehman Trilogy” won out against four other contenders, “Clyde’s,” “Hangmen,” “The Minutes” and “Skeleton Crew.”
“Take Me Out” emerged victorious in the best play revival category, a particularly strong field that included productions of “American Buffalo,” “How I Learned to Drive,” “Trouble in Mind” and “For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf.”
Written by Richard Greenberg, “Take Me Out” first ran on Broadway in 2003 and won the best play Tony that year; this year’s revival, presented by the nonprofit Second Stage Theater, was directed by Scott Ellis. It is about what happens when a baseball player, portrayed in this production by Jesse Williams, comes out as gay; Jesse Tyler Ferguson picked up his first Tony for his portrayal of the player’s investment adviser, who is also gay.
“Company,” a musical first staged in 1970 that wittily and sometimes bitterly examines married life, won the Tony for musical revival, besting a much-praised revival of “Caroline, or Change,” as well as a starry revival of “The Music Man” that, thanks to the appeal of leading man Hugh Jackman, has been the top-selling show on Broadway since it opened.
The award for “Company” reflected not only admiration for the reimagined production but also respect for Sondheim, its composer and lyricist, who is revered as one of the most important figures in American musical theater, and who died in November. The “Hamilton” creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, who was mentored by Sondheim, introduced a tribute to him, saying, “I stand here on behalf of generations of artists he took the time to encourage.”
The Tonys, hosted by Ariana DeBose and broadcast on CBS, honored not only shows, performers, writers and designers, but also the understudies who saved so many performances this season. And DeBose, who this year won an Academy Award as Anita in the Steven Spielberg remake of “West Side Story,” paid tribute to the season’s extraordinary diversity, saying, “I feel like the phrase Great White Way is becoming more of a nickname as opposed to a how-to guide.”
She noted the season’s high volume of work by Black writers, which came about as producers and theater owners scrambled to respond to demands for more representation and opportunity for Black artists after the national unrest over racism during the summer of 2020. This year’s class of Tony nominees featured a large number of Black artists, reflecting the fact that work by Black writers led to more jobs for Black performers, designers, directors, and more.
The season being honored — the first since the coronavirus pandemic forced theaters to close in March of 2020 — featured 56 productions, including 34 eligible for Tony Awards because they opened between Feb. 20, 2020 and May 4, 2022. (The others were returning productions, many of them long-running hits.)
The Covid challenges were costly: 6.7 million people attended a Broadway show during the 2021-22 season, down from 14.8 million during the 2018-19 season, which was the last full season before the pandemic; total grosses were $845 million, down from $1.8 billion.
The Tonys served as a chance for Broadway to try to entice television viewers to become Times Square visitors. But one challenge: Viewership for all televised awards shows has been steadily falling. The Tonys audience had a recent peak in 2016, at 8.7 million viewers, when “Hamilton” was a contender; in 2019, there were 5.4 million viewers, and last year, when the Tonys held a ceremony in September to coincide with the reopening of theaters, just 2.6 million tuned in.
This year’s winners featured some Broadway veterans, including Patti LuPone, picking up her third Tony Award for her ferocious turn as an alcohol-addled married friend of the chronically single protagonist in “Company”; and Phylicia Rashad, winning her second Tony for playing a factory worker in “Skeleton Crew.” Among the other performers who collected Tony Awards: Joaquina Kalukango, for her starring role as a 19th-century New York City tavern owner in “Paradise Square”; Matt Doyle, who played a groom with a zany case of wedding day jitters in “Company,” and Deirdre O’Connell, who won for her remarkable lip-synced performance as a kidnapping victim in the play “Dana H.”
“I would love for this little prize to be a token for every person who is wondering, ‘Should I be trying to make something that could work on Broadway or that could win me a Tony Award, or should I be making the weird art that is haunting me, that frightens me, that I don’t know how to make, that I don’t know if anyone in the whole world will understand?’” O’Connell said. “Please let me, standing here, be a little sign to you from the universe to make the weird art.”
“A Strange Loop” tells the story of a Broadway usher, named Usher, who is trying to write a musical about a Broadway usher trying to write a musical; his thoughts, many of them self-critical, are portrayed by six performers, who each appear in multiple guises. The musical began its life Off Broadway, with a 2019 production at Playwrights Horizons in association with Page 73 Productions. After winning the Pulitzer, it had another pre-Broadway production at Woolly Mammoth Theater Company in Washington, D.C. It had support throughout those nonprofit runs from the producer Barbara Whitman, who is now the lead producer of the commercial run on Broadway; she was also a lead producer of the Tony-winning “Fun Home.”
The Broadway production, which opened in April, has seen an uptick at the box office since being nominated for 11 Tony Awards (it won two), but has room for growth: During the week that ended June 5, it filled 89 percent of the 912 seats at the Lyceum Theater, grossing $685,772, with an average ticket price of $105.
“Six” and “MJ,” although unsuccessful in the six-way race for best new musical, are doing substantially better at the box office, and did notch some big victories at the awards ceremony.
“Six” picked up the Tony Award for best score during the first minutes of the ceremony. Its music and lyrics were written by two young British artists, Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss, who came up with the idea while undergraduates at Cambridge University, and who were discovered by a commercial producer following a buzz-building first run at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe. The musical’s costume designer, Gabriella Slade, also won a Tony for her Tudor-style-meets-contemporary-clubwear outfits.
“MJ” also landed key prizes, including for the lead performance by Myles Frost, a 22-year-old in his first professional stage role, and for the crowd-pleasing choreography by Christopher Wheeldon, who also directed the musical.
The other contenders, “Girl From the North Country,” featuring the songs of Bob Dylan; “Mr. Saturday Night,” starring Billy Crystal as a washed-up comedian; and “Paradise Square,” about race relations in Civil War-era New York, appeared to be less of a factor in the competition.
That first hour of the awards ceremony, viewable only on the streaming channel Paramount+, was hosted by Darren Criss and Julianne Hough, both of whom are currently starring in Broadway plays — he in a revival of “American Buffalo,” and she in a new farce called “POTUS.” They began the evening with a Broadway-is-back tribute, written by Criss, extolling the virtues and challenges of theater (the song included a plea for no slapping, in a dig at the Oscars).
A lifetime achievement award was given to Angela Lansbury, a beloved star of stage, film and television who was also a five-time host of the Tony Awards, more than any other person. Lansbury, who is 96, was not able to attend in person, or even to accept by video; instead the actor Len Cariou, who starred with Lansbury in the original production of “Sweeney Todd,” for which they both won Tony Awards, paid tribute to her and introduced a video of career highlights. Then the New York City Gay Men’s Chorus performed the title song from “Mame,” which was the show in which she won the first of her five competitive Tony Awards.
The Tony Awards, named for actress Antoinette Perry, are presented by the Broadway League, a trade association that represents theater owners and producers, and the American Theater Wing, a theater advocacy organization. The awards have been presented since 1947; there was no ceremony in 2020, and last year’s September ceremony honored shows from the truncated prepandemic season.
This year’s awards were spread among 11 shows, with none coming anywhere near the record 12 prizes picked up by “The Producers” in 2001. The biggest hauls went to “Company” and “The Lehman Trilogy,” each of which won five awards; “MJ” won four, and “A Strange Loop,” “Dana H.,” “Six” and “Take Me Out” each won two. Taking home one prize each were “Girl From the North Country,” “Paradise Square,” “Skeleton Crew” and “The Skin of Our Teeth.”

By Mekado MurphyMay 18, 2022
I’m the assistant film editor on The Times’s Culture desk. Between screenings of “Top Gun: Maverick” and “Jurassic World: Dominion,” I like to fire up a good indie podcast or a thoughtful YouTube tutorial.
Here are five things I’ve been watching and listening to lately →
Greg Daniels’s sci-fi comedy is about a future in which tech companies have created a digital afterlife. Now in its second season, it remains successful at taking existential ideas and grounding them in off-kilter humor.
Think you love music? Kirk Hamilton’s podcast will have you appreciating it in ways you didn’t know were possible.
Hamilton takes one song and breaks down the essentials of what makes it shine. Listen to the episode about Beyoncé’s “Single Ladies” and be blown away.
Film: ‘The Color Purple’ (1985)
I get teary-eyed just thinking about this movie. In Celie (Whoopi Goldberg), who crafted an extraordinary life despite the worst obstacles, I see my grandmothers, mother, aunt and sisters: all the heroic Black women who helped me become who I am.
Lewis brings a fun personality and a sense of inventiveness to his videos about interior design hacks, which include low-hassle ways to put a decorative stamp on your apartment rental and tips on shopping at Ikea.
This gift of an album by Brandi Carlile, from 2015, has been on my Spotify rotation constantly as of late. It’s rare that almost every song on a record tells its own heartfelt tale in its own style, but Carlile and her team of impeccable musicians pull it off here. And her voice of soaring highs and pensive lows is one I will follow most anywhere.
Here are some more recent favorites:

For 50 years, in movies like “A Man and a Woman” and “My Night at Maud’s,” his specialty was playing the flawed Everyman.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Jean-Louis Trintignant, a leading French actor of subtle power who appeared in some of the most celebrated European films of the last 50 years, among them Bernardo Bertolucci’s “The Conformist,” Eric Rohmer’s “My Night at Maud’s” and Claude Lelouch’s “A Man and a Woman,” died on Friday at his home in southern France. He was 91.
His wife, Marianne Hoepfner Trintignant, confirmed the death to Agence France-Presse. Mr. Trintignant had announced in 2018 that he had prostate cancer and was retiring.
Mr. Trintignant seemed to specialize in playing the flawed Everyman and revealing his characters’ depths slowly.
“Jean-Louis Trintignant has been, for better than half a century, one of the great stealth actors of the movies,” the critic Terrence Rafferty wrote in The New York Times in 2012. “He knows how to catch an audience unaware.”
The occasion was the release that year of Michael Haneke’s “Amour,” which went on to win the 2013 Academy Award for best foreign-language film. In a starring role for the first time in the millennium, Mr. Trintignant, by then nearly blind, portrayed a frail old man caring for his dying wife, played by Emmanuelle Riva — “two titans of French cinema,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times — in a film that is both a love story and a stark examination of illness and mortality.
It was the capstone to a rich career playing a gallery of characters who were rarely glamorous. Mr. Trintignant was an emotionally fragile Fascist in “The Conformist” (1970); a timid, meticulous graduate student who accidentally falls in with a ribald bon vivant in Dino Risi’s 1962 “Il Sorpasso” (“The Easy Life”); and a repressed Roman Catholic from the provinces who resists the seductive advances of a beautiful divorced woman in “My Night at Maud’s” (1969).
“If some people laugh because I did not have sex with Maud, well, I would prefer being thought ridiculous to being thought a hero,” Mr. Trintignant said in a 1970 interview with The Times. “Even kissing scenes bore me.”
In 1969 he won the best actor award at the Cannes Film Festival for his performance as a magistrate investigating the assassination of a Greek politician in Costa-Gavras’s political thriller “Z,” which also won the foreign-language Oscar that year.
For American audiences, Mr. Trintignant did not fit the conventional images of French film stars, like the wisecracking Jean-Paul Belmondo, the working-class hero Jean Gabin or the suave sophisticate Maurice Chevalier. He was more understated.
“The best actors in the world,” he once said, “are those who feel the most and show the least.”
Jean-Louis Xavier Trintignant was born on Dec. 11, 1930, in Piolenc, a small town in southeastern France, where his father, Raoul, was a wealthy industrialist and local politician. Jean-Louis seriously considered becoming a racecar driver like his uncle Maurice Trintignant, a top competitor in the 1950s and ’60s who was only 13 years older than Jean-Louis. (Another uncle, Louis Trintignant, also raced and was killed in 1933 when his car crashed.)
Jean-Louis took up law studies instead, thinking he would follow his father into politics. But while a law student in Aix-en-Provence he attended a performance of “The Miser” by Molière and was so smitten that he decided on a stage career.
Mr. Trintignant moved to Paris to study acting and began appearing in theater productions at 20. After touring France in the early 1950s, he was hailed as one of the country’s most gifted young stage actors and was soon offered film contracts.
In Roger Vadim’s 1956 movie “And God Created Woman,” Mr. Trintignant starred as a young, naïve husband who is in love with his diabolically flirtatious wife, played by Brigitte Bardot (Mr. Vadim’s wife at the time) in what was considered her breakout sex-kitten role. Whether true or not, rumors circulated that she and Mr. Trintignant had a real-life affair during the filming. Ms. Bardot’s marriage to Mr. Vadim ended in 1957.
Mr. Vadim nonetheless cast Mr. Trintignant in the 1959 film “Les Liaisons Dangereuses,” adapted from a sexually scandalous 18th-century novel about a scheming noblewoman. Mr. Trintignant had the lesser but romantic role of the charming Chevalier Danceny, a music teacher for French nobility.
The Académie Française, the official arbiter of French culture, denounced the film as “desecrating a classic,” and it was condemned as salacious from Roman Catholic pulpits on both sides of the Atlantic.
Mr. Trintignant shared top billing with Vittorio Gassman in “Il Sorpasso,” which is widely considered Mr. Risi’s masterpiece. He played a shy law student who is enticed by Mr. Gassman’s libidinous extrovert and embarks on a rollicking car journey through the Italian countryside that ends tragically.
Still more memorable was Mr. Trintignant’s performance eight years laterin “The Conformist.” Based on a novel of the same title by Alberto Moravia, the film is a chilling psychological portrait of a secret policeman in Fascist Italy. Mr. Trintignant, in the lead role, arranges the assassination of his old friend, a left-wing university professor, whose young wife he covets.
Mr. Trintignant assumed his most romantic role, as a racecar driver, in “A Man and a Woman” (1966). The movie was an international hit, generating more box-office receipts than any previous French film. He said his early passion for racing — and an intimate knowledge of the sport conveyed to him by his uncles — had made his performance especially credible.
But he professed that he was uncomfortable in the movie’s explicit love scenes, in which his co-star was Anouk Aimée, a longtime friend of his wife at the time, the director Nadine Trintignant.
“It was embarrassing to find myself in bed with a woman that way,” he told The Times in 1970. “I had known Anouk for 10 years, and she was Nadine’s best friend, and the whole crew was watching.” The movie’s best scenes, Mr. Trintignant insisted, were his hairpin racing turns in Monte Carlo.
He went on to appear in an average of three films a year for the next three decades, more often as a supporting actor than as the lead.
An exception was the acclaimed 1994 film “Red,” the finale of the Polish director Krzysztof Kieslowski’s “Three Colors” trilogy. In a work that tracks the parallel lives of a group of people living outside Geneva, Mr. Trintignant played a cold retired judge who spied on his neighbors using high-tech surveillance equipment.
He also continued to act onstage occasionally.
Later in life Mr. Trintignant returned to his early passion for sports-car racing, participating in the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1980 and the Monte Carlo Rally in 1984. In the ’90s he spent much of his time tending a vineyard he operated in the South of France or acting in theater. His return to film in “Amour” came after an absence of more than a decade.
Mr. Trintignant’s first marriage, to the actress Stéphane Audran, ended in divorce. He married Nadine Marquand, then an actress, in 1960 and had three children with her: Vincent, now a director; Pauline, who died in infancy; and Marie, a successful actress (she had acted alongside her father at age 4 in “Mon Amour, Mon Amour,” which was directed by her mother) and the mother of four who at 41 was beaten to death in her hotel room in Vilnius, Lithuania, in the summer of 2003 while filming there.
The murder was a sensation in the European press. Ms. Trintignant’s 39-year-old boyfriend, Bertrand Cantat, one of France’s biggest rock stars, later admitted in a Lithuanian court that he had beaten her in a jealous rage over her plans to vacation with an ex-husband.
He was convicted of manslaughter in 2004 and released on parole in 2007, angering the Trintignant family and its supporters.
After Marie’s death, Mr. Trintignant fell into a severe depression.
“For three months I didn’t speak,” he told the Montreal newspaper The Gazette in 2012. “After that I realized I had to either stop living, commit suicide or continue to live.”
In 2011 he withdrew from a planned one-man show at the summer Avignon Festival in France when he learned that Mr. Cantat was to appear at the festival as well in an acting role onstage.
Mr. Trintignant’s marriage to Nadine Trintignant ended in divorce in 1976. He married Marianne Hoepfner, a racecar driver, in 2000. Information on other survivors was not immediately available.
Mr. Trintignant’s eyesight deteriorated in his later years, but he was accepting of his condition. “We weren’t meant to live more than 80 years,” he told The Gazette. “It’s not so bad as all that. I’m still happy when I’m alone. I have an inner life.”
Even at the height of his popularity, Mr. Trintignant insisted that acting was always a struggle.
“I am not a born actor,” he said in the 1970 Times interview. “Even today, I am not an instinctive actor. I prepare meticulously, and it is only when I am before the camera that I become completely free.”

Modern Love in miniature, featuring reader-submitted stories of no more than 100 words.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
I flew home from Berlin to Vancouver after two years abroad. My mother, Roberta, tasked me with removing my belongings from the attic. I sorted through boxes of memories. Flipping through an old notebook, I discovered an entry entitled, “Confessions,” written in cursive on Feb. 24, 2004, the eve of my 13th birthday: “I get so weird near girls and I think I’m lesbo.” A feeling of vindication and love for my younger self washed over me. I thought I hadn’t known I was gay until later on. In reality, I had always known. — Deidre Olsen
Naming a 10-week-old fetus was a bad idea. Two days after an ultrasound that revealed an empty gestational sac, I lay in a hospital bed, waiting for a surgeon to hasten the loss of what was already gone. I stared at the ceiling while gasping through sobs. “Feel your feelings,” the world likes to urge. OK, done. My sadness crushed me to a powder, but I didn’t blow away. I thought of my husband, at home at that same moment, leaning over our 20-month-old daughter’s crib and whispering the names of everyone who loves her. I remained whole. — Anne Manning
It was my fifth trip to Ireland, but my first time in Connemara, the place my grandmother had left, an area known for its storytelling. I was scared it wouldn’t live up to her stories, or maybe I wouldn’t. David, a cousin I hadn’t met before, raced me around, rhyming off dates and details, coloring in our ancestral lines. He handed me a photo, his grandfather in Canada, visiting my grandmother — standing together as we did then. I held in tears as David politely looked away. As I departed, he hugged me and said, “Come home again, soon.” — Casey Erin Wood
As a lifelong educator born with the surname Lerner, I joked with my students that I was destined to become a teacher. That role was my driving force for decades, until I became a grandfather. I never had grandparents; they were killed in the Holocaust. The other day, on a video chat, my grandson in a time zone to the west, stared into his screen and asked, “Is it dark outside by you?” “Yes.” “Then how come it’s not dark here?” With that question, my roles of teacher and grandparent joyfully converged. — Jack Lerner
See more Tiny Love Stories at nytimes.com/modernlove. Submit yours at nytimes.com/tinylovestories.
Want more from Modern Love? Watch the TV series; sign up for the newsletter; or listen to the podcast on iTunes, Spotify or Google Play. We also have swag at the NYT Store and two books, “Modern Love: True Stories of Love, Loss, and Redemption” and “Tiny Love Stories: True Tales of Love in 100 Words or Less.”

By Mekado MurphyMay 18, 2022
I’m the assistant film editor on The Times’s Culture desk. Between screenings of “Top Gun: Maverick” and “Jurassic World: Dominion,” I like to fire up a good indie podcast or a thoughtful YouTube tutorial.
Here are five things I’ve been watching and listening to lately →
Greg Daniels’s sci-fi comedy is about a future in which tech companies have created a digital afterlife. Now in its second season, it remains successful at taking existential ideas and grounding them in off-kilter humor.
Think you love music? Kirk Hamilton’s podcast will have you appreciating it in ways you didn’t know were possible.
Hamilton takes one song and breaks down the essentials of what makes it shine. Listen to the episode about Beyoncé’s “Single Ladies” and be blown away.
Film: ‘The Color Purple’ (1985)
I get teary-eyed just thinking about this movie. In Celie (Whoopi Goldberg), who crafted an extraordinary life despite the worst obstacles, I see my grandmothers, mother, aunt and sisters: all the heroic Black women who helped me become who I am.
Lewis brings a fun personality and a sense of inventiveness to his videos about interior design hacks, which include low-hassle ways to put a decorative stamp on your apartment rental and tips on shopping at Ikea.
This gift of an album by Brandi Carlile, from 2015, has been on my Spotify rotation constantly as of late. It’s rare that almost every song on a record tells its own heartfelt tale in its own style, but Carlile and her team of impeccable musicians pull it off here. And her voice of soaring highs and pensive lows is one I will follow most anywhere.
Here are some more recent favorites:

“A Strange Loop,” a scalding story about a gay, Black theater artist confronting self-doubt and societal disapproval, won the Tony Award for best new musical Sunday night, giving another huge accolade to a challenging contemporary production that had already won a Pulitzer Prize.
The soul-baring show, nurtured by nonprofits and developed over many years, triumphed over two flashy pop musicals, “MJ,” a jukebox musical about the entertainer Michael Jackson, and “Six,” an irreverent reconsideration of Henry VIII’s ill-fated wives, in a six-way race.
“A Strange Loop” garnered widespread praise from critics; on Sunday night, Michael R. Jackson, the writer who spent nearly two decades working on it, acknowledged how personal the project was as he collected his first Tony Award, for best book of a musical.
“I wrote it at a time when I didn’t know what I was going to do with my life,” he said. “I didn’t know how I was going to move forward. I felt unseen. I felt unheard. I felt misunderstood, and I just wanted to create a little bit of a life raft for myself as a Black gay man.”
The ceremony — the 75th Tony Awards presentation — provided an opportunity for Broadway to celebrate its return and its perseverance, hoping that a dash of razzle-dazzle, a dollop of contemporary creativity and a sprinkling of nostalgia will help lure theatergoers back to a pandemic-scarred industry now in full swing but still craving more customers.
The season that just ended was a tough one: It started late (most theaters remained closed until September), and was repeatedly disrupted (coronavirus cases obliterated its old show-must-go-on ethos, prompting cancellations and performer absences). With tourism still down, it was also short on audience.
“Our industry has been through so much,” Marianne Elliott, who won a Tony Award for directing a gender-reversed revival of the Stephen Sondheim musical comedy “Company,” said in her acceptance speech. “It felt at times that live theater was endangered.”
But in the glittering ceremony at Radio City Music Hall in Manhattan, a parade of performers celebrated all that went well: Theaters reopened, long-running shows returned, and an unusually diverse array of plays and musicals arrived to entertain, provoke and inspire theatergoers.
The best play Tony went to “The Lehman Trilogy,” a sweeping saga about the rise and fall of the Lehman Brothers banking business. Using three shape-shifting actors, contained within a spinning glass box of a set, the play journeyed all the way from the Wall Street giant’s humble origins in 1844 to its ignominious collapse in 2008. The show, written by Stefano Massini and Ben Power, picked up not only the Tony for best play, but also for the play’s director, Sam Mendes; its set designer, Es Devlin; and the great British actor, Simon Russell Beale, who thanked audiences for showing up, despite pandemic protocols and public health concerns.
“You trusted us,” he said. “You came with open arms. It wasn’t easy at that point to come to the theater because of all those regulations. But you welcomed us.”
“The Lehman Trilogy” won out against four other contenders, “Clyde’s,” “Hangmen,” “The Minutes” and “Skeleton Crew.”
“Take Me Out” emerged victorious in the best play revival category, a particularly strong field that included productions of “American Buffalo,” “How I Learned to Drive,” “Trouble in Mind” and “For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf.”
Written by Richard Greenberg, “Take Me Out” first ran on Broadway in 2003 and won the best play Tony that year; this year’s revival, presented by the nonprofit Second Stage Theater, was directed by Scott Ellis. It is about what happens when a baseball player, portrayed in this production by Jesse Williams, comes out as gay; Jesse Tyler Ferguson picked up his first Tony for his portrayal of the player’s investment adviser, who is also gay.
“Company,” a musical first staged in 1970 that wittily and sometimes bitterly examines married life, won the Tony for musical revival, besting a much-praised revival of “Caroline, or Change,” as well as a starry revival of “The Music Man” that, thanks to the appeal of leading man Hugh Jackman, has been the top-selling show on Broadway since it opened.
The award for “Company” reflected not only admiration for the reimagined production but also respect for Sondheim, its composer and lyricist, who is revered as one of the most important figures in American musical theater, and who died in November. The “Hamilton” creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, who was mentored by Sondheim, introduced a tribute to him, saying, “I stand here on behalf of generations of artists he took the time to encourage.”
The Tonys, hosted by Ariana DeBose and broadcast on CBS, honored not only shows, performers, writers and designers, but also the understudies who saved so many performances this season. And DeBose, who this year won an Academy Award as Anita in the Steven Spielberg remake of “West Side Story,” paid tribute to the season’s extraordinary diversity, saying, “I feel like the phrase Great White Way is becoming more of a nickname as opposed to a how-to guide.”
She noted the season’s high volume of work by Black writers, which came about as producers and theater owners scrambled to respond to demands for more representation and opportunity for Black artists after the national unrest over racism during the summer of 2020. This year’s class of Tony nominees featured a large number of Black artists, reflecting the fact that work by Black writers led to more jobs for Black performers, designers, directors, and more.
The season being honored — the first since the coronavirus pandemic forced theaters to close in March of 2020 — featured 56 productions, including 34 eligible for Tony Awards because they opened between Feb. 20, 2020 and May 4, 2022. (The others were returning productions, many of them long-running hits.)
The Covid challenges were costly: 6.7 million people attended a Broadway show during the 2021-22 season, down from 14.8 million during the 2018-19 season, which was the last full season before the pandemic; total grosses were $845 million, down from $1.8 billion.
The Tonys served as a chance for Broadway to try to entice television viewers to become Times Square visitors. But one challenge: Viewership for all televised awards shows has been steadily falling. The Tonys audience had a recent peak in 2016, at 8.7 million viewers, when “Hamilton” was a contender; in 2019, there were 5.4 million viewers, and last year, when the Tonys held a ceremony in September to coincide with the reopening of theaters, just 2.6 million tuned in.
This year’s winners featured some Broadway veterans, including Patti LuPone, picking up her third Tony Award for her ferocious turn as an alcohol-addled married friend of the chronically single protagonist in “Company”; and Phylicia Rashad, winning her second Tony for playing a factory worker in “Skeleton Crew.” Among the other performers who collected Tony Awards: Joaquina Kalukango, for her starring role as a 19th-century New York City tavern owner in “Paradise Square”; Matt Doyle, who played a groom with a zany case of wedding day jitters in “Company,” and Deirdre O’Connell, who won for her remarkable lip-synced performance as a kidnapping victim in the play “Dana H.”
“I would love for this little prize to be a token for every person who is wondering, ‘Should I be trying to make something that could work on Broadway or that could win me a Tony Award, or should I be making the weird art that is haunting me, that frightens me, that I don’t know how to make, that I don’t know if anyone in the whole world will understand?’” O’Connell said. “Please let me, standing here, be a little sign to you from the universe to make the weird art.”
“A Strange Loop” tells the story of a Broadway usher, named Usher, who is trying to write a musical about a Broadway usher trying to write a musical; his thoughts, many of them self-critical, are portrayed by six performers, who each appear in multiple guises. The musical began its life Off Broadway, with a 2019 production at Playwrights Horizons in association with Page 73 Productions. After winning the Pulitzer, it had another pre-Broadway production at Woolly Mammoth Theater Company in Washington, D.C. It had support throughout those nonprofit runs from the producer Barbara Whitman, who is now the lead producer of the commercial run on Broadway; she was also a lead producer of the Tony-winning “Fun Home.”
The Broadway production, which opened in April, has seen an uptick at the box office since being nominated for 11 Tony Awards (it won two), but has room for growth: During the week that ended June 5, it filled 89 percent of the 912 seats at the Lyceum Theater, grossing $685,772, with an average ticket price of $105.
“Six” and “MJ,” although unsuccessful in the six-way race for best new musical, are doing substantially better at the box office, and did notch some big victories at the awards ceremony.
“Six” picked up the Tony Award for best score during the first minutes of the ceremony. Its music and lyrics were written by two young British artists, Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss, who came up with the idea while undergraduates at Cambridge University, and who were discovered by a commercial producer following a buzz-building first run at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe. The musical’s costume designer, Gabriella Slade, also won a Tony for her Tudor-style-meets-contemporary-clubwear outfits.
“MJ” also landed key prizes, including for the lead performance by Myles Frost, a 22-year-old in his first professional stage role, and for the crowd-pleasing choreography by Christopher Wheeldon, who also directed the musical.
The other contenders, “Girl From the North Country,” featuring the songs of Bob Dylan; “Mr. Saturday Night,” starring Billy Crystal as a washed-up comedian; and “Paradise Square,” about race relations in Civil War-era New York, appeared to be less of a factor in the competition.
That first hour of the awards ceremony, viewable only on the streaming channel Paramount+, was hosted by Darren Criss and Julianne Hough, both of whom are currently starring in Broadway plays — he in a revival of “American Buffalo,” and she in a new farce called “POTUS.” They began the evening with a Broadway-is-back tribute, written by Criss, extolling the virtues and challenges of theater (the song included a plea for no slapping, in a dig at the Oscars).
A lifetime achievement award was given to Angela Lansbury, a beloved star of stage, film and television who was also a five-time host of the Tony Awards, more than any other person. Lansbury, who is 96, was not able to attend in person, or even to accept by video; instead the actor Len Cariou, who starred with Lansbury in the original production of “Sweeney Todd,” for which they both won Tony Awards, paid tribute to her and introduced a video of career highlights. Then the New York City Gay Men’s Chorus performed the title song from “Mame,” which was the show in which she won the first of her five competitive Tony Awards.
The Tony Awards, named for actress Antoinette Perry, are presented by the Broadway League, a trade association that represents theater owners and producers, and the American Theater Wing, a theater advocacy organization. The awards have been presented since 1947; there was no ceremony in 2020, and last year’s September ceremony honored shows from the truncated prepandemic season.
This year’s awards were spread among 11 shows, with none coming anywhere near the record 12 prizes picked up by “The Producers” in 2001. The biggest hauls went to “Company” and “The Lehman Trilogy,” each of which won five awards; “MJ” won four, and “A Strange Loop,” “Dana H.,” “Six” and “Take Me Out” each won two. Taking home one prize each were “Girl From the North Country,” “Paradise Square,” “Skeleton Crew” and “The Skin of Our Teeth.”

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Last month, the Bob Dylan Center opened in Tulsa, Okla., offering researchers unparalleled access to Dylan’s archives and peeling back the layers on his songwriting process, long the object of study and fascination. And this month, “Lou Reed: Caught Between the Twisted Stars” opened at the Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center — it’s the first exhibition drawn from Reed’s archive, which was acquired by the New York Public Library.
Both of these seek to offer deeper understandings of these rock icons, but they also offer the opportunity for alternate narratives to emerge. Dylan and Reed always carefully tended to their own mythologies — now the behind-the-scenes tools are available for all to see.
On this week’s Popcast, a conversation about the value of even the unlikeliest ephemera, the difference between public and private archives and the specific ways Dylan and Reed found methods to distance themselves from their pasts.
Ben Sisario, The New York Times’s music business reporter
Connect With Popcast. Become a part of the Popcast community: Join the show’s Facebook group and Discord channel. We want to hear from you! Tune in, and tell us what you think at popcast@nytimes.com. Follow our host, Jon Caramanica, on Twitter: @joncaramanica.

By Joshua BaroneJune 9, 2022
I’m the assistant classical music and dance editor on The Times’s Culture desk.
After years of being a chronic completist, I’m finally learning how to break up with bad books and TV shows.
Here are five things I’m watching and reading instead →
This is basically a gay “Juno,” and I mean that as a compliment. Like Diablo Cody, who wrote that mid-aughts charmer, Jared Frieder finds heart in the story of a teenager learning that he might be H.I.V. positive and having to spend his last summer before college waiting to know for sure.
Part of a trio of Kelly exhibitions now at Matthew Marks’s Chelsea galleries, this show is a delightful glimpse into the playful side of an artist better known for formal austerity. Kelly’s rarely seen postcard collages reflect his sense of space and shape, yes, but also of camp.
What hooked me on this Swiss series was the trope — familiar to many New Yorkers, including me — of reconciling big-city ambition and a small-town background. It’s a beautifully shot, expansive family drama.
I’ve spent the past year and a half learning German through the Goethe-Institut, but language courses aren’t really designed to teach the most current trends in culture and argot.
Goethe’s TikTok account, however, is a gift — small doses of trivia and lessons in, say, transgender and nonbinary vocabulary. It’s helpful for students and tourists alike.
As I write this, I’m preparing for a hike in the mountains near Zakopane, Poland. For homework, a friend recommended this Zygmunt Miloszewski art-world thriller, which is partially set there. It’s breezy, a little naughty and rich with twists that keep you on unsure ground.
Here are some more recent favorites:

The authorities said that no arrests had been made and that the shooting appeared to be an isolated event. They were still looking for the attacker, who opened fire during an argument.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
An attacker opened fire on a light rail train in San Francisco on Wednesday morning, killing one person during an argument and injuring a bystander before running out of the train, the authorities said.
The San Francisco Police Department received a call around 10 a.m. about a shooting at the Forest Hill station on the Muni Metro, the city’s public rail system, Officer Kathryn Winters told reporters on Wednesday. When the officers arrived, they found that the train had left the station and was heading toward the Castro station, one stop northeast of the Forest Hill station, Officer Winters said.
“Most of the people from the train exited the train quickly,” Officer Winters said, adding that the police were unsure of how crowded the train or station had been at the time of the shooting.
When the police arrived at the Castro station, they found two victims, Officer Winters said. The San Francisco Fire Department said in a statement on Wednesday that it treated two victims “with penetrating injuries” at the station.
One victim died at the scene, despite receiving emergency care by the police and emergency workers, and another victim was taken to a hospital with injuries that were not life threatening, Officer Winters said. Myrna Melgar, the supervisor for San Francisco’s District 7, said on Twitter that the assailant ran out of the train at the Castro station.
The shooting happened as the train was leaving the Forest Hill station, Ms. Melgar said in a later statement, quoting the police. The assailant and a victim “were in a heated verbal argument,” she said, and witnesses heard three or four gunshots. One person was killed, and a bystander was taken to a hospital with a knee injury.
“This appears to be an isolated incident,” Officer Winters told reporters at the scene, adding that no arrests had been made.
The Police Department said in a statement that the shooting did not appear to have targeted the L.G.B.T.Q. community or have any connection to Pride events taking place in the city this week.
The department did not know whether there was a relationship between the shooter and the victims, Officer Winters said.
The San Francisco Department of Emergency Management told residents to avoid the area because of police activity.
The police were working to retrieve security video recorded at the station, Officer Winters said.
The shooting happened weeks after voters in San Francisco recalled the city’s progressive district attorney, Chesa Boudin, in part over perceptions that crime in the city was on the rise.
The city has been facing persistent property crimes, especially car break-ins and burglaries, but data from the Police Department shows that many other types of crime, including homicides, have been stable or have declined during the pandemic.

Ten years later, a look back at the movie that helped the actor move from serious heartthrob to serious thespian.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
“Any assault on the borders of perception is going to seem rash at first,” says Eric Packer, the cocksure, self-destructive, limo-riding finance guy at the heart of David Cronenberg’s 2012 Don DeLillo adaptation “Cosmopolis.” The character is talking about currency speculation, but he may just as well be talking about the actor playing him: Robert Pattinson, known to audiences then as Edward Cullen, the co-protagonist of the “Twilight” franchise, and to audiences now as not merely a Batman, but the Batman. (And the co-protagonist of the “Twilight” franchise.)
At 10 years, “Cosmopolis” is a footnote in Cronenberg’s career and a pivotal moment in Pattinson’s. Before the movie premiered at Cannes in 2012, Pattinson’s work in films like “Little Ashes” (a romantic drama about Salvador Dalí’s love affair with Federico García Lorca), “Remember Me” (a romantic drama that ends in the World Trade Center on the morning of 9/11) and “Water for Elephants” (a romantic drama set in a circus that frankly plays like a circus itself) earned him negligible distinction compared to the “Twilight” movies, none of which distinguished him universally, for the better. Slant Magazine described Pattinson in “Twilight” as a “blank, pasty-faced, fire-haired Gap model”; The Austin Chronicle opined that his “cheekbones keep getting in the way of the story”; Slate semi-praised his performance at the expense of Catherine Hardwicke’s filmmaking, writing that Pattinson “doesn’t seem to have been given much direction beyond ‘melt the camera with your eyes.’”
As the “Twilight” films lumbered along, Pattinson’s notices grew slimmer, leading to his near-absence in reviews of the property’s capper, “The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn — Part 2,” which opened in theaters in the fall of 2012. (His co-star, Kristen Stewart, received the bulk of critics’ attention.) The conclusion of “Twilight” liberated Pattinson from his image as Edward Cullen, but “Cosmopolis” allowed him to make a new beginning, with a stage (and a stretch limousine) to explore his talent in ways his previous roles didn’t let him.
Stilted, strange and too eager to make its points about the financial elite and reckless capitalism during Occupy Wall Street, “Cosmopolis” cast Pattinson against contemporary screen titans (Juliette Binoche, Paul Giamatti); assigned him awkward dialogue about everything from Eric’s gastrointestinal health to his mother-in-law’s physique; and inserted him in situations, from kinky to violent to repulsive, far beyond his purview as a Y.A. heartthrob. Eric has ferocious casual sex with Binoche’s character, Didi Fancher, in the limo, has his prostate examined in the limo and in one of the movie’s rare scenes outside the limo, has athletic casual sex with his bodyguard, Kendra (Patricia McKenzie), then orders her to blast him with her stun gun. “I’m looking for more,” he rasps at her from rumpled sheets. “Show me something I don’t know.”
Again, “Cosmopolis” lends the sense that Pattinson is talking about Pattinson. Maybe, after a runaway franchise, Pattinson felt like he had something to prove. By his estimation, 75 percent of his performance in the “Twilight” movies came from his hair. No wonder he jumped on a movie about a man driving across New York City to see his barber. Eric’s ’do is subdued from the start — slicked, tight and controlled, much like Pattinson’s performance. He’s rigid with purpose, masking Eric’s interior doubts with a stiff exterior bravado that comes rapidly undone by the film’s climax. Throughout, Pattinson shows flashes of the actor he’s capable of being with the right material and the right director. The next decade frequently gave him both.
He appeared in a sprawl of independent films from seasoned auteurs and cutting-edge modern directors: David Michôd’s “The Rover,” Werner Herzog’s “Queen of the Desert,” James Gray’s “The Lost City of Z,” Brady Corbet’s “Childhood of a Leader,” the Safdie brothers’ “Good Time,” the Zellner brothers’ “Damsel,” Robert Eggers’s “The Lighthouse,” Claire Denis’s “High Life.” (He also teamed up again with Cronenberg in 2014 for “Maps to the Stars.”) Rather than parlay commercial success into roles befitting his celebrity stature, Pattinson took the money and ran, appearing in movies most of his fans almost certainly wouldn’t watch, or know about, without his involvement (and probably didn’t even with it). He didn’t play his career safe. He got weird.
“Cosmopolis” showed everyone watching the potential Pattinson couldn’t demonstrate in the boundaries of the “Twilight” movies, and he’s realized that potential in countless roles ever since. Certainly there are traces of Eric Packer in, for example, Samuel Alabaster, the effete, well-to-do pioneer man of “Damsel”; in Ephraim Winslow, the overambitious lighthouse keeper aspirant of “The Lighthouse”; or in Connie Nikas, the “Good Time” character who shares both Eric’s abandon and his apathy for bystanders caught in his path.
After making the most of his “Twilight” clout working on off-kilter, elusive and plain old bizarre indie movies, Pattinson has circled back around to something familiar: franchise blockbusters. Matt Reeves’s film “The Batman” returns Pattinson to his roots, in a sense. (Cronenberg, by happy coincidence, has stayed simpatico with Pattinson by returning to his own roots, body horror, in his new film, “Crimes of the Future.”) The surface similarities of “The Batman” to “Twilight” are matched by a few substantive similarities to “Cosmopolis”; much like Cronenberg’s movie, Reeves’s film is about a man too young to possess as much wealth as he does, who is driven in part by lingering grief over his dead father. But that’s where the comparisons between these two films end.
By the laws of franchise maintenance, Pattinson is set to star as the Dark Knight once more in an inevitable sequel, but by the lessons learned in “Cosmopolis,” he’ll most likely go back to making offbeat choices before long. Those are the choices that define him now, after all, not “Twilight,” and not “The Batman.” All he needed was to climb in a limousine and take a ride with Cronenberg.
“Cosmopolis” is available to stream on Amazon.

Despite picking up 5 prizes at this month’s Tony Awards, the Sondheim-blessed revival was facing a tough summer at the box office.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
A Tony-winning, gender-swapped, Sondheim-blessed revival of “Company” will end its Broadway run on July 31.
The production, directed by Marianne Elliott, has been noteworthy for the ways in which it inverts the 1970 original. The pathbreaking musical, with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and a book by George Furth, has always been about a single person turning 35 while surrounded by paired-off friends, but in the current production that character is a woman named Bobbie, whereas in previous productions it was a man named Bobby.
The show was the winningest musical at this month’s Tony Awards, picking up the prizes for best musical revival, best director (Elliott), best featured actress (Patti LuPone), best featured actor (Matt Doyle) and best scenic design (Bunny Christie). But its sales have been decent, rather than outstanding, and the lead producer, Chris Harper, said he had decided now was the time to wrap up.
“Listen: It’s no secret to you or anyone else — it’s tough out there, and summer was going to be hard and September even harder,” Harper said in an interview. “I wanted to celebrate the final six weeks and go out on a high.”
Harper said it was too early to say whether the revival, which was capitalized for up to $13 million, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, would recoup its costs. The show, like many others, received $10 million in federal assistance from the Small Business Administration during the pandemic. It grossed $640,297 during the week ending June 12, playing to houses that were 74 percent full.
Harper said the show is planning a North American tour to start in the fall of 2023.
“It’s been glorious, and I feel so completely proud of the production,” he said. “It was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to do a Sondheim in a radically new way, and to have him be so proud of it was amazing. So this is sad, but it’s also a moment to celebrate what it has achieved.”
The revival, starring Katrina Lenk, began previews on March 2, 2020, and then 10 days later was forced to shut down, along with the rest of Broadway, because of the coronavirus pandemic. It resumed previews on Nov. 15, 2021, and Sondheim attended that performance; he died 11 days later, at the age of 91; in a final interview, he expressed unfettered enthusiasm for the production.
The revival finally opened on Dec. 9, 2021; at the time of its closing it will have played 300 performances.
The production, conceived by Elliott, began its life in London, where it won the Olivier Award for best musical revival. LuPone, a beloved Broadway figure who plays an alcohol-addled older friend to Bobbie, also appeared in the London production, and her rendition of the classic “The Ladies Who Lunch” song on both sides of the Atlantic was a highlight. Doyle, who joined the cast in New York, plays a groom with wedding day jitters and sings another well-known Sondheim song, “Getting Married Today”; in the original, that song was sung by the bride-to-be in a heterosexual couple, but in this revival the couple is same-sex.
“Company” is the fourth Broadway show this month to announce an unanticipated closing, following “Dear Evan Hansen,” “Tina” and “Come From Away.”

The accident happened in transit to a local airport in Baja California Sur in Mexico. Six other cast and crew members were injured, Netflix confirmed.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Two cast members of the Netflix show “The Chosen One” died after an accident on Thursday in Baja California Sur, Mexico, that left six other cast and crew members injured, Netflix said.
The accident occurred in transit from Santa Rosalía to the local airport, Netflix said. The accident was not on set, the company said, adding that those who were injured — two cast members and four crew members — were in stable condition.
The company did not provide details about what happened, but The Associated Press reported that the cast and crew members were in a van that crashed.
Redrum, the production company behind the show, has temporarily stopped production, Netflix said. Representatives from Redrum could not be immediately reached for comment on Sunday.
“The Chosen One,” according to a Netflix description, is about a 12-year-old boy who learns he is the returned Jesus Christ, destined to save humankind. The show is based on a comic book series by Mark Millar and Peter Gross. Netflix said on Twitter in April that shooting had started in Mexico.
In a statement on Facebook on Friday, the Baja California state government confirmed that the two actors killed were Raymundo Garduño Cruz and Juan Francisco González Aguilar.
“Our condolences to their family, friends and the Baja California arts community,” the government said.
SAG-AFTRA, the union representing film, television and radio workers, said in a statement that it had been in contact with Netflix, as well as with Asociación Nacional de Actores, which represents actors in Mexico, about the accident.
“We are investigating the circumstances with local production,” SAG-AFTRA said. “On set safety is always our top priority. We will continue to take all necessary steps to ensure that our members and others are safe in their workplace.”

Ukraine’s casualties in the war against Russia are a closely guarded secret. But those who have been in the trenches along the front line know how relentless the fight has become.
Open graves at a military cemetery outside the city of Dnipro in eastern Ukraine.Credit...
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
DNIPRO, Ukraine — Nearly 600 graves stretch to the edges of the military cemetery outside the city of Dnipro, marked by ranks of yellow and blue Ukrainian flags snapping in the wind.
The graves represent just a small percentage of the thousands of Ukrainian soldiers who have died in eight years of war since Russia first began to annex parts of their country in 2014, but the rapid expansion of this graveyard in eastern Ukraine is telling.
Almost half the graves are fresh. Draped in wreaths of artificial flowers or marked with a wooden cross stuck in the bare mud, they belong to soldiers killed in the last three months, since Russia began its large-scale invasion of Ukraine.
“There would not be anything here at all, if they had not come,” Viktoria Martynova said of the Russians. “We did not attack anyone. We were living in our own country, in our homes, on our own land.”
Her husband, Oleksiy Martynov, an electrician, lay in one of the new graves. He enlisted on the first day of the war and was killed in a mine explosion near the Russian border in April, barely six weeks later.
The number of Ukrainian casualties remains a closely guarded secret. The media-conscious government of President Volodymyr Zelensky has carefully controlled the flow of information in an apparent attempt to keep public morale high. Hospitals and military officials are forbidden from disclosing casualty numbers. Reporters are generally not permitted to visit the front line in Ukraine and photographs and videos showing wounded and dead soldiers are rare.
Yet with Russian artillery pounding its forces in the east, Ukraine is seeing casualties mount at such a rate that last week Mr. Zelensky said the army was losing 60 to 100 soldiers a day, and for the first time visited troops on the front lines.
For the men at the front, the strain is visible: in the dead-tired eyes of a police chief after another day leading his men in a bombarded city; in the blank stare of a commander who had just lost one of his best soldiers; and in the tense look of a group of soldiers heading for the first time to ground zero, as they call the frontline trenches.
Those soldiers are facing perhaps the most grueling weeks and months of the war as they try to stem, and survive, the Russian onslaught.
The nature of the fight has changed for the Ukrainians from up-close urban fighting and hit-and-run attacks on Russian armored columns around Kyiv, at which they excelled, to long-distance artillery battles and airstrikes on the eastern front, where Russia’s superior firepower gives it the upper hand.
Soldiers who served in the trenches last week near the village of Dovhenke near the contested region of Donetsk described hiking to positions and digging in as tank shells, mortars and cluster bombs landed around them.
“We were digging in on our knees and in the mud because it was raining,” said Samara, 48, the deputy leader of a unit who has completed five rotations on the front line. Like most soldiers he asked to be identified by his code name for security reasons.
“The last 48 hours we did not have moment of silence,” he said.
A tank blasted at their positions for five hours, then Russian infantry began an assault on foot, he said. Ukrainian snipers stalled the infantry advance and soldiers managed to lay a mine in the tank’s path, but the men in the trenches could do little but wait it out, he said.
“When a tank is firing you have to hide,” he said. “It’s a difficult situation.” His tin cup was punctured with several shrapnel holes. “I left it outside the trench,” he said, laughing. “I did not lift my head to see how it happened.”
No one sleeps during the 72-hour stint at “zero,” he said. The army had tried different lengths of rotations and determined that three days was the limit men should do before swapping out, he said.
Several soldiers said one of the hardest parts was digging in.
“We only had one spade and it was not very good,” said a 19-year-old soldier who uses the code name Air. At first things were quiet, so the men sat around joking and smoking as if on a camping excursion, he said.
They had dug a shallow trench, enough to lie in, but when the shelling started it proved barely enough. “The only thing you think about is why we dug so little,” he said. “We did not panic but my heart was beating so fast.”
Mortars and cluster bombs landed as close as 10 or 15 meters away, he said. “When you lift your head, you understand you are in a fog and you smell the gunpowder.”
One soldier, Vadym Melnyk, 40, who holds a doctorate in economics and teaches at Kyiv University, said he was disappointed not to see any evidence of Western-supplied weapons during his first rotation at the front last week.
“Unfortunately I didn’t see any,” he said after his return. “And that place now is one of the most difficult on the front.”
Tasked with holding positions against a Russian attack, the unit was armed only with Soviet-made assault rifles and anti-tank weapons, he said. They did not even have American-made Javelin missiles, which have been sent in large numbers to Ukraine, he said.
The Russians, he said, had much greater firepower, including multiple rocket launcher systems, tanks and big caliber guns. “They used everything they had,” he said. “They were firing at us without any problems.”
He said he was troubled that for two days their unit was under fire from the same Russian mortar position but Ukrainian artillery forces did not seem to do anything to knock it out.
Planes dropped cluster bombs overhead but luckily for the unit the canister opened at some distance away and the bomblets did not reach their positions, Mr. Melnyk said. He also said he saw white phosphorus dropped in the woods near their positions. It looked like a firework salute, he said, adding that a soldier in a friend’s unit had lost his sight from horrific burns.
The fighting at Dovhenke, which lies south of the town of Izium, has been particularly intense in recent weeks as Russian forces punched their way south in a move to seize the last part of the Luhansk region. Russian forces captured the village at the end of May and have continued pushing toward the town of Sloviansk.
Airstrikes remain persistently devastating, and Ukraine seems to have little defense against them, commanders and soldiers said. One soldier said his regiment lost 28 men in one night of bombardment by Russian jets last week.
Yet those who survive a close call said it inspired a greater determination. No one was ready to quit in his unit, Mr. Melnyk said.
“Everyone stayed until the end of the rotation,” he said. The group included 19- and 20-year-olds, and men in their 50s, including a former convict and men with doctorates. “It’s such a crazy mix but everyone feels the same — we must be there, we must fight and we must win.”
He was aware of the mounting casualties, he said, but the Russians lost men, too.
“If you want to win you should fight,” he said. “We don’t have another way.”

In this new HBO series by Olivier Assayas, a continuation of his self-referential cult film from 1996, past and present are inextricably intertwined.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Most shows fall within recognizable categories: original stories, spinoffs, docudramas or, increasingly, reboots and revivals.
Then there is “Irma Vep.” Olivier Assayas’s new HBO series, starring Alicia Vikander, is more like a braid in which the past and the present are inextricably intertwined. Its origins go back more than a century, though it will be more helpful to start our story in 1996, when a film bearing the same title came out.
Back then, Assayas was a former critic turned filmmaker with a handful of intimate art-house dramas under his belt. “Irma Vep” brought him international acclaim.
Not because it was a commercial hit, mind you. The movie “didn’t make exactly a splash at the box office,” the French writer-director said in a video conversation from his office in Paris last month. “It didn’t do that great.”
What “Irma Vep” had in spades, however, was cool.
This was thanks partly to its meta subject matter. The real-life Hong Kong action star Maggie Cheung — to whom Assayas was later married for a few years — played a version of herself shooting a remake of “Les Vampires” (1915-16), a French silent film serial, by Louis Feuillade, about a disguise-loving criminal named Irma Vep.
And then there was Assayas’s fingers-in-socket style, which generated such memorable scenes as Cheung anxiously fidgeting in a black latex catsuit as Sonic Youth rained electricity on the soundtrack.
“I think it’s a movie that a lot of people hold dear, especially because it’s about cinema,” Ravi Nandan, the head of TV at A24, the production company behind the series, said on the phone from Los Angeles. “So people inside of filmmaking, both Hollywood and independent cinema, have all seen it and loved it.”
“It’s sort of like a touchstone in that Truffaut, ‘Day for Night’ sort of way,” he added.
The series, which premieres Monday on HBO, is not a sequel sliced up into eight episodes; Assayas goes for a literary analogy when trying to explain the project’s nature. “Turning ‘Irma Vep’ into the new ‘Irma Vep’ is like moving from poetry to novel — and to a thick novel,” he said. (While the show works on its own, the matryoshka doll structure is more rewarding if you have seen the movie, which is currently streaming on HBO Max and the Criterion Channel.)
That this was not a rehash was among the reasons Vikander signed on. “He was like, ‘No, no, it’s just a continuation of it — I’m not finished with it yet, that’s why I’m interested in doing it,’ ” she said in a video chat from London, recalling Assayas’s pitch. “I could see that he had that small fire within him.”
Another reason was their friendship: The pair met when he thought he had to recast his 2016 film “Personal Shopper” because its intended lead, Kristen Stewart, had a scheduling conflict. In the end, Stewart was able to free herself and make that movie, but Assayas and Vikander stayed in touch. When the series took shape, the Swedish actress was his first choice for the lead character of Mira, a Hollywood star who goes to Paris to shoot a remake of an old silent film serial about — well, you’ve heard this one before.
“I had a feeling that she had not unleashed her full potential,” Assayas said of Vikander. “I thought she’s funny, she’s smart, she’s quick, she has this profound understanding and love of movies. I felt that the combination of us two, something could happen.”
Vikander, who first drew wide notice for playing an android in “Ex Machina” and won an Academy Award for the period drama “The Danish Girl” (2015), is not generally known for lighthearted material. So, the comic dimension of “Irma Vep” was part of the attraction.
“I was longing to do that,” she said, laughing in delight. “And I think Olivier knew that from knowing me, my private persona. He was like, ‘Yeah, you need to let that out more.’ I think that this is just the beginning.”
In the show, the humor usually bubbles up in conjunction with the antics of the French cast and crew Mira is working with, led by the mercurial René Vidal (Vincent Macaigne), a neurotic, cinema-obsessed director who has already made a movie about Irma Vep (starring a Chinese actress named “Jade Lee” as a stand-in for Cheung) and is now back at it with a series. Amusingly, Macaigne’s speaking cadence often sounds like Assayas’s, and while the director agrees that he’s partly written himself into René, he said he is nicer.
“I don’t scream at people, you know,” he said, laughing. “I don’t attack my actors.”
Still, it’s clear that parallels between art and life are woven into the new show’s fabric. And each iteration of “Irma Vep” brings additional, increasingly complex ripples of self-reference. “I’m part of the story of the character Irma Vep in the sense that it starts with Louis Feuillade in 1916, and it travels through cinema up to the present,” Assayas said.
“I like the idea of layers of time combining in the movie, which is not something you can do very often,” he continued. “And there is the relationship to my own work, how it ages, how I interact with myself a quarter of a century apart, how the events surrounding the film — which, to be transparent, is my marriage to Maggie Cheung — is also something that echoes very profoundly and essentially with the goings-on in the series. And how also modern cinema has a dialogue with silent film.”
As for Mira, many viewers might assume she’s a stand-in for Stewart — we first see Mira arriving in Paris wearing shades and a slouchy beanie, nursing a broken heart after being dumped by her girlfriend. It’s a resemblance Assayas both soft-pedals and does not refute.
“There’s a little bit of it but not really,” he said. “This was written with Alicia in mind, but then you can’t escape the fact that my experience of an American movie star is Kristen Stewart. I don’t know that many of them, and she’s a friend, and I love her and I admire her. So yes, there must be elements of Kristen — Kristen is haunting the film.”
As for Vikander, her identification with her character also had limits. “Probably one of the things with Mira that I can mostly relate to is maybe her passionate love for cinema,” she said. “But it was also fun doing it with a character that is quite different from me.”
But the new “Irma Vep” is more than a series à clef, or a mere patchwork of references to other stars and other films. Under its playful manner and some very funny side plots — one, in particular, involves the need to source crack cocaine for an addled actor — Assayas continues to explore what was at the heart of the 1996 movie.
“The series is about the thin line between reality and fantasy; it’s about how we all live simultaneously in a material world and an immaterial world,” he said. “When you’re directing, when you are acting, you are playing a dangerous game, in a certain way, with your identity — you are being yourself and you are being someone else, and you struggle to bring out as much truth as you can.”
For Mira, a passageway between her regular life and the land of make-believe is Irma Vep’s catsuit, here rendered not in latex but in a silky fabric closer to the serial’s version. As with the fictionalized Cheung in 1996, the costume connects Mira to Irma. (By now you surely have noticed that their names are an anagram, which is yet another reference to the source material.)
It comes as little surprise to learn the catsuit’s spell worked on the series’s star, too. “You’re extremely visible because it’s so body-tight, but I also feel like a ninja — I just disappear,” Vikander said. “When I was in this whole black thing, I really immersed and really enjoyed doing it. It felt like the physicality of the part.
“It was one of those things that I had thought about a lot, but when I first tried on the costume,” she continued, snapping her fingers, “she just appeared.”

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Last month, the Bob Dylan Center opened in Tulsa, Okla., offering researchers unparalleled access to Dylan’s archives and peeling back the layers on his songwriting process, long the object of study and fascination. And this month, “Lou Reed: Caught Between the Twisted Stars” opened at the Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center — it’s the first exhibition drawn from Reed’s archive, which was acquired by the New York Public Library.
Both of these seek to offer deeper understandings of these rock icons, but they also offer the opportunity for alternate narratives to emerge. Dylan and Reed always carefully tended to their own mythologies — now the behind-the-scenes tools are available for all to see.
On this week’s Popcast, a conversation about the value of even the unlikeliest ephemera, the difference between public and private archives and the specific ways Dylan and Reed found methods to distance themselves from their pasts.
Ben Sisario, The New York Times’s music business reporter
Connect With Popcast. Become a part of the Popcast community: Join the show’s Facebook group and Discord channel. We want to hear from you! Tune in, and tell us what you think at popcast@nytimes.com. Follow our host, Jon Caramanica, on Twitter: @joncaramanica.

“A Strange Loop,” a scalding story about a gay, Black theater artist confronting self-doubt and societal disapproval, won the Tony Award for best new musical Sunday night, giving another huge accolade to a challenging contemporary production that had already won a Pulitzer Prize.
The soul-baring show, nurtured by nonprofits and developed over many years, triumphed over two flashy pop musicals, “MJ,” a jukebox musical about the entertainer Michael Jackson, and “Six,” an irreverent reconsideration of Henry VIII’s ill-fated wives, in a six-way race.
“A Strange Loop” garnered widespread praise from critics; on Sunday night, Michael R. Jackson, the writer who spent nearly two decades working on it, acknowledged how personal the project was as he collected his first Tony Award, for best book of a musical.
“I wrote it at a time when I didn’t know what I was going to do with my life,” he said. “I didn’t know how I was going to move forward. I felt unseen. I felt unheard. I felt misunderstood, and I just wanted to create a little bit of a life raft for myself as a Black gay man.”
The ceremony — the 75th Tony Awards presentation — provided an opportunity for Broadway to celebrate its return and its perseverance, hoping that a dash of razzle-dazzle, a dollop of contemporary creativity and a sprinkling of nostalgia will help lure theatergoers back to a pandemic-scarred industry now in full swing but still craving more customers.
The season that just ended was a tough one: It started late (most theaters remained closed until September), and was repeatedly disrupted (coronavirus cases obliterated its old show-must-go-on ethos, prompting cancellations and performer absences). With tourism still down, it was also short on audience.
“Our industry has been through so much,” Marianne Elliott, who won a Tony Award for directing a gender-reversed revival of the Stephen Sondheim musical comedy “Company,” said in her acceptance speech. “It felt at times that live theater was endangered.”
But in the glittering ceremony at Radio City Music Hall in Manhattan, a parade of performers celebrated all that went well: Theaters reopened, long-running shows returned, and an unusually diverse array of plays and musicals arrived to entertain, provoke and inspire theatergoers.
The best play Tony went to “The Lehman Trilogy,” a sweeping saga about the rise and fall of the Lehman Brothers banking business. Using three shape-shifting actors, contained within a spinning glass box of a set, the play journeyed all the way from the Wall Street giant’s humble origins in 1844 to its ignominious collapse in 2008. The show, written by Stefano Massini and Ben Power, picked up not only the Tony for best play, but also for the play’s director, Sam Mendes; its set designer, Es Devlin; and the great British actor, Simon Russell Beale, who thanked audiences for showing up, despite pandemic protocols and public health concerns.
“You trusted us,” he said. “You came with open arms. It wasn’t easy at that point to come to the theater because of all those regulations. But you welcomed us.”
“The Lehman Trilogy” won out against four other contenders, “Clyde’s,” “Hangmen,” “The Minutes” and “Skeleton Crew.”
“Take Me Out” emerged victorious in the best play revival category, a particularly strong field that included productions of “American Buffalo,” “How I Learned to Drive,” “Trouble in Mind” and “For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf.”
Written by Richard Greenberg, “Take Me Out” first ran on Broadway in 2003 and won the best play Tony that year; this year’s revival, presented by the nonprofit Second Stage Theater, was directed by Scott Ellis. It is about what happens when a baseball player, portrayed in this production by Jesse Williams, comes out as gay; Jesse Tyler Ferguson picked up his first Tony for his portrayal of the player’s investment adviser, who is also gay.
“Company,” a musical first staged in 1970 that wittily and sometimes bitterly examines married life, won the Tony for musical revival, besting a much-praised revival of “Caroline, or Change,” as well as a starry revival of “The Music Man” that, thanks to the appeal of leading man Hugh Jackman, has been the top-selling show on Broadway since it opened.
The award for “Company” reflected not only admiration for the reimagined production but also respect for Sondheim, its composer and lyricist, who is revered as one of the most important figures in American musical theater, and who died in November. The “Hamilton” creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, who was mentored by Sondheim, introduced a tribute to him, saying, “I stand here on behalf of generations of artists he took the time to encourage.”
The Tonys, hosted by Ariana DeBose and broadcast on CBS, honored not only shows, performers, writers and designers, but also the understudies who saved so many performances this season. And DeBose, who this year won an Academy Award as Anita in the Steven Spielberg remake of “West Side Story,” paid tribute to the season’s extraordinary diversity, saying, “I feel like the phrase Great White Way is becoming more of a nickname as opposed to a how-to guide.”
She noted the season’s high volume of work by Black writers, which came about as producers and theater owners scrambled to respond to demands for more representation and opportunity for Black artists after the national unrest over racism during the summer of 2020. This year’s class of Tony nominees featured a large number of Black artists, reflecting the fact that work by Black writers led to more jobs for Black performers, designers, directors, and more.
The season being honored — the first since the coronavirus pandemic forced theaters to close in March of 2020 — featured 56 productions, including 34 eligible for Tony Awards because they opened between Feb. 20, 2020 and May 4, 2022. (The others were returning productions, many of them long-running hits.)
The Covid challenges were costly: 6.7 million people attended a Broadway show during the 2021-22 season, down from 14.8 million during the 2018-19 season, which was the last full season before the pandemic; total grosses were $845 million, down from $1.8 billion.
The Tonys served as a chance for Broadway to try to entice television viewers to become Times Square visitors. But one challenge: Viewership for all televised awards shows has been steadily falling. The Tonys audience had a recent peak in 2016, at 8.7 million viewers, when “Hamilton” was a contender; in 2019, there were 5.4 million viewers, and last year, when the Tonys held a ceremony in September to coincide with the reopening of theaters, just 2.6 million tuned in.
This year’s winners featured some Broadway veterans, including Patti LuPone, picking up her third Tony Award for her ferocious turn as an alcohol-addled married friend of the chronically single protagonist in “Company”; and Phylicia Rashad, winning her second Tony for playing a factory worker in “Skeleton Crew.” Among the other performers who collected Tony Awards: Joaquina Kalukango, for her starring role as a 19th-century New York City tavern owner in “Paradise Square”; Matt Doyle, who played a groom with a zany case of wedding day jitters in “Company,” and Deirdre O’Connell, who won for her remarkable lip-synced performance as a kidnapping victim in the play “Dana H.”
“I would love for this little prize to be a token for every person who is wondering, ‘Should I be trying to make something that could work on Broadway or that could win me a Tony Award, or should I be making the weird art that is haunting me, that frightens me, that I don’t know how to make, that I don’t know if anyone in the whole world will understand?’” O’Connell said. “Please let me, standing here, be a little sign to you from the universe to make the weird art.”
“A Strange Loop” tells the story of a Broadway usher, named Usher, who is trying to write a musical about a Broadway usher trying to write a musical; his thoughts, many of them self-critical, are portrayed by six performers, who each appear in multiple guises. The musical began its life Off Broadway, with a 2019 production at Playwrights Horizons in association with Page 73 Productions. After winning the Pulitzer, it had another pre-Broadway production at Woolly Mammoth Theater Company in Washington, D.C. It had support throughout those nonprofit runs from the producer Barbara Whitman, who is now the lead producer of the commercial run on Broadway; she was also a lead producer of the Tony-winning “Fun Home.”
The Broadway production, which opened in April, has seen an uptick at the box office since being nominated for 11 Tony Awards (it won two), but has room for growth: During the week that ended June 5, it filled 89 percent of the 912 seats at the Lyceum Theater, grossing $685,772, with an average ticket price of $105.
“Six” and “MJ,” although unsuccessful in the six-way race for best new musical, are doing substantially better at the box office, and did notch some big victories at the awards ceremony.
“Six” picked up the Tony Award for best score during the first minutes of the ceremony. Its music and lyrics were written by two young British artists, Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss, who came up with the idea while undergraduates at Cambridge University, and who were discovered by a commercial producer following a buzz-building first run at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe. The musical’s costume designer, Gabriella Slade, also won a Tony for her Tudor-style-meets-contemporary-clubwear outfits.
“MJ” also landed key prizes, including for the lead performance by Myles Frost, a 22-year-old in his first professional stage role, and for the crowd-pleasing choreography by Christopher Wheeldon, who also directed the musical.
The other contenders, “Girl From the North Country,” featuring the songs of Bob Dylan; “Mr. Saturday Night,” starring Billy Crystal as a washed-up comedian; and “Paradise Square,” about race relations in Civil War-era New York, appeared to be less of a factor in the competition.
That first hour of the awards ceremony, viewable only on the streaming channel Paramount+, was hosted by Darren Criss and Julianne Hough, both of whom are currently starring in Broadway plays — he in a revival of “American Buffalo,” and she in a new farce called “POTUS.” They began the evening with a Broadway-is-back tribute, written by Criss, extolling the virtues and challenges of theater (the song included a plea for no slapping, in a dig at the Oscars).
A lifetime achievement award was given to Angela Lansbury, a beloved star of stage, film and television who was also a five-time host of the Tony Awards, more than any other person. Lansbury, who is 96, was not able to attend in person, or even to accept by video; instead the actor Len Cariou, who starred with Lansbury in the original production of “Sweeney Todd,” for which they both won Tony Awards, paid tribute to her and introduced a video of career highlights. Then the New York City Gay Men’s Chorus performed the title song from “Mame,” which was the show in which she won the first of her five competitive Tony Awards.
The Tony Awards, named for actress Antoinette Perry, are presented by the Broadway League, a trade association that represents theater owners and producers, and the American Theater Wing, a theater advocacy organization. The awards have been presented since 1947; there was no ceremony in 2020, and last year’s September ceremony honored shows from the truncated prepandemic season.
This year’s awards were spread among 11 shows, with none coming anywhere near the record 12 prizes picked up by “The Producers” in 2001. The biggest hauls went to “Company” and “The Lehman Trilogy,” each of which won five awards; “MJ” won four, and “A Strange Loop,” “Dana H.,” “Six” and “Take Me Out” each won two. Taking home one prize each were “Girl From the North Country,” “Paradise Square,” “Skeleton Crew” and “The Skin of Our Teeth.”

Modern Love in miniature, featuring reader-submitted stories of no more than 100 words.
Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
I checked the time as we neared the airport, and my stomach sank. My wrist was bare, as it had been the day my son died suddenly more than 20 years before. Bad things happened when I forgot to wear my watch. My husband, who never knew my son, took my hand and held it until I remembered this: Grief has no use for clocks or time, and joy waits for no one. We pressed on to Ireland, then, the three of us — me, the boy I carry with me always, and the man who loves me through it all. — Casey Mulligan Walsh
“You have a memory to look back on today,” Facebook reminded me. Three years ago, my ex was proudly hugging me at my college graduation. Our smiles belied the messy breakup ahead of us. Every year since, on this day, I chose not to let that memory go. To remember, despite the confusion and scars, that it wasn’t all so bad. “Are you coming?” my current boyfriend asks, bringing me out of the virtual window of my past. Finally, I press “delete.” Today is the day, I tell myself (and Facebook) that I truly accept him as a memory. — Emma Wong
Ben suggested tamales for our first date, which I, a notoriously picky eater, had never had. We got chicken ones from a little Mexican bakery and walked to the beach. I didn’t know how he would react. If nothing else came of our date, at least Ben had introduced me to the tastiness of tamales. We sat by the water, getting slightly sunburned. I willed myself to speak. “I have to tell you something: I’m trans. I understand if ——” “It’s fine.” “Are you sure? I get it if ——” “I don’t care.” He took my hand and smiled. — Carson Walter
Springtime 1977, I was laughing on my grandmother’s front stoop in Queens. I can’t recall what was so funny, but I remember this: falling off the stoop and chipping my newly minted front tooth. I ran inside to show my mother and grandmother. Panic ensued. The dentist was called. Days later, I sat in Dr. Kornfeld’s office as he expertly repaired the chip. His handiwork has miraculously held for 45 years. My current dentist suggests that I replace the composite with something new, but I refuse. My smile remains a tiny memorial to a kindly, skilled dentist I’ll never see again. — Kathleen Harris
See more Tiny Love Stories at nytimes.com/modernlove. Submit yours at nytimes.com/tinylovestories.
Want more from Modern Love? Watch the TV series; sign up for the newsletter; or listen to the podcast on iTunes, Spotify or Google Play. We also have swag at the NYT Store and two books, “Modern Love: True Stories of Love, Loss, and Redemption” and “Tiny Love Stories: True Tales of Love in 100 Words or Less.”

Send any friend a story
As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month. Anyone can read what you share.
Mr. Ayers is the author of the memoir “My Life in the Sunshine” and the president of the record label Beggars Group U.S.
I always know when Mother’s Day is approaching. I love thinking about what new vegetarian restaurant I might take my mother to or which of the many great photos of her from my childhood I’ll post on Instagram. Father’s Day, on the other hand, has never been on my mental calendar. I usually learn it’s coming when I see an ad for a sturdy piece of luggage or golf gear.
I hardly know my father, the jazz vibraphonist Roy Ayers; we’ve met only a few times. He and my mother were never really together. With his consent, she got pregnant deliberately, knowing he wouldn’t be part of our lives. I’ve always known that story, and for most of my life, I’ve been OK with it. I had a wonderful childhood, thanks to my mother and several formidable male role models. So I never really felt my father’s absence. He didn’t break any promises. He didn’t leave. He was just never there in the first place.
In my mid-30s, I finally got in touch. Roy was surprisingly open, and when we sat down for lunch, our conversation felt easy. But what I’d hoped might become a semiregular meeting turned into a bright spotlight on his absence. When I tried to stay in touch with Roy after that lunch, he rushed through phone calls or left them largely unanswered.
Though we live in the same city, my father and I haven’t had a meaningful conversation since that lunch years ago. It took an unexpected incident last summer for me to realize that I can still celebrate Father’s Day without my father’s presence.
In June 2021, I scored tickets to a screening of “Summer of Soul (…Or, When the Revolution Could Not Be Televised)” at Marcus Garvey Park, the location of the 1969 Harlem Cultural Festival performances documented in Ahmir “Questlove” Thompson’s Oscar-winning film. About 20 minutes into the concert documentary, the exuberant host Tony Lawrence shouts, “Ladies and gentlemen, from right here in Harlem, soul time!”
And with no warning whatsoever, my father’s image filled the two-story-tall screen, framed by the brilliant yellow, blue and brown backdrop of the festival stage. He looked breezy in a white tuxedo shirt, its cuffs flapping loosely, the top few buttons undone.
On the screen that day, I watched my father play the vibes as if his life depended on it — with a confident focus and control that demonstrated a tremendous commitment to his craft. It became clear to me that music was his life. Music took 100 percent of his energy, and there was no room for me in that equation.
I was 49 last summer, and that performance was filmed about two years before I was conceived — just before Roy’s solo career blossomed. In that moment at the screening, I witnessed my father in his element, and I saw a side of him I’d never seen. I saw an energetic, disciplined talent who was on the cusp of writing and recording some of his best music — some of the best music of a golden era. And I saw a 28-year-old man who looked a lot like I did at that age — a younger version of myself, with all the passion and promise of youth.
My father was so good and what he did was so important to him that it became easier for me to understand why I was never — and would never be — a priority in his life. That 1969 performance helped me to realize that I have everything I’m ever going to get from him. It was time to stop hoping for more.
Most of us with absent fathers think, “What about me?” We rarely stop to ask, “What about him?” It took me 49 years to have that thought. But when I finally did, it allowed me to let some things go.
I’ve felt many ways about my father over the course of my life: ambivalent as a child who rarely thought about him; thrilled when, as an adult, I finally got to meet him and have a real conversation; angry when he didn’t return my calls after that. I’ve felt our connection when I see our similarities — our high cheekbones and our physical laughs. And I’ve felt bitterly disconnected when I think about our differences. But as I watched this performance from over 50 years ago, I encountered a new feeling: pride.
My father is now 81, and he’s still touring the world playing music. I believe music will occupy his energy until there’s none left, and that belief makes me happy for him and for the many people whose lives he enriches. I’m no closer to my father this Father’s Day, but I’ve made peace with that.
I have always felt uncomfortable talking about my father, even with my closest friends. But as I watched Roy perform in “Summer of Soul,” I turned to my friend, pointed at the screen, and said, with newfound ease, “That’s my father.”
Nabil Ayers (@nabilayers) is the author of the memoir “My Life in the Sunshine” and the president of the record label Beggars Group U.S.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Hollywood watchers are calling “Top Gun: Maverick” a rare American military film that connects with fans and critics without promoting woke politics.
The sequel to 1986’s “Top Gun” has an A+ Cinemascore rating, and a 99% audience score and a 97% critics rating at Rotten Tomatoes. According to Box Office Mojo, it has grossed $747 million worldwide through June 5, giving the film a rare confluence of box-office success, critical support and audience esteem.
“That hardly ever happens,” said Hunter Duesing, a film teacher and co-host of the “Midnight Movie Cowboys” podcast.
When President Lyndon Johnson gave John Wayne military assistance to make the 1968 film “The Green Berets,” audiences flocked to Wayne’s effort to glorify the “American fighting man.”
But critics slammed the film because it supported the Vietnam War.
The “Top Gun” films are a different story. In both the 1986 original and this year’s sequel, Navy fighter pilots face off against an unnamed enemy country.
SEE ALSO: Cruise control: Pentagon hoping ‘Top Gun: Maverick’ will boost recruiting like original did
Mr. Duesing, based in Texas, says the personalities of star Tom Cruise and producer Jerry Bruckheimer have a lot to do with that.
He noted that Mr. Bruckheimer, a well-known donor to Republican political candidates, is a specialist at turning out box office hits like “Black Hawk Down” and “Pearl Harbor” that depict the American military in a positive light without any political agenda from the left or right.
Hollywood forecasters are predicting that “Top Gun: Maverick” will be the first film to break $1 billion in box office receipts for Mr. Cruise, a longtime star who also headlines the long-running “Mission Impossible” franchise.
And it may do so without the benefit of a release in the world’s biggest movie market, as Maverick’s iconic jacket includes an image of the Taiwanese flag, preventing a release in China.
Christian Toto, the editor of HollywoodInToto.com, says “Top Gun: Maverick” also has unified audiences by avoiding any racism or sexism subplots in its choice to use more diverse actors than the original.
“The film offers a generic, pro-military message that doesn’t overstay its welcome. The cast is diverse, but the script doesn’t beat us over the head with that diversity,” said Mr. Toto, a former features writer for The Washington Times.
The author of “Virtue Bombs: How Hollywood Got Woke and Lost Its Soul” adds that it’s become “rare for both critics and audiences to throw their arms around a movie” in recent years.
“Tom Cruise cares deeply about his brand, and he’s unwilling to stain it by weighing in on the latest culture war fight,” Mr. Toto said.
In recent years, critics and fans have often been at odds over their film preferences.
Reviewers have savaged breakaway conservative hits like “God’s Not Dead” — a 2014 Christian film that earned $64.7 million on a $2 million budget — while praising more niche films that few moviegoers saw in theaters.
Sasha Stone, a Los Angeles-based film blogger who edits the website Awards Daily, says the media often elevates some films at the expense of what moviegoers enjoy seeing.
She says “Top Gun: Maverick” is a traditional Hollywood action movie that returns to an older formula of success.
“That means there is a central male hero who saves the day,” Ms. Stone said. “There wasn’t much for those on the left to attack. They leaned in just enough to deflect potential attacks and in so doing created a green light for people to simply enjoy a film.”
• Sean Salai can be reached at ssalai@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
PHOENIX — The skies over a scattering of Western U.S. cities will stay dark for the third consecutive Fourth of July as some major fireworks displays are canceled again this year, this time for fire concerns amid dry weather, along with pandemic related supply or staffing problems.
The city of Phoenix said it canceled its three major Independence Day displays because it couldn’t obtain the necessary fireworks due to supply chain problems. Displays in several other Phoenix metro cities are still on.
Flagstaff in northern Arizona will carry out its annual Independence Day parade through the city’s historic downtown, but a new laser light show will replace the standard pyrotechnic display because of concerns about sparking wildfires.
A wildfire skirted the mountainous city in recent weeks while another burned farther north, prompting hundreds of people to evacuate.
“The decision was made early because we wanted people to be able to make plans with their families,” said Flagstaff city spokesperson Sarah Langley.
Fire officials in some cities worry that the cancelations could prompt some people to ramp up their use of consumer fireworks in residential areas.
“We are typically worried about exposure of sparks and fire to homes and dry brush,” said Phoenix Fire spokesperson Capt. Evan Gammage. “We get so many calls around this time of year.”
In New Mexico, the most destructive wildfire season in modern history won’t stop that state’s major cities including Albuquerque and Santa Fe from holding Fourth of July fireworks displays under fire department supervision.
Many local jurisdictions still prohibit the private use of fireworks amid a punishing drought that continues despite the recent arrival of summer monsoon rains.
Some national forests in the U.S. Southwest eased or rescinded fire restrictions, and welcomed back visitors to vast tracts that temporarily were closed because of wildfire danger. Fireworks are always prohibited in national forests
In Sacramento, Cal Expo officials announced they won’t have a fireworks display because of staffing and resource shortages. Instead, they are focused on the California State Fair & Food Festival to be held the last two weeks of July.
In Lompoc, on California’s central coast, the annual Fourth of July fireworks show won’t be held because of concerns about potential fire hazards.
A popular northern San Joaquin Valley fireworks show that in pre-pandemic times brought tens of thousands of people to Lake Don Pedro, California, was canceled because of drought concerns, including the lake’s projected low level.
“The safety of our guests and being good stewards of the land entrusted to us are our highest priorities,” the Don Pedro Recreation Agency said in a statement.
The fire danger also prompted Lakewood and Castle Rock in Colorado to cancel their pyrotechnic displays. Still, an Independence Eve fireworks show with live music by the Colorado Symphony is planned July 3 at Denver’s Civic Center Park.
The Southgate Mall in Missoula, Montana, canceled its annual Fourth of July celebration and fireworks show without giving a reason.
Elsewhere in the U.S., some North Carolina towns canceled displays after a recent fireworks-related explosion killed a man on a small farm and a large cache of fireworks were destroyed in a related fire.
In Minneapolis, a fireworks display over the Mississippi won’t be held because of staff shortages and construction at a nearby park.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
NEW YORK — On Valentine’s Day 1972, a musical opened off-Broadway needing a lot of love. It was already $20,000 in debt and the reviews were mixed to poor. A decision had to be made: Keep going or give it the kiss off?
The choice to continue was a risky but fateful one, not only for the investors but also for the actors who would subsequently use it as a career incubator, including John Travolta, Richard Gere, Patrick Swayze, Treat Williams, Marilu Henner, Peter Gallagher, Alan Paul, Judy Kaye and Barry Bostwick.
That show was “Grease,” a tale of teen angst and true love set in the mid-1950s. It would go on to transfer to Broadway for a then-record eight-year run, spawning several touring companies and a celebrated film. Not many know that it was almost stillborn.
“People think that ‘Grease’ was born a blockbuster. ‘Grease’ was born anything but blockbuster. If there’s any metaphor that works for this show, it’s ‘The Little Engine That Could,’ says Tom Moore, the show’s director.
The story of the show’s often rocky beginnings into a pop culture juggernaut is told in the new oral history book “Grease: Tell Me More, Tell Me More,” culled from stories submitted by some 100 cast and crew and edited by Moore, “Grease” veteran Adrienne Barbeau and producer Ken Waissman.
The book includes the behind-the-scenes hookups, the accidents - broken ankles were a big risk - life on the road, the time Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor stopped by to enchant the cast, their encounter with Liberace, performing the show with flashlights during the 1977 New York blackout and the day the show closed on Broadway in 1980, complete with dozens of great photos.
The book comes out Tuesday, the 50th anniversary of “Grease” opening on Broadway. It is structured chronologically as the show is born and cast and then as it sparks multiple tours, with chapters at the end organized by theme. All participants were welcome to add their stories, from understudies and orchestra members to actors and designers.
“Some had really very amusing, very risqué backstage stories that I didn’t even know about it,” says Waissman, who helped audition 2,000 people for the first company’s 16 roles.
It was Waissman who fell in love with an early iteration of the show when it was an amateur production playing weekends at a converted trolley barn in Chicago. “I saw my entire yearbook come to life,” he says.
The other soon-to-be stars who had roles in “Grease” include Tony Award-winning Broadway directors Walter Bobbie and Jerry Zaks; authors Laurie Graff and John Lansing; and TV stars Ilene Kristen, Ilene Graff, and Lisa Raggio.
The musical centers around the T-Birds, a “greaser” gang, and their girls, the Pink Ladies. The main romance is between the leader of the T-Birds, Danny Zuko, who still pines for his summer love, the “good girl” Sandy Dumbrowski. It’s a show about forming friendships, raging hormones, petty jealousies and hot-rod racing.
All successful musicals leave members with fond memories, but “Grease” was different in that it was an ensemble musical that employed young actors all of roughly the same age - ideally, close to high school. It was often an actor’s first big break and that reflected the themes of the show.
“It’s about about the first of everything - first loves, first fitting into high school, first finding your pack, first finding your group, first finding your identity. And to a certain extent, we were doing all of that personally at the same time we were putting together the show,” says Moore. “We were still to a great extent growing up together.”
Members of the various companies - touring productions often became farm teams for Broadway replacements - have kept in touch via social media over the years. When the pandemic hit, the idea was floated to combine all the stories into a book, a way to connect during a national isolation.
“It was as intense as it had been in rehearsal because everybody wanted to get it right,” says Moore. “These memories are so important to them.”
The book - published by Chicago Review Press - makes it clear how tight money was at the start, with costume designer Carrie Robbins using her own shower curtain to make a beauty school smock and cutting up her pink bath mat and toilet seat cover to make a poodle skirt.
It was Waissman and co-producer Maxine Fox who made the bold step to keep the show open in 1972 despite debt and poor reviews. Waissman explained it this way: “Look, we can’t afford the $20,000 that we owe right now. We might as well not afford a lot more. So we’re not closing.”
Moore credits Waissman and Fox with believing in the project and saving a show that would go on to mean so much to so many people. “You don’t see that a lot with producers now,” he says.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
BATH, Maine (AP) — The christening of a Navy destroyer on Saturday highlighted the sacrifices of two generations - the ship’s namesake killed in World War II and another Marine who died more than 60 years later.
The future USS Basilone bears the name of a Marine who was awarded the Medal of Honor before his death on Iwo Jima.
Breaking a bottle on the ship’s bow for good luck was a woman who lost her brother in an ambush in Fallujah, Iraq.
The legacy and sacrifice of such Marines are never forgotten, Sgt. Major of the Marine Corps Troy Black told a crowd of 2,000 gathered next to the warship at Navy shipbuilder Bath Iron Works in Maine.
Gunnery Sgt. John Basilone was awarded the Medal of Honor for heroism while defending Henderson Field against a fierce assault by a 3,000-strong Japanese force during the Battle of Guadalcanal in 1942.
The New Jersey resident returned home to a hero’s welcome and a parade. But he asked to rejoin his comrades and died on the opening day of the invasion of Iwo Jima in February 1945. He was awarded the Navy Cross posthumously for heroism that day.
His 92-year-old brother Donald and others at the ceremony spoke of Basilone’s patriotism, dedication and bravery.
That included his insistence on returning to combat instead of staying safe for the remainder of the war. “He really wanted to go back,” Donald Basilone said in statement read by his niece.
Ryan Manion, whose brother, Marine 1st Lt. Travis Manion, was killed in Iraq, said both her brother and the ship’s namesake were cut from the same cloth even though they were from different generations.
“John Basilone was a young patriot who joined the military to do his job when his country needed him the most,” she said.
The ceremony marked a milestone in construction of the 509-foot guided-missile destroyer. Dignitaries included admirals, family members, Democratic Gov. Janet Mills and Republican Sen. Susan Collins.
Manion, who is one of the ship’s sponsors, is president of the Pennsylvania-based Travis Manion Foundation, which aims to empower veterans and families of fallen heroes, using her brother’s words, “If not me, then who?”
Her brother was killed by a sniper when he exposed himself to enemy fire to get an advantageous firing position and draw attention away from wounded Marines during an ambush in 2007 in Iraq.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

In Maverick, we see the deepest vision of whom we aspire to be
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
This summer Americans are experiencing something special, almost spiritual with the release of “Top Gun: Maverick.” It’s more than a film. It’s an experience that inspires and empowers us, and the guy who is giving it to us is the same guy who always gives it to us — Tom Cruise.
For those of us who grew up during the 1980s when the original “Top Gun” was first released, we remember a time when heroism was championed. We were encouraged to lead from the front, not behind. Confidence was applauded, bravery was admired, and America was celebrated, not derogated.
So when Mr. Cruise returned on screen more than 35 years later as Maverick, he brought America back into the danger zone where it belongs. Contrary to “woke” fiction, the danger zone is America’s comfort zone, and that’s why Maverick will forever be admired as one of our nation’s most endeared fictional heroes.
In Maverick, we see the deepest vision of whom we aspire to be. The bold hero who shines in their rugged individuality. The passionate crusader who takes risks to protect his friends. Courage and conviction without bowing to the fear of consequences. With Maverick, our fighting spirit instantly connects with what it really means to be an American.
What makes Mr. Cruise’s acting quality so believable in all his films, is the fact that he is not unrealistically fearless. Gwyneth Paltrow elicits this sentiment to her co-star Ben Affleck in the film “Bounce” when she accurately tells him, “It’s not brave if you’re not scared.”
The human connection Mr. Cruise makes with his audience is his hesitation, revealing a deep embedded but natural vulnerability all the while surrendering his heart to what Pink Floyd calls, “a momentary lapse of reason.” We see this inspirational fighting spirit in many of Mr. Cruise’s characters.
As Brian Flanagan in “Cocktail,” he overcomes blue-collar insecurities by bolting past security to win back his aristocratic, uptown love Jordan Mooney. As Lt. Daniel Caffey in “A Few Good Men,” he conquers his fears of a court-martial in a brief, deliberate pause before tearing into Col. Nathan Jessup. As Mitch McDeere in “The Firm,” he risks his life to save his long-forgotten brother — and his marriage — by turning the tables on his senior partners, the government and the mob.
As Lt. Pete Mitchell in “Top Gun,” there are many momentary lapses of reason, which become the theme of the film — the bold individual who wrestles between his brave heart and what his instructor Viper calls, “a confidence problem.” He has the potential, the drive and an almost irresistible urge to take chances, but deep inside, a part of him is unsure of himself.
Ultimately, Maverick is relatable because he’s like a lot of us: Uncertain but passionate, and despite those natural fears, he still can’t resist risking to go all in. He risks public humiliation by serenading Charlotte Blackwood, breaks the hard deck to shoot down Jester and makes signature unauthorized flybys by the control tower. He never lets us down.
As an older, more experienced Cpt. Pete Mitchell in “Top Gun: Maverick,” our hero takes his character to a defining, pinnacle Cruise moment. In what is undeniably a coded and symbolic, but inspiring exchange, Maverick is leaving Rear Adm. Chester “Hammer” Cain’s office after learning he’s once again been spared getting grounded by Adm. Tom “Iceman” Kazansky. Furious that his plans were foiled, the rear admiral tries to break the pilot as he walks out the door.
“The end is inevitable, Maverick,” Hammer warns. “Your kind is headed for extinction.”
Maverick pauses as Hammer’s words register, and after that famous Cruise moment of deliberation, he shakes it off and confidently smiles.
“Maybe so, sir. But not today.”
This line is not actually about Maverick. It’s about America.
For decades, our nation’s detractors have said the so-called “American experiment” is coming to an end. Despite these dark predictions by her many critics and enemies alike, it’s never happened. It never will.
Maverick is and always has been an allegory for the United States. The symbolism is embedded in the notion that, like Maverick, she never falters because she never follows. She makes her own decisions. Maverick remains undefeated precisely because he takes principled stands and risks others will not.
This sentiment of unrelenting underdog courage in the face of risk is the surge of inspiration Mr. Cruise offers both as Maverick, and the many other characters he has played. He gives Americans what they really want from Hollywood — a reminder of what we’re all capable of when we’re brave enough to pursue it. No modern actor more than Tom Cruise has that kind of impact or has become as engrained in our patriotic culture.
To date, Mr. Cruise has never received an Academy Award. This year’s comeback as Maverick did more than just leave a legacy on screen in Hollywood. It inspired our nation.
It’s time for Hollywood to give the all-American hero the win he deserves.
• Jeffrey Scott Shapiro is a former Washington prosecutor who also served as a U.S. Army Reserve judge advocate and a senior U.S. official from 2017 to 2021. He now serves on the editorial board for The Washington Times.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
ICE agents tracked down a smuggler who separated a 1-year-old girl from her mother as they tried to make their way deeper into the U.S., arresting the smuggler and reuniting the family.
The Mexican woman and her 11-year-old son were apprehended by Border Patrol agents in western Texas on Saturday, according to court documents. That’s when the mother revealed her daughter had also been with them but had been separated in Mexico so the baby could be smuggled through a border crossing rather than trekked through the desert.
Agents searched the mother’s phone and found details on the smuggling operation, including a picture of a bus ticket that had apparently been bought for the infant showing she was to be taken from El Paso to Dallas.
Agents from Homeland Security Investigations, a branch of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, stepped in to help. They spotted a woman carrying a small child show up just as the bus was getting ready to depart.
Agents say the woman, identified as Rubye Ramos, at first insisted the baby was hers and presented a birth certificate for a 4-year-old. When agents told her they knew the child wasn’t hers, they said she “broke down in tears” and handed the baby over, acknowledging it wasn’t hers.
“This is one more example of the callous and ruthless tactics used by transnational criminal organizations that often use the most vulnerable migrants — children — as a commodity,” said Gloria I. Chavez, chief patrol agent in the Border Patrol’s El Paso sector.
Ms. Ramos faces a human smuggling charge.
She was ordered held without bond until a detention hearing later this week.
She is a U.S. citizen but lives in Mexico, and prosecutors argued she couldn’t be counted on to remain in the U.S. unless she was detained.
The Trump administration drew attention several years back for its zero-tolerance border policy, which had the effect — and critics argued the intended consequence — of separating illegal immigrant families caught at the border.
The parents were arrested and since there are no family facilities in federal jails, the children were placed in the case of the Health and Human Services Department. But the government failed to reunite the families once the parents were out of the criminal justice system — often a matter of just a day or two.
Thousands of families were separated and authorities say hundreds remain so today, four years later.
The border case presents the other side of that coin — parents who voluntarily separate from their children to make an illegal entry into the U.S.
Smugglers will sometimes decide for their own reasons that a family shouldn’t enter or be transported together, and split children from adults with the intention to reunite them at a destination deeper in the U.S.
• Stephen Dinan can be reached at sdinan@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
After the arrest of more than two dozen members of a white supremacist group near a northern Idaho pride event, including one identified as its founder, LGBTQ advocates said Sunday that polarization and a fraught political climate are putting their community increasingly at risk.
The 31 Patriot Front members were arrested with riot gear after a tipster reported seeing people loading up into a U-Haul like “a little army” at a hotel parking lot in Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, police said.
Among those booked into jail on misdemeanor charges of conspiracy to riot was Thomas Ryan Rousseau of Grapevine, Texas, who has been identified by the Southern Poverty Law Center as the 23-year-old who founded the group after the deadly “Unite the Right” rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, in 2017. No attorney was immediately listed for him and phone numbers associated with him went unanswered Sunday.
Also among the arrestees was Mitchell F. Wagner, 24, of Florissant, Missouri, who was previously charged with defacing a mural of famous Black Americans on a college campus in St. Louis last year.
Michael Kielty, Wagner’s attorney, said Sunday that he had not been provided information about the charges. He said Patriot Front did not have a reputation for violence and that the case could be a First Amendment issue. “Even if you don’t like the speech, they have the right to make it,” he said.
Patriot Front is a white supremacist neo-Nazi group whose members perceive Black Americans, Jews and LGBTQ people as enemies, said Jon Lewis, a George Washington University researcher who specializes in homegrown violent extremism.
Their playbook, Lewis said, involves identifying local grievances to exploit, organizing on platforms like the messaging app Telegram and ultimately showing up to events marching in neat columns, in blue- or white-collared-shirt uniforms, in a display of strength.
Though Pride celebrations have long been picketed by counterprotesters citing religious objections, they haven’t historically been a major focus for armed extremist groups. Still, it isn’t surprising, given how anti-LGBTQ rhetoric has increasingly become a potent rallying cry in the far-right online ecosystem, Lewis said.
“That set of grievances fits into their broader narratives and shows their ability to mobilize the same folks against ‘the enemy’ over and over and over again,” he said.
The arrests come amid a surge of charged rhetoric around LGBTQ issues and a wave of state legislation aimed at transgender youth, said John McCrostie, the first openly gay man elected to the Idaho Legislature. In Boise this week, dozens of Pride flags were stolen from city streets.
“Whenever we are confronted with attacks of hate, we must respond with the message from the community that we embrace all people with all of our differences,” McCrostie said in a text message.
Sunday also marked six years since the mass shooting that killed 49 people at the Orlando LGBTQ club Pulse, said Troy Williams with Equality Utah in Salt Lake City.
“Our nation is growing increasingly polarized, and the result has been tragic and deadly,” he said.
Authorities in the San Francisco Bay Area are investigating a possible hate crime after a group of men allegedly shouted homophobic and anti-LGBTQ slurs during a weekend Drag Queen Story Hour at the San Lorenzo Library on Saturday. No arrests have been made, no one was physically harmed, and authorities are investigating the incident as possible harassment of children.
In Coeur d’Alene on Saturday, police found riot gear, one smoke grenade, shin guards and shields inside the van after pulling it over near a park where the North Idaho Pride Alliance was holding a Pride in the Park event, Coeur d’Alene Police Chief Lee White said.
The group came to riot around the small northern Idaho city wearing Patriot Front patches and logos on their hats and some T-shirts reading “Reclaim America” according to police and videos of the arrests posted on social media.
Those arrested came from at least 11 states, including Washington, Oregon, Texas, Utah, Colorado, South Dakota, Illinois, Wyoming, Virginia, and Arkansas.
Though there is a history of far-right extremism dating back decades in northern Idaho, White said only one of those arrested Saturday was from the state.
The six-hour Pride event generally went on as scheduled, including booths, food, live music, a drag show and a march of more than 50 people, the Idaho Statesman reported.
“We have been through so much, so much,” Jessica Mahuron of the North Idaho Pride Alliance, which organized the event, told KREM-TV. “Harassment, and attempts to intimidate on the psychological level, and the truth is if you allow yourself to be intimidated you let them win and what we have shown today is that you will not win.”
The group is scheduled to be arraigned on Monday.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Capitol Police Officer Caroline Edwards said she was mocked and insulted by the pro-Trump mob that attacked the U.S. Capitol.
Ms. Edwards testified about her experience on duty during the riot for the House Jan. 6 committee’s prime-time TV hearing Thursday,
She recalled being called a series of disparaging names.
“I was called Nancy Pelosi’s dog, called incompetent, called a hero and a villain,” Ms. Edwards said. “I was called a traitor to my country, my oath and my Constitution.”
Ms. Edwards, in her emotional testimony, added that she was a “proud American” who was protecting the nation.
Ms. Edwards was one of the first police officers injured in the riot. She cracked her head on the steps of the Capitol after being knocked to the ground by rioters who were pushing against the police barricades.
Ms. Edwards testified alongside British documentary filmmaker Nick Quested, who was embedded with the Proud Boys on the day of the riot.
The hearing marks the first of several by the Jan. 6 committee this month.
Members of the committee have promised that the hearings will reveal the “mountain of evidence” that the riot was a coordinated plot set in motion by then-President Donald Trump.
• Mica Soellner can be reached at msoellner@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Artist formerly known as Johnny Rotten calls anarchy 'terrible idea'
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
The former lead singer of the Sex Pistols no longer espouses the anti-establishment message of the British punk rock band’s signature hit “Anarchy in the U.K.”
In a June 1 essay for The Times of London, Johnny Rotten, who now goes by his legal name John Lydon, denounced the lyrics that he once screamed in performances.
“Anarchy is a terrible idea,” wrote Mr. Lydon, now 66.
The singer slammed anarchist websites for promoting anti-authoritarian messages “in designer Dr. Martens, clever little rucksacks and nicely manufactured balaclavas.”
Mr. Lydon, who formed the platinum-selling band with the late Sid Vicious and others in 1975, also said he has “no animosity against any one of the royal family” despite his opposition to funding the monarchy with tax money.
“God bless the Queen,” he wrote in the essay, printed in time for Queen Elizabeth II’s jubilee celebrations. “She’s put up with a lot.”
The hit Sex Pistols’ single “God Save the Queen” was banned from playlists across the United Kingdom when it was released for the Queen’s Silver Jubilee in 1977. A limited re-release for the queen’s Platinum Jubilee this year sold out quickly.
• Sean Salai can be reached at ssalai@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
A West Virginia man was charged with murdering three co-workers at a Maryland machine shop as well as attempted murder and other charges, authorities said late Friday.
The name of the alleged shooter, Joe Louis Esquivel, 23, of Hedgesville, West Virginia, was also released by the Washington County sheriff’s office on Friday.
Esquivel, who was hospitalized after a shootout with police, is currently being held by the Washington County Detention Center on no bond.
Authorities say Esquivel arrived Thursday morning for his normal shift at Columbia Machine Inc. in the small rural community of Smithsburg in western Maryland. He allegedly worked until he left the building to retrieve a weapon, went back inside and fired on employees in the area of a breakroom. Police responded to a 911 call at about 2:30 p.m.
The sheriff’s office has not released a motive.
Smithsburg police who arrived first on the scene found a wounded person outside the business. As deputies arrived, three additional victims, all deceased, were located inside, the Washington County sheriff’s office said.
Esquivel left the scene in a car and was quickly met by Maryland State Police. A Maryland state trooper who was injured in a shootout with the suspect was treated and released late Thursday, authorities said.
The 25-year veteran of the Maryland State Police was shot when police said Esquivel fired multiple rounds at troopers. At least one trooper returned fire, striking the suspect, state police said.
A search warrant was executed at the suspect’s West Virginia residence, and additional firearms were located, the sheriff’s office said.
Washington County Sheriff Doug Mullendore identified those killed in the shooting as Mark Alan Frey, 50, of Hagerstown, Maryland; Charles Edward Minnick Jr., 31, of Smithsburg, Maryland; and Joshua Robert Wallace, 30, of Hagerstown.
Reached by telephone Friday, Nelson Michael, the father of Brandon Michael, 42, who was wounded in the machine shop shooting, said his son was still in the hospital, but he didn’t know more about his condition.
“He’s surviving,” he said. “I’m glad he’s alive, but it’s going to work on his nerves. I know that.”
Nelson Michael said he didn’t know why the gunman shot the victims.
“I’m not saying any more. I’m just glad my son’s alive, and I feel so bad for the families of the other ones,” he said.
Authorities said the investigation is ongoing.
Mullendore said the suspect used a semiautomatic handgun, which was recovered after the shootout.
Smithsburg, a community of nearly 3,000 people, is just west of the Camp David presidential retreat and about 75 miles (120 kilometers) northwest of Baltimore. The manufacturing facility was in a sparsely populated area northeast of the town’s center with a church, several businesses and farmland nearby.
Based in Vancouver, Washington, Columbia Machine manufactures equipment for concrete products, and its Smithsburg location builds molds and works on parts and repairs for other plants. The company’s CEO, Rick Goode, issued a statement calling the deaths of three employees and the wounding of a fourth tragic.
“Our highest priority during this tragic event is the safety and wellbeing of our employees and their families,” he said.
Dennis Stouffer lived about a half-mile from Frey, one of the victims, and said he would see Frey at the mailbox when he drove by.
He described Frey as “a solid individual” and “a good guy.”
Stouffer said in a phone interview that Frey once made meat hooks for a deer-meat processing shop he used to run in Smithsburg.
“He didn’t make a bunch of noise or anything. He just went about his work,” Stouffer said.
Speaking late Friday morning, Stouffer said the reason for the shooting remained “a big mystery” to people in the community.
“We’re all in shock and disbelief, and that’s an understatement,” Stouffer said.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
HALEIWA, Hawaii (AP) — Hawaii photographer Clark Little is known for his stunning images from inside the barrels of some of the most powerful and dangerous waves on Earth.
The native of Oahu’s North Shore has spent the last 15 years documenting shorebreak waves, the monster swells that roll in from the Pacific and crash directly onto the sand, unobstructed by reefs or shallow water.
Little just released a book, “The Art of Waves,” that chronicles his adventures in the ocean. It contains more than 150 of his favorite images.
“Shorebreak is so beautiful and scary at the same time,” Little said. “I used to surf the shorebreak, so … it’s my comfort zone. I like sand bottom. I think it has more aqua beautiful colors.”
Surfing great Kelly Slater affectionately calls Little “Turbo” - he was known for driving fast and taking chances when the two got to know each other decades ago, well before Slater became one of surfing’s most decorated athletes.
“Clark is so connected with what he’s looking at. It seems so natural to him,” said Slater, who wrote the forward to the new book. “It just struck him one day to start capturing it.”
Big wave surfer Laird Hamilton said Little’s photography gives him the chance to examine the beauty and complexity of the ocean in a way that’s impossible when surfing in the chaotic and big seas he likes to be in.
“His books capture the things about the ocean that make us believe in higher powers,” Hamilton said.
When he was younger, Little would surf the shorebreak waves, something few people dare to do. But Little said even he gets into trouble in these conditions.
“On a big day and I’m trying to swim out to get the shot … then there’s one wave, two waves, three waves,” Little said. “Then I’m out of breath and then there’s another five more waves. I can’t swim in. I can’t get out because it’s pulling. It’s huge. And it’s just, it’s chaos.”
People around the globe were showing respect for waves Wednesday in honor of World Oceans Day, an annual event aimed at promoting conservation and raising awareness of the human impact on oceans.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced Friday she’ll appear on an episode of a popular drag queen show.
Mrs. Pelosi, a California Democrat who represents San Francisco, will make “a special Pride Month appearance” on episode five of “RuPaul’s Drag Race All Stars 7,” aides said Friday.
The show is described as “a group of talented drag queens who compete in challenges to impress host RuPaul, the world’s most famous drag queen, to win a cash prize along with a crown and the title of America’s Next Drag Superstar.”
The show runs on the Paramount Plus streaming service and each episode includes a competition involving performance or fashion design.
In the all-star episodes, “only winners return to compete for the crown,” according to Paramount.
In the episode featuring Mrs. Pelosi, she walked on stage wearing a bright yellow suit and told the contestants, “Your freedom of expression of yourselves in drag is what America is all about. With the midterm election coming up, it’s very important people make their voices and their vote heard.”
It’s Mrs. Pelosi’s second trip to the show. She also appeared in 2018.
Her latest appearance came amid growing outcry over a new trend of staging drag queen performances for children.
So-called family-friendly drag performances have popped up across the country, including in Dallas, Texas; Palm Beach, Florida; and the Smithsonian American Art Museum in Washington to commemorate Pride Month.
The acts have drawn outrage from critics who say the performances appear sexual and should not be viewed by children.
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis said his state’s child endangerment laws could be invoked if there are drag shows for children, although he did not comment specifically on the Palm Beach event.
Mr. DeSantis slammed the Dallas “Drag your kids to pride” event, which took place earlier this month at an adult venue decorated with neon signs laced with sexual innuendo. Video went viral of drag queens dancing with the children and taking money from them.
“That is not something children should be exposed to,” Mr. DeSantis said Thursday.
• Susan Ferrechio can be reached at sferrechio@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
House Republicans have named the congressional aide to Rep. Jake Auchincloss, Massachusetts Democrat, who allowed TV’s Stephen Colbert’s comedy crew into one of the House office buildings after hours.
Republicans said Tuesday that Auchincloss Chief of Staff Tim Hysom was responsible for letting seven producers and staffers of “The Late Show with Stephen Colbert” back into the House Longworth Building last week after U.S. Capitol Police directed the TV crew to leave the complex earlier in the day.
Rep. Rodney Davis, Illinois Republican and ranking member of the House Administration Committee, said he is 100% sure Mr. Hysom is the main staffer who coordinated the events that night for the Colbert team.
Auchincloss spokesman Matt Corridoni denied that his office was involved in letting in the Colbert team.
“The congressman had a scheduled interview with CBS, as did other members of Congress,” he said in a statement. “Our contact with them ended well before the building closed for the evening. We do not condone any inappropriate activity and cannot speak to anything that occurred after hours.”
Mr. Hysom has worked for Mr. Auchincloss, a first-term lawmaker, since he took office in January 2021.
However, he worked for other Democratic members of Congress including Rep. Adam Schiff of California. He was Mr. Schiff’s district deputy director in 2011 and 2012, and also served him between 2003 and 2006, as his legislative correspondent and later a legislative aide.
Mr. Schiff is now a panel member of the select committee holding hearings related to the Jan. 6 Capitol riot.
The Washington Times reached out to Mr. Hysom for comment, but did not hear back.
Mr. Hysom also has been identified by Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia Republican, as the congressional staffer who has been “harassing” her throughout the year.
According to Mrs. Greene, the Colbert show crew was following her throughout the day, later with Mr. Hysom’s help.
“When the Capitol Police threw them out, it also happened to be Congressman Jake Auchincloss’s and Tim Hysom’s staff that let them back in late at night. And you know, whose office they were going to? Mine. My office,” she said Tuesday on the House floor.
Capitol Police said they received a call about a disturbance in the Longworth Building around 8:30 p.m.
“Responding officers observed seven individuals, unescorted and without Congressional ID, in a sixth-floor hallway,” the agency said in a statement. “The building was closed to visitors, and these individuals were determined to be a part of a group that had been directed by the USCP to leave the building earlier in the day.”
The Colbert TV crew was arrested and later released that night for trespassing at a House office building. The incident followed the third public hearing by the House panel investigating the Jan. 6 Capitol riot.
CBS has said that interviews conducted by Mr. Colbert’s production crew were authorized and pre-arranged through congressional offices.
However, they were previously denied congressional press credentials by the House Radio/TV gallery, necessary to gain entry into the Capitol complex, and could not obtain additional mandated credentials to cover the hearing.
Most of the criminal charges filed against the Jan. 6 rioters have been for trespassing on Capitol grounds, the same charges filed against the Colbert crew.
Mr. Colbert downplayed the incident and claimed his staff was just guilty of “first-degree puppetry.”
Congressional tours have also been the basis for Jan. 6-related accusations against Republican lawmakers.
The committee zeroed in last week on Rep. Barry Loudermilk, Georgia Republican, for leading a tour the day before the riot that included at least one person who participated in the march on the Capitol.
Mr. Loudermilk denied leading a “reconnaissance tour,” accusing the panel of a “smear campaign” that has resulted in threats against himself, his staff and his family.
“Once again, instead of contacting me directly, the committee has released carefully edited and select information to the press, with the clear intention of creating a false narrative about the visit to my office by constituents on January 5, 2021. I, my family, and my staff continue to receive serious threats of violence,” Mr. Loudermilk said in a statement Wednesday. “I hold the J6 committee members and their staff directly responsible for these unfounded accusations and threats.”
• Kerry Picket can be reached at kpicket@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

First one-on-one interview to air since Super Bowl
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
President Biden will make an appearance Wednesday on ABC’s “Jimmy Kimmel Live” as part of a trip to Los Angeles for the ninth Summit of the Americas.
The taping for Mr. Kimmel’s late-night talk show will be Mr. Biden’s first one-on-one interview since he sat down with NBC anchor Lester Holt for the Super Bowl in early February.
Mr. Kimmel promoted the show in a tweet late Sunday.
“Our very elected President @JoeBiden visits @JimmyKimmelLive Wednesday night. No malarkey,” he tweeted with airing times of 11:35 p.m. Eastern and 10:35 p.m. Central.
Republicans and others have criticized Mr. Biden for failing to take tough questions in one-on-one situations more frequently, saying he’s over-reliant on notes and Teleprompters while the nation suffers from inflation and other crises.
The president faces low approval numbers, so the appearance on a comedy-driven show will be seen as an attempt to boost his personal ratings.
Mr. Biden will head to California on Wednesday and stay for the summit and other events in Los Angeles. He is scheduled to travel to New Mexico on Saturday to meet with Gov. Michelle Lujan Grisham and discuss recent wildfires.
• Tom Howell Jr. can be reached at thowell@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Holiday will only succeed after Biden stops using race as political weapon
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
To which a full 40% of Americans reply, “What is Juneteenth?”
Well, now it is a federal holiday, which means that if you need something from the post office you are out of luck. If you need something from your state division of motor vehicles, however, there’s a good chance it might still be open since many states have not followed suit in making it a holiday.
Some people get the day off from work, which is always popular. Unless, of course, you are stuck at work watching all the happy people frolicking outside in the sunshine from your dreary office window. Then it is very sad.
Anyway, at a time when Americans seem more divided than we should be, Juneteenth is an awkward national touchstone.
Roughly 100% of Americans know what July 4, Thanksgiving and Christmas and Memorial Day are — and it’s not just because we all get those days off from work or school. Even more painful holidays that we don’t exactly “celebrate” — such as 9/11 — are familiar to everyone and observed by all.
Family feasts, fireworks, presents under the tree or solemn days of remembrance — all unify us and remind us how lucky we are to live in a great, free country.
But if fully 40% of Americans do not even know what Juneteenth is, then it is hardly a unifying holiday. Even if you are among the lucky federal bureaucrats who got the day off.
The latest Gallup polling shows that only 59% of Americans know “a lot” or “some” of what Juneteenth is. That’s up more than 20 points from last year when just 37% of Americans knew what Juneteenth is.
Yet the same poll showed that many Americans support teaching Juneteenth in school — even if they did not know what the holiday was about. Clearly, those people got the day off.
The point of the holiday is to memorialize June 19 as the day in 1865 when Union soldiers arrived in Galveston, Texas, to free slaves — two months after the Confederacy had surrendered in the Civil War and fully two and a half years after President Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation had ended slavery in Confederate states.
Certainly, this is a really big deal. It is safe to say that the end of slavery — and the conclusion of our bloodiest war — is something all good Americans celebrate today.
Ending slavery and reunifying after that long, horrible war was one of America’s greatest trials and remains among the greatest achievements in American history. It should be a moment of enormous pride and historical celebration.
But, like everything in America, great ideas are often ruined by politicians in Washington.
President Biden made Juneteenth a federal holiday when he signed the Juneteenth National Independence Day Act last year, after running an entire presidential campaign on the bizarre notion that half of America is racist. Mr. Biden’s racially-charged, divisive and dishonest campaign came after years of Democrats in Washington doing all they could to sow racial discord in America — 150 years after the end of slavery and more than a decade after electing America’s first Black president.
Juneteenth will only succeed as a national holiday when it becomes a unifying celebration rather than a political weapon.
• Charles Hurt is the opinion editor at The Washington Times.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
NEW YORK — The dogs get the spotlight, but the upcoming Westminster Kennel Club show is also illuminating a human issue: veterinarians’ mental health.
In conjunction with a first-time Veterinarian of the Year award that will be presented on the show’s final day Wednesday, the club is giving $10,000 to a charity focused on veterinary professionals’ psychological welfare.
It’s new emotional territory for the 145-year-old event at a point when the coronavirus pandemic, and a changing culture, have bared the internal struggles of people from schoolchildren to health care workers to college athletes and professional sports stars.
For veterinarians, too, the pandemic added new strains - wrung-out clients, soaring caseloads and more - and amplified longstanding ones.
“We love what we do, and there’s a certain mystique about working with animals - a lot of people think we play with puppies all day long. But there’s a lot behind this,” said American Veterinary Medicine Association President José Arce of San Juan, Puerto Rico. He hopes Westminster’s award will educate people about vets’ wellbeing.
The show begins with an agility competition Saturday and continues Monday through Wednesday, with the best in show prize awarded live on Fox Sports’ FS1 channel Wednesday night. For the first time, some action will also appear on the Spanish-language FOX Deportes.
PHOTOS: At Westminster dog show, new focus on veterinarians' welfare
Nearly 3,500 canines - the most since the 1970s - are expected at the historic Lyndhurst estate in Tarrytown, New York, show co-chairman David Haddock said. The 200-plus breeds and varieties include two newcomers, the mudi and the Russian toy.
It’s the second year in a row that pandemic concerns shifted the United States’ most storied dog show to its June date and suburban outdoor venue, rather than New York City’s Madison Square Garden in winter.
Westminster has given scholarships to veterinary students since 1987, but the new award recognizes a practicing vet. Inaugural winner Dr. Joseph Rossi has treated many show dogs at North Penn Animal Hospital in Lansdale, Pennsylvania, and his and his wife’s Norwich terrier Dolores won the breed at Westminster in 2020.
Co-sponsored by pet insurer Trupanion, the honor comes with a contribution to MightyVet, which offers mentors, courses and other support on topics including work-life balance, handling tough conversations with clients and looking for signs that colleagues might be in serious distress.
“We want to make sure that our animals are taken care of, but to do that, we need to make sure that our vets are taken care of,” Westminster spokesperson Gail Miller Bisher said.
Concerns and research about burnout, depression and suicidality among veterinarians have percolated for decades in the field.
But the issue got wider attention after a 2019 study in the Journal of the American Veterinary Medicine Association showed that a higher proportion of deaths due to suicide among U.S. veterinarians than in the general population. Various other occupations have above-average suicide rates, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
As in human medicine, veterinarians feel the strain of handling emergencies, caring for the sick - and, often, starting out a career with six-figure student debt.
Veterinary doctors, however, also confront the responsibility of advising pet owners about euthanasia and carrying it out.
There are emotionally painful, ethically trying moments when people can’t let go of a suffering pet - or, conversely, can’t afford treatment that could be life-saving. (Some charities and veterinary facilities provide financial help.) Even when euthanasia isn’t under discussion, there are the challenges of communicating with anguished pet owners and coming to terms with cases that don’t go as hoped.
“As the veterinarian, it hits us hard,” Rossi said. “We love animals, and that’s why we do this.”
In an average week, several veterinarians or other staffers seek out one-on-one guidance for a problem - job-related or not - from veterinary social worker Judith Harbour, who also works with pet owners at the Schwarzman Animal Medical Center in New York.
Veterinarians need to be able to move from crisis to crisis at AMC, which treats more than 50,000 animals a year and has a 24-7 emergency room and highly specialized care.
“But then there needs to be a time when the difficult experiences are dealt with,” says Harbour. She aims to help vets and other staffers talk though those experiences “in a productive way that’s not just a venting session.”
She advises them to focus on their inner motivations and values, be kind to themselves and remember that many situations don’t have perfect solutions.
The American Veterinary Medicine Association also offers help, ranging from free suicide prevention training to a “workplace wellbeing certificate” program that engages entire veterinary practices in learning about such subjects as giving feedback, navigating conflict and fostering diversity and inclusion.
The pet-owning public has a role to play, too, Arce says.
“We understand how passionate people are about their pets and the health of their pets, but treating your veterinarian roughly because you’re under stress, because your pet is ill, is not the way to go,” he said.
“We’re trying to help you with everything we can.”
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

A hospital visit changed my life and ended another
Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
My heart pounded. I shivered, the coldness of the room exacerbating my jittery nerves. My boyfriend, just inches away from me, felt miles away.
The clinic door swayed open and shut as patients filtered in and out. Each time, I could hear the faint chant of prayer from outside. The calming supplication to God in the words that I, as a lifelong Catholic knew so well, contrasted sharply with the bleak silence within the drab waiting room.
In my heart, I knew that I should go to them.
But I couldn’t. An invisible weight glued me to my chair, imprisoning me in the cold, loveless waiting room, accompanied by the man who just days ago I had believed to be in love with me.
My name was called. As if in a dream, I followed the nurse into a room and lay on the procedure table. Never being introduced to the person about to end the life of my child and without any explanation of what was about to occur, the “quick and easy” operation began. The loud humming of a vacuum suction rudely and brutally killed the stillness of the room — just as it killed the life inside of me. Those next excruciatingly painful minutes seemingly lasted a lifetime. And then it was done.
Emancipated from what I thought was my problem, shame, not relief, consumed me. I followed the nurse into a separate room where several recovering women lay on hospital gurneys. Some were crying, some moaned in pain. Their blank and expressionless faces haunt me to this day. Left alone in our recovery, the only interaction from the staff was when they escorted us to leave at which they told us if we had any complications to contact our physician. Little did I know that shortly after being home I would be hospitalized for an infection related to my abortion.  It would be years before I recognized how easily I had been manipulated by those whom I had sought out for help. Knowing how to play on my fears as a scared and ashamed 18-year-old college-bound student, Planned Parenthood successfully peddled to me the same lie that has permeated countless headlines and tweets this past week: that abortion is the best option, and that it is necessary for women to succeed.
The palpable rage and furor of the pro-abortion movement over the leaked draft of the Supreme Court’s decision in Dobbs v. Jackson this week reopened the wounds I have carried the past 42 years since I had my first abortion and the two more that followed it. As pro-abortion zealots seethe with rage over the possible overturning of Roe, and clamor about the downfall of so-called “women’s rights,” they ignore the pain and suffering of so many post-abortive women like me.
Our stories are inconvenient to them.
My abortion left me depressed, anguished and guilty for years. It changed the trajectory of my life, leaving me struggling with self-loathing, guilt and horrific depression, and my hopes and dreams of college collapsed. Like one dead, I engaged mindlessly in drinking, drugs and promiscuous activity. I had two more abortions.
After years of suffering, I finally found healing and forgiveness in my faith and in attending abortion healing programs. I now advocate for women and their unborn children, to let women know that they have options other than abortion.
Thankfully, the vital work of thousands of pregnancy care centers and maternity homes around the country has helped women to recognize that there are alternatives to abortion and that there are support systems in place to help them choose life. If I had known about these organizations and the powerful work that they do to help women in situations like my own, my sons and daughter would be alive today — even if that meant the ultimate sacrifice of giving them up for adoption.
Pro-abortion advocates often advertise abortion as a risk-free procedure. To them, women face two options: To have their baby, and all the economic, emotional and physical burdens that come with that or to have an abortion and forget about their child forever.
Yet as humans and mothers with innate biological ties to our children both in and out of the womb, we must recognize that women don’t work like that. Countless post-abortive women have shared their stories with me, and like mine, their experiences fundamentally conflict with the carefree image the abortion industry depicts. The anguish of losing a child, and knowing that you chose to end their life, is suffocating. My abortions did not bring me success or empower me as a woman, in fact, took away the most beautiful empowering gift a woman has, that of being a mother.
Since 1973, Roe v. Wade has mainstreamed such a narrow-minded view of women, pitting a mother against a child in an unnatural and painful struggle that leaves one “adversary” dead and the other to suffer the consequences of that struggle for years. It shouldn’t have to be like this.
As a post-abortive mother, I hope that the Supreme Court votes to overturn Roe v. Wade and sends the regulation of abortion back to state legislatures around the country for popular opinion to decide.
Thanks to advances in ultrasound technology, in-utero surgery and treatments for babies done well before they are born, and overall increased understanding that the unborn are separate, living human beings, Americans are more pro-life than ever. A majority of Americans oppose extreme pro-abortion policies such as those advocated by national leaders of the Democratic party. According to a Marist Poll from January 2022, 71% of Americans support more protections for unborn children than are currently in place in law.
Americans largely support the pro-life measures that have been in the headlines over the last year with 50% of Americans supporting protections for unborn babies at 6 weeks when their heartbeat can be detected, and 54% favoring drawing a line at abortions after 15 weeks, the limit in question before the court and a point by which research shows babies can feel the excruciating pain of abortion.
I hope and pray that the Supreme Court Justices stand strong despite the intimidation and threats from the pro-abortion lobby and move to overturn the tragedy of Roe v. Wade so that no woman has to suffer as I did.
Women deserve better than abortion.
Women deserve honesty, and the empowerment to choose life.
• Andie Pearson is the directory manager for Her PLAN.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
NEW YORK — Roddy Ricch is facing gun charges after being arrested on his way to perform at a concert Saturday night.
According to police, the 23-year-old rapper was arriving at Citi Field on Saturday evening when a private security firm operating a checkpoint noticed a firearm in the vehicle he was riding in. The Los Angeles-based Ricch was scheduled to perform at the Governors Ball Music Festival.
A loaded firearm was recovered from the car along with nine rounds of ammunition and a large-capacity magazine, police said.
Police charged Ricch, whose real name is Rodrick Moore, and two other men in the car — 46-year-old Michael Figueroa of Brooklyn and 57-year-old Carlos Collins of Eastchester, New York — with criminal possession of a weapon, possession of a large capacity ammunition feeding device and unlawful possession of the device.
Messages seeking comment were left Sunday with Ricch’s booking agency and record company. It wasn’t immediately known if he had retained an attorney who could comment on the charges.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
“Tiger King” star Bhagavan “Doc” Antle has been charged with laundering more than half a million dollars, money federal prosecutors said Monday that he believed to be the proceeds of an operation to smuggle people across the Mexican border into the United States.
Charges against Antle and Andrew Jon Sawyer, one of Antle’s employees at Myrtle Beach Safari, were revealed during a federal court hearing in Florence, South Carolina.
According to federal prosecutors, Antle and Sawyer laundered $505,000 over a four-month period by doling out checks from businesses they controlled, receiving a 15% fee of the money that passed through their hands.
The checks, prosecutors allege, falsely purported to be payment for construction work at Myrtle Beach Safari but were in reality intended to serve as evidence that the recipients had legitimate income.
According to the complaint unsealed in court Monday, Antle discussed his plan to conceal the cash he received by inflating tourist numbers at his 50-acre (20-hectare) wildlife tropical preserve. Prosecutors also said he had previously used bulk cash receipts to purchase animals for which he could not use checks.
Records for the Horry County jail show Antle and Sawyer were both arrested Friday. Attorneys for both men did not immediately comment on the charges when reached via email.
According to authorities, Antle and Sawyer each face a maximum of 20 years in federal prison if convicted.
Antle is featured prominently in “Tiger King: Murder, Mayhem and Madness,” a 2020 Netflix documentary miniseries that focused on tiger breeders and private zoo operators in the U.S. The series focused heavily on Oklahoma zoo operator Joe Exotic, who also was targeted for animal mistreatment and was convicted in a plot to kill a rival, Carole Baskin.
Animal rights advocates have accused Antle of mistreating lions and other wildlife. He was indicted in Virginia in 2020 on animal cruelty and wildlife trafficking charges.
In May, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals asked the IRS to probe Antle’s Rare Species Fund, a nonprofit raising money for wildlife conservation. PETA alleges he uses some of the fund’s money to subsidize his safari site in Socastee outside Myrtle Beach.
“It’s fitting that ‘Doc’ Antle is behind bars after years of locking up the endangered animals he uses in tawdry photo ops. His legal woes are mounting, as PETA recently blew the whistle on his apparent ‘charity’ scam, and the end to his reign of terrorizing tiger cubs can’t come soon enough,” said Debbie Metzler, associate director of PETA’s Captive Animal Law Enforcement division, in a statement.
Meanwhile, in Virginia, Antle is facing two felony counts of wildlife trafficking and conspiracy to wildlife trafficking charges, as well as 13 misdemeanor counts of conspiracy to violate the Endangered Species Act and animal cruelty charges tied to trafficking lion cubs. Those charges are scheduled to go to trial next month.
Antle has a history of recorded violations, going as far back as 1989, when he was fined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture for abandoning deer and peacocks at his zoo in Virginia. Over the years, he has more than 35 USDA violations for mistreating animals.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
BRINDISI, Italy — Film director Paul Haggis appeared in court in southern Italy on Wednesday amid a police investigation into a woman’s allegations he had sex with her without her consent over the course of two days.
Haggis, 69, made no comment as he arrived with Italian attorney Michele Laforgia at the courthouse in Brindisi, a port town in Puglia, the region that forms the “heel” of southeastern Italy. There was no sign that members of his family who were in Italy at the time joined him.
Prosecutors announced Sunday that police had detained the Canadian-born director, screenwriter and producer for investigation of alleged aggravated sexual violence and aggravated personal injuries.
State TV and other Italian media said the alleged victim is a 30-year-old Englishwoman who had known Haggis before he came to the tourist town of Ostuni to participate in an arts festival.
Haggis co-wrote, directed and produced “Crash,” which won the 2006 Academy Awards for best picture and best screenplay. He also wrote the screenplay for “Million Dollar Baby,” another Oscar winner.
He has had legal problems in recent years stemming from sexual misconduct accusations by four women in the United States.
PHOTOS: Director Haggis appears in Italy court amid assault probe
In Italy, a judge, after hearing arguments from both prosecutors and defense lawyers, is expected to rule Wednesday on whether Haggis should be freed from custody pending possible additional investigation.
The judge could also decide to order him kept jailed or under house arrest.
Haggis’ U.S.-based attorney, Priya Chaudhry, told The Associated Press on Sunday that although she could not discuss the evidence under Italian law, “I am confident that all allegations will be dismissed against Mr. Haggis. He is totally innocent, and willing to fully cooperate with the authorities so the truth comes out quickly.”
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Saving the lives of millions of children not just a ‘political victory’
Telephone game in the ‘Age of Trump’
The media’s Julian Assange problem
WASHINGTON — Hershel W. “Woody” Williams, the last remaining Medal of Honor recipient from World War II, will lie in honor at the U.S. Capitol, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer said Sunday.
A date and other details will be announced later, Pelosi and Schumer said in a joint statement.
“Woody Williams embodied the best of America: living a life of duty, honor and courage,” Pelosi said. Schumer said: “Woody Williams was an American hero who embodied the best of our country and the greatest generation.”
Williams, who died on Wednesday at 98, was a legend in his native West Virginia for his heroics under fire over several crucial hours at the battle for Iwo Jima. As a young Marine corporal, Williams went ahead of his unit in February 1945 and eliminated a series of Japanese machine gun positions. Facing small-arms fire, Williams fought for four hours, repeatedly returning to prepare demolition charges and obtain flamethrowers.
Later that year, the 22-year-old Williams received the Medal of Honor from President Harry Truman. The Medal of Honor is the nation’s highest award for military valor.
In remarks at a memorial Sunday in Charleston, West Virginia, U.S. Sen. Joe Manchin said Williams “never quit giving back.” That included raising money for gold star families - immediate family members of fallen service members - with an annual motorcycle ride.
“It’s raised hundreds of thousands of dollars,” Manchin said. He joked that “it’s not going to be stopping, because Woody would come after me in a heartbeat.”
Manchin, a West Virginia Democrat, said he will miss Williams’ phone calls, noting how Williams would always give him directions and to-do lists.
“I’ll miss him telling me how I’m supposed to vote. And when I didn’t, how I made a mistake,” Manchin said.
Gen. David H. Berger, commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps, said at the memorial that Williams always took exception to the notion that he accomplished that feat alone. He always acknowledged the other men on his team, some of whom never returned home.
“Woody may be the most genuine person I ever met,” Berger said, noting his unique combination of humility and humor. “He could make you laugh. He could make you care. That was his gift.”
Williams remained in the Marines after the war, serving a total of 20 years, before working for the Veterans Administration for 33 years as a veterans service representative. In 2018, the Huntington VA medical center was renamed in his honor, and the Navy commissioned a mobile base sea vessel in his name in 2020.
“He left an indelible mark on our Marine Corps,” Berger said. “As long as there are Marines, his legacy will live on.”
Manchin announced during his remarks that Williams would lie in state at the Rotunda, but Pelosi and Schumer said he would lie in honor. The distinction, according to the Architect of the Capitol, which oversees the building, is that government officials and military officers lie in state while private citizens lie in honor.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Saving the lives of millions of children not just a ‘political victory’
Telephone game in the ‘Age of Trump’
The media’s Julian Assange problem
BRINDISI, Italy — Film director Paul Haggis appeared in court in southern Italy on Wednesday amid a police investigation into a woman’s allegations he had sex with her without her consent over the course of two days.
Haggis, 69, made no comment as he arrived with Italian attorney Michele Laforgia at the courthouse in Brindisi, a port town in Puglia, the region that forms the “heel” of southeastern Italy. There was no sign that members of his family who were in Italy at the time joined him.
Prosecutors announced Sunday that police had detained the Canadian-born director, screenwriter and producer for investigation of alleged aggravated sexual violence and aggravated personal injuries.
State TV and other Italian media said the alleged victim is a 30-year-old Englishwoman who had known Haggis before he came to the tourist town of Ostuni to participate in an arts festival.
Haggis co-wrote, directed and produced “Crash,” which won the 2006 Academy Awards for best picture and best screenplay. He also wrote the screenplay for “Million Dollar Baby,” another Oscar winner.
He has had legal problems in recent years stemming from sexual misconduct accusations by four women in the United States.
PHOTOS: Director Haggis appears in Italy court amid assault probe
In Italy, a judge, after hearing arguments from both prosecutors and defense lawyers, is expected to rule Wednesday on whether Haggis should be freed from custody pending possible additional investigation.
The judge could also decide to order him kept jailed or under house arrest.
Haggis’ U.S.-based attorney, Priya Chaudhry, told The Associated Press on Sunday that although she could not discuss the evidence under Italian law, “I am confident that all allegations will be dismissed against Mr. Haggis. He is totally innocent, and willing to fully cooperate with the authorities so the truth comes out quickly.”
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Saving the lives of millions of children not just a ‘political victory’
Telephone game in the ‘Age of Trump’
The media’s Julian Assange problem
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. — Andrew Gillum, the 2018 Democratic nominee for Florida governor, is facing 21 federal charges related to a scheme to seek donations and funnel a portion of them back to him through third parties, the U.S. attorney’s office announced Wednesday.
Gillum, 42, and co-defendant Janet Lettman-Hicks, 53, face 19 counts of wire fraud. Gillum is also charged with making false statements to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The U.S. attorney’s office said the pair “conspired to commit wire fraud, by unlawfully soliciting and obtaining funds from various entities and individuals through false and fraudulent promises and representations that the funds would be used for a legitimate purpose.”
Lettman-Hicks then used her company to fraudulently give money to Gillum disguised as payroll payments, the office said in a press release.
It’s the latest trouble for Gillum, who narrowly lost to Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis in a race that required a recount.
Gillum served as mayor of Tallahassee before running for governor.
In March 2020, Gillum was found intoxicated and unconscious in a hotel room with two men, including one who works as a male escort. Two days later he entered a rehabilitation center, and later did a television interview and said he‘s bisexual.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Hollywood was stunned when the can’t-miss blockbuster “Lightyear” sputtered in its opening weekend at the box office, but not conservatives, who blamed the animated film’s failure to launch on Disney’s ongoing lurch to the left.
The Disney-Pixar feature failed to dislodge Universal’s “Jurassic World: Dominion” from the No. 1 box office slot after grossing $51 million in its domestic debut, well below projections for the spinoff of the hugely popular “Toy Story” franchise.
Entertainment analysts attributed the lackluster showing to factors such as the movie’s “confusing premise” (Variety) and competition from the Disney+ streaming service (Deadline), while those on the right described the film as the latest casualty of corporate wokeness.
“Buzz Lightyear went woke. The movie went broke,” Rep. Jim Jordan, Ohio Republican, tweeted.
Former Trump White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said she decided against seeing the movie last weekend over reports of its political messaging.
“I wanted to take my family to this movie. I chose not to because I’m just tired of a woke agenda,” Ms. McEnany said on Fox’s “Outnumbered.” “I don’t care what it is, any agenda, right, left, being pushed in my face. I just wanted to watch a movie about toys.”
The headlines in the conservative press included “Pixar’s new Toy Story spinoff just bombed on opening weekend and I wonder why,” said Not the Bee, while Breitbart called it “the latest woke box office flop.”
“Maybe Disney and Pixar could concentrate on telling a story instead of distributing propaganda to children,” tweeted Jordan B. Peterson, the University of Toronto professor emeritus and YouTube personality.
“Lightyear” flew onto the political radar months ago with the much-discussed lesbian kiss between two of the animated characters, as well as the decision to cast Chris Evans as the voice of Buzz Lightyear instead of Tim Allen, the role’s originator, who’s known for his right-of-center views.
Patricia Heaton to Disney: You ‘Completely Castrated’ Buzz Lightyear in ‘Toy Story’ Spin-off! https://t.co/ZtGHG4nHEx
The would-be blockbuster’s release also follows months of high-profile feuding between Disney and Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, spurred by Disney’s pledge in March to help repeal what critics called the “don’t say gay” bill, which bans schools from discussing sexual orientation and gender identity in grades K-3.
The backlash intensified after Manhattan Institute senior fellow Christopher Rufo released internal video clips showing Disney executives discussing how to add LGBTQ themes and characters to shows.
The Florida clash followed reports that the kissing scene was cut but then added back after pushback from “LGBTQIA+ employees of Pixar & their allies,” who accused Disney in a letter of removing scenes of “gay affection.”
“Nearly every moment of overtly gay affection is cut at Disney’s behest,” read the March 9 letter posted by Popular Information’s Judd Legum.
As Galyn Susman, one of the “Lightyear” producers, told the Mercury News: “We got the opportunity to put it back in and that was really exciting.”
Mr. Evans blasted those objecting to the scene as “idiots” in a June 15 interview, two days before the movie’s debut.
“The real truth is those people are idiots,” Mr. Evans told Reuters. “I mean, I think throughout history, you can see every time there’s been social advancement as we wake up, the American story, the human story, is one of constant social awakening and growth. That’s what makes us good.”
Director Angus MacLane said that making the Space Ranger Commander Alisha Hawthorne character gay was important for “representation,” and that the public display of affection showed that she and her wife, Kiko, were in a “loving, lasting relationship.”
“We had a lot of queer personnel on the film,” Mr. MacLane told the Los Angeles Times. “There’s a lot of really fantastic representation that means a lot — more than I can understand. For them to be so excited about that and have it be so personal, it means a lot to me.”
“Lightyear,” which cost $200 million to make, had the lowest-grossing domestic opening since the 2017 sequel “Cars 2,” which earned $53 million. “Toy Story 4,” the last movie in the franchise, earned $120 million in its first three days of domestic release in 2019.
“They genuinely do not understand the moral disgust of parents in this nation right now who just want to enjoy good movies with their kids without having a sexual agenda shoved in their faces!” said Not the Bee.
The film may have trouble making up the shortfall internationally. Fourteen Muslim countries have banned the movie, including Saudi Arabia and the Palestinian territories, and screenings in China are also seen as unlikely unless Disney cuts the smooching scene.
Sen. Ted Cruz, Texas Republican, said it would be a “wild twist” if Hollywood drew the line at “Lightyear” after years of kowtowing on content to Beijing censors.
“There’s significant discussion that China is not going to allow the movie in because of this scene, and I’ve got to say it’s a wild twist where Hollywood has been willing to grovel to China, to let China censor its movies, to embrace anti-Americanism, to avoid any criticism of China because they want to get access to the Chinese movie market,” Mr. Cruz said on his “The Verdict” podcast.
“But when it comes to their culture agenda, apparently now suddenly they’ve discovered, all right, give up the money because lesbian toys are more important,” he said.
“Lightyear” earned good but not great reviews, scoring 76% with critics and 85% with audiences on Rotten Tomatoes. A frequent criticism was that the movie fails to live up to the Pixar franchise’s high standards.
Hollywood in Toto film critic Christian Toto called the film a “generic space romp unworthy of what many consider the most impressive film studio around.”
He also described the big kiss as superfluous to the plot.
“The film arrives with plenty of pre-release buzz thanks to its same-sex buss. Suffice to say the moment isn’t necessary and the romance attached to it is the only romantic coupling in the film. The subplot, to be blunt, feels inorganic,” Mr. Toto said in his review. “Same-sex couples deserve representation in a more natural fashion.”
• Valerie Richardson can be reached at vrichardson@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Saving the lives of millions of children not just a ‘political victory’
Telephone game in the ‘Age of Trump’
The media’s Julian Assange problem
House Republicans have named the congressional aide to Rep. Jake Auchincloss, Massachusetts Democrat, who allowed TV’s Stephen Colbert’s comedy crew into one of the House office buildings after hours.
Republicans said Tuesday that Auchincloss Chief of Staff Tim Hysom was responsible for letting seven producers and staffers of “The Late Show with Stephen Colbert” back into the House Longworth Building last week after U.S. Capitol Police directed the TV crew to leave the complex earlier in the day.
Rep. Rodney Davis, Illinois Republican and ranking member of the House Administration Committee, said he is 100% sure Mr. Hysom is the main staffer who coordinated the events that night for the Colbert team.
Auchincloss spokesman Matt Corridoni denied that his office was involved in letting in the Colbert team.
“The congressman had a scheduled interview with CBS, as did other members of Congress,” he said in a statement. “Our contact with them ended well before the building closed for the evening. We do not condone any inappropriate activity and cannot speak to anything that occurred after hours.”
Mr. Hysom has worked for Mr. Auchincloss, a first-term lawmaker, since he took office in January 2021.
However, he worked for other Democratic members of Congress including Rep. Adam Schiff of California. He was Mr. Schiff’s district deputy director in 2011 and 2012, and also served him between 2003 and 2006, as his legislative correspondent and later a legislative aide.
Mr. Schiff is now a panel member of the select committee holding hearings related to the Jan. 6 Capitol riot.
The Washington Times reached out to Mr. Hysom for comment, but did not hear back.
Mr. Hysom also has been identified by Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia Republican, as the congressional staffer who has been “harassing” her throughout the year.
According to Mrs. Greene, the Colbert show crew was following her throughout the day, later with Mr. Hysom’s help.
“When the Capitol Police threw them out, it also happened to be Congressman Jake Auchincloss’s and Tim Hysom’s staff that let them back in late at night. And you know, whose office they were going to? Mine. My office,” she said Tuesday on the House floor.
Capitol Police said they received a call about a disturbance in the Longworth Building around 8:30 p.m.
“Responding officers observed seven individuals, unescorted and without Congressional ID, in a sixth-floor hallway,” the agency said in a statement. “The building was closed to visitors, and these individuals were determined to be a part of a group that had been directed by the USCP to leave the building earlier in the day.”
The Colbert TV crew was arrested and later released that night for trespassing at a House office building. The incident followed the third public hearing by the House panel investigating the Jan. 6 Capitol riot.
CBS has said that interviews conducted by Mr. Colbert’s production crew were authorized and pre-arranged through congressional offices.
However, they were previously denied congressional press credentials by the House Radio/TV gallery, necessary to gain entry into the Capitol complex, and could not obtain additional mandated credentials to cover the hearing.
Most of the criminal charges filed against the Jan. 6 rioters have been for trespassing on Capitol grounds, the same charges filed against the Colbert crew.
Mr. Colbert downplayed the incident and claimed his staff was just guilty of “first-degree puppetry.”
Congressional tours have also been the basis for Jan. 6-related accusations against Republican lawmakers.
The committee zeroed in last week on Rep. Barry Loudermilk, Georgia Republican, for leading a tour the day before the riot that included at least one person who participated in the march on the Capitol.
Mr. Loudermilk denied leading a “reconnaissance tour,” accusing the panel of a “smear campaign” that has resulted in threats against himself, his staff and his family.
“Once again, instead of contacting me directly, the committee has released carefully edited and select information to the press, with the clear intention of creating a false narrative about the visit to my office by constituents on January 5, 2021. I, my family, and my staff continue to receive serious threats of violence,” Mr. Loudermilk said in a statement Wednesday. “I hold the J6 committee members and their staff directly responsible for these unfounded accusations and threats.”
• Kerry Picket can be reached at kpicket@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Reparations: The left’s new segregation
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced Friday she’ll appear on an episode of a popular drag queen show.
Mrs. Pelosi, a California Democrat who represents San Francisco, will make “a special Pride Month appearance” on episode five of “RuPaul’s Drag Race All Stars 7,” aides said Friday.
The show is described as “a group of talented drag queens who compete in challenges to impress host RuPaul, the world’s most famous drag queen, to win a cash prize along with a crown and the title of America’s Next Drag Superstar.”
The show runs on the Paramount Plus streaming service and each episode includes a competition involving performance or fashion design.
In the all-star episodes, “only winners return to compete for the crown,” according to Paramount.
In the episode featuring Mrs. Pelosi, she walked on stage wearing a bright yellow suit and told the contestants, “Your freedom of expression of yourselves in drag is what America is all about. With the midterm election coming up, it’s very important people make their voices and their vote heard.”
It’s Mrs. Pelosi’s second trip to the show. She also appeared in 2018.
Her latest appearance came amid growing outcry over a new trend of staging drag queen performances for children.
So-called family-friendly drag performances have popped up across the country, including in Dallas, Texas; Palm Beach, Florida; and the Smithsonian American Art Museum in Washington to commemorate Pride Month.
The acts have drawn outrage from critics who say the performances appear sexual and should not be viewed by children.
Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis said his state’s child endangerment laws could be invoked if there are drag shows for children, although he did not comment specifically on the Palm Beach event.
Mr. DeSantis slammed the Dallas “Drag your kids to pride” event, which took place earlier this month at an adult venue decorated with neon signs laced with sexual innuendo. Video went viral of drag queens dancing with the children and taking money from them.
“That is not something children should be exposed to,” Mr. DeSantis said Thursday.
• Susan Ferrechio can be reached at sferrechio@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

The canine behavior of the LGBTQ cabal
A lofty fight against the left’s Godless modernity
Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
BATH, Maine (AP) — The christening of a Navy destroyer on Saturday highlighted the sacrifices of two generations - the ship’s namesake killed in World War II and another Marine who died more than 60 years later.
The future USS Basilone bears the name of a Marine who was awarded the Medal of Honor before his death on Iwo Jima.
Breaking a bottle on the ship’s bow for good luck was a woman who lost her brother in an ambush in Fallujah, Iraq.
The legacy and sacrifice of such Marines are never forgotten, Sgt. Major of the Marine Corps Troy Black told a crowd of 2,000 gathered next to the warship at Navy shipbuilder Bath Iron Works in Maine.
Gunnery Sgt. John Basilone was awarded the Medal of Honor for heroism while defending Henderson Field against a fierce assault by a 3,000-strong Japanese force during the Battle of Guadalcanal in 1942.
The New Jersey resident returned home to a hero’s welcome and a parade. But he asked to rejoin his comrades and died on the opening day of the invasion of Iwo Jima in February 1945. He was awarded the Navy Cross posthumously for heroism that day.
His 92-year-old brother Donald and others at the ceremony spoke of Basilone’s patriotism, dedication and bravery.
That included his insistence on returning to combat instead of staying safe for the remainder of the war. “He really wanted to go back,” Donald Basilone said in statement read by his niece.
Ryan Manion, whose brother, Marine 1st Lt. Travis Manion, was killed in Iraq, said both her brother and the ship’s namesake were cut from the same cloth even though they were from different generations.
“John Basilone was a young patriot who joined the military to do his job when his country needed him the most,” she said.
The ceremony marked a milestone in construction of the 509-foot guided-missile destroyer. Dignitaries included admirals, family members, Democratic Gov. Janet Mills and Republican Sen. Susan Collins.
Manion, who is one of the ship’s sponsors, is president of the Pennsylvania-based Travis Manion Foundation, which aims to empower veterans and families of fallen heroes, using her brother’s words, “If not me, then who?”
Her brother was killed by a sniper when he exposed himself to enemy fire to get an advantageous firing position and draw attention away from wounded Marines during an ambush in 2007 in Iraq.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Reparations: The left’s new segregation
Move over Maverick, the dinosaurs have arrived to claim their throne.
“Jurassic World: Dominion” took a mighty bite out of the box office with $143.4 million in North American ticket sales, according to studio estimates Sunday. Including earnings from international showings - the film opened in various markets last weekend - “Jurassic World: Dominion,” released globally by Universal Pictures, has already grossed $389 million. And it’s just getting started.
“We couldn’t be happier,” said Jim Orr, Universal’s head of domestic distribution. “‘Jurassic World: Dominion’ had a very broad and ridiculously enthusiastic audience.”
The hefty haul is yet another sign that the box office is continuing to rebound this summer. With the blockbuster successes of films like “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness,” “Top Gun: Maverick” and now “Jurassic World 3,” audiences are coming back to movie theaters more consistently.
The film, which had a reported $185 million price tag not accounting for marketing and promotion costs, opened on 4,676 screens in the U.S. and Canada, starting with preview showings Thursday. Audiences were 56% male and 54% over the age of 25, according to Universal.
Critics were not kind to the dino extravaganza, but audiences seem to be enjoying themselves based on exit polls. Moviegoers gave it an A- CinemaScore and an 81% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes, suggesting that word of mouth will be strong in the coming weeks.
“You want to see dinosaurs on the big screen, it doesn’t matter what critics thought,” said Paul Dergarabedian, the senior media analyst for Comscore.
And many moviegoers did opt for the biggest screens possible. Globally, IMAX showings of “Jurassic World: Dominion” represented $25 million of the total. The 3D format also accounted for around 25% of worldwide ticket sales.
“The appetite for the colossal creatures in this franchise is still voracious, and the way audiences want to experience this movie is in 3D,” said Travis Reid, the CEO and president of Cinema for RealD, in a statement.
Both “Top Gun: Maverick” and “Jurassic World: Dominion” are an important caveat for an industry that continues to learn new lessons about pandemic-era moviegoing every week. Although both films are legacy sequels, neither are of the superhero variety, which, for a long time, had seemed like the only pandemic-proof genre.
“Top Gun: Maverick” is still coasting in rarefied skies too: It fell only 44% in its third weekend with an estimated $50 million to take second place, bringing its North American total north of $393.3 million. “Doctor Strange 2,” in its sixth weekend, was a distant third with $4.9 million.
This weekend is only the third of the pandemic era in which the total domestic box office surpassed $200 million, according to box office tracker Comscore. The others were “Spider Man: No Way Home,” in December, and “Doctor Strange 2,” in May. But this is the first time there has been space for two movies to do well.
“Pretty much all the big blockbuster weekends that we’ve had over the pandemic have been dominated by one movie,” Dergarabedian said. “In this case, we have two big blockbusters in theaters at once. This is the recipe for success that theater owners have been waiting for over the course of the pandemic. It’s an important milestone.”
“Dominion,” a co-production of Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment, is the third film in the “Jurassic World” trilogy, which began in 2015 and introduced characters played by Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard. The newest installment brings back actors Laura Dern, Sam Neill and Jeff Goldblum from Steven Spielberg’s 1993 “Jurassic Park.”
Colin Trevorrow, who stewarded the “World” trilogy and directed the first film, returned to direct “Dominion,” in which dinosaurs are no longer contained and locusts are threatening the world’s food supply.
The filmmakers have said “Dominion” is intended to be the last of the “Jurassic World” films, which have been enormously profitable with over $3 billion in ticket sales. The first earned over $1.7 billion globally alone. Including the original “Jurassic Park” trilogy, that number skyrockets to $5 billion.
“Jurassic World 3” should continue performing throughout the summer, Orr said. Universal Pictures also has a number of diverse, high-profile and theatrical-only releases coming in the next few weeks, including the horror film “The Black Phone,” “Minions: The Rise of Gru” and Jordan Peele’s “Nope.” And this vote of confidence in movie theaters is promising.
“This is a tremendous start to our summer,” Orr said.
Estimated ticket sales for Friday through Sunday at U.S. and Canadian theaters, according to Comscore. Final domestic figures will be released Monday.
1. “Jurassic World: Dominion,” $143.4 million.
2. “Top Gun: Maverick,” $50 million.
3. “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness,” $4.9 million.
4. “The Bob’s Burgers Movie,” $2.3 million.
5. “The Bad Guys,” $2.3 million.
6. “Downton Abbey: A New Era,” $1.7 million.
7. “Everything Everywhere All At Once,” $1.3 million.
9. “Sonic the Hedgehog 2,” $710,000.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Reparations: The left’s new segregation
BRAWLEY, Calif. — A Marine Corps Osprey aircraft carrying five Marines crashed Wednesday in the Southern California desert and civilian and military emergency crews were responding, but there were no immediate details about any injuries or fatalities, the military said.
The MV-22B Osprey belonged to the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing based at Camp Pendleton and went down at 12:25 p.m. during training, said Maj. Mason Englehart, spokesman for the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing, an aviation unit headquartered at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar, in San Diego, about 115 miles (185 kilometers) west of the crash site near the community of Glamis in Imperial County.
The tiltrotor aircraft can take off and land as a helicopter but transit as a turboprop aircraft.
Englehart said he had no further details yet to release about the five Marines who were on board.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

The canine behavior of the LGBTQ cabal
A lofty fight against the left’s Godless modernity
Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Country music star Toby Keith announced Sunday that he has been undergoing treatment for stomach cancer since last fall.
The multiplatinum-selling singer said on Twitter that he underwent surgery and received chemotherapy and radiation in the past six months.
“So far, so good,” said Keith, an Oklahoma native who turns 61 on July 8. “I need time to breathe, recover and relax.
“I am looking forward to spending this time with my family. But I will see the fans sooner than later. I can’t wait.”
The status of Keith’s performances for the remainder of this year wasn’t immediately clear. His next performance is scheduled for June 17 in Wheaton, Illinois, according to his website. After Keith’s announcement, the Ohio State Fair announced that his July 28 concert in Columbus, Ohio, has been canceled.
Keith’s publicist, Elaine Schock, said in an email Sunday night that some tour dates will be canceled, “but I’m not sure how many at this point.”
Keith’s foundation has assisted children with cancer since 2006.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Reparations: The left’s new segregation
WASHINGTON — Hershel W. “Woody” Williams, the last remaining Medal of Honor recipient from World War II, will lie in honor at the U.S. Capitol, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer said Sunday.
A date and other details will be announced later, Pelosi and Schumer said in a joint statement.
“Woody Williams embodied the best of America: living a life of duty, honor and courage,” Pelosi said. Schumer said: “Woody Williams was an American hero who embodied the best of our country and the greatest generation.”
Williams, who died on Wednesday at 98, was a legend in his native West Virginia for his heroics under fire over several crucial hours at the battle for Iwo Jima. As a young Marine corporal, Williams went ahead of his unit in February 1945 and eliminated a series of Japanese machine gun positions. Facing small-arms fire, Williams fought for four hours, repeatedly returning to prepare demolition charges and obtain flamethrowers.
Later that year, the 22-year-old Williams received the Medal of Honor from President Harry Truman. The Medal of Honor is the nation’s highest award for military valor.
In remarks at a memorial Sunday in Charleston, West Virginia, U.S. Sen. Joe Manchin said Williams “never quit giving back.” That included raising money for gold star families - immediate family members of fallen service members - with an annual motorcycle ride.
“It’s raised hundreds of thousands of dollars,” Manchin said. He joked that “it’s not going to be stopping, because Woody would come after me in a heartbeat.”
Manchin, a West Virginia Democrat, said he will miss Williams’ phone calls, noting how Williams would always give him directions and to-do lists.
“I’ll miss him telling me how I’m supposed to vote. And when I didn’t, how I made a mistake,” Manchin said.
Gen. David H. Berger, commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps, said at the memorial that Williams always took exception to the notion that he accomplished that feat alone. He always acknowledged the other men on his team, some of whom never returned home.
“Woody may be the most genuine person I ever met,” Berger said, noting his unique combination of humility and humor. “He could make you laugh. He could make you care. That was his gift.”
Williams remained in the Marines after the war, serving a total of 20 years, before working for the Veterans Administration for 33 years as a veterans service representative. In 2018, the Huntington VA medical center was renamed in his honor, and the Navy commissioned a mobile base sea vessel in his name in 2020.
“He left an indelible mark on our Marine Corps,” Berger said. “As long as there are Marines, his legacy will live on.”
Manchin announced during his remarks that Williams would lie in state at the Rotunda, but Pelosi and Schumer said he would lie in honor. The distinction, according to the Architect of the Capitol, which oversees the building, is that government officials and military officers lie in state while private citizens lie in honor.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Joe Biden unleashes DOJ, HHS to shove abortion down states’ throats
Desperate Democrats start pressing for energy taxes
Reparations: The left’s new segregation
Hollywood was stunned when the can’t-miss blockbuster “Lightyear” sputtered in its opening weekend at the box office, but not conservatives, who blamed the animated film’s failure to launch on Disney’s ongoing lurch to the left.
The Disney-Pixar feature failed to dislodge Universal’s “Jurassic World: Dominion” from the No. 1 box office slot after grossing $51 million in its domestic debut, well below projections for the spinoff of the hugely popular “Toy Story” franchise.
Entertainment analysts attributed the lackluster showing to factors such as the movie’s “confusing premise” (Variety) and competition from the Disney+ streaming service (Deadline), while those on the right described the film as the latest casualty of corporate wokeness.
“Buzz Lightyear went woke. The movie went broke,” Rep. Jim Jordan, Ohio Republican, tweeted.
Former Trump White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said she decided against seeing the movie last weekend over reports of its political messaging.
“I wanted to take my family to this movie. I chose not to because I’m just tired of a woke agenda,” Ms. McEnany said on Fox’s “Outnumbered.” “I don’t care what it is, any agenda, right, left, being pushed in my face. I just wanted to watch a movie about toys.”
The headlines in the conservative press included “Pixar’s new Toy Story spinoff just bombed on opening weekend and I wonder why,” said Not the Bee, while Breitbart called it “the latest woke box office flop.”
“Maybe Disney and Pixar could concentrate on telling a story instead of distributing propaganda to children,” tweeted Jordan B. Peterson, the University of Toronto professor emeritus and YouTube personality.
“Lightyear” flew onto the political radar months ago with the much-discussed lesbian kiss between two of the animated characters, as well as the decision to cast Chris Evans as the voice of Buzz Lightyear instead of Tim Allen, the role’s originator, who’s known for his right-of-center views.
Patricia Heaton to Disney: You ‘Completely Castrated’ Buzz Lightyear in ‘Toy Story’ Spin-off! https://t.co/ZtGHG4nHEx
The would-be blockbuster’s release also follows months of high-profile feuding between Disney and Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis, spurred by Disney’s pledge in March to help repeal what critics called the “don’t say gay” bill, which bans schools from discussing sexual orientation and gender identity in grades K-3.
The backlash intensified after Manhattan Institute senior fellow Christopher Rufo released internal video clips showing Disney executives discussing how to add LGBTQ themes and characters to shows.
The Florida clash followed reports that the kissing scene was cut but then added back after pushback from “LGBTQIA+ employees of Pixar & their allies,” who accused Disney in a letter of removing scenes of “gay affection.”
“Nearly every moment of overtly gay affection is cut at Disney’s behest,” read the March 9 letter posted by Popular Information’s Judd Legum.
As Galyn Susman, one of the “Lightyear” producers, told the Mercury News: “We got the opportunity to put it back in and that was really exciting.”
Mr. Evans blasted those objecting to the scene as “idiots” in a June 15 interview, two days before the movie’s debut.
“The real truth is those people are idiots,” Mr. Evans told Reuters. “I mean, I think throughout history, you can see every time there’s been social advancement as we wake up, the American story, the human story, is one of constant social awakening and growth. That’s what makes us good.”
Director Angus MacLane said that making the Space Ranger Commander Alisha Hawthorne character gay was important for “representation,” and that the public display of affection showed that she and her wife, Kiko, were in a “loving, lasting relationship.”
“We had a lot of queer personnel on the film,” Mr. MacLane told the Los Angeles Times. “There’s a lot of really fantastic representation that means a lot — more than I can understand. For them to be so excited about that and have it be so personal, it means a lot to me.”
“Lightyear,” which cost $200 million to make, had the lowest-grossing domestic opening since the 2017 sequel “Cars 2,” which earned $53 million. “Toy Story 4,” the last movie in the franchise, earned $120 million in its first three days of domestic release in 2019.
“They genuinely do not understand the moral disgust of parents in this nation right now who just want to enjoy good movies with their kids without having a sexual agenda shoved in their faces!” said Not the Bee.
The film may have trouble making up the shortfall internationally. Fourteen Muslim countries have banned the movie, including Saudi Arabia and the Palestinian territories, and screenings in China are also seen as unlikely unless Disney cuts the smooching scene.
Sen. Ted Cruz, Texas Republican, said it would be a “wild twist” if Hollywood drew the line at “Lightyear” after years of kowtowing on content to Beijing censors.
“There’s significant discussion that China is not going to allow the movie in because of this scene, and I’ve got to say it’s a wild twist where Hollywood has been willing to grovel to China, to let China censor its movies, to embrace anti-Americanism, to avoid any criticism of China because they want to get access to the Chinese movie market,” Mr. Cruz said on his “The Verdict” podcast.
“But when it comes to their culture agenda, apparently now suddenly they’ve discovered, all right, give up the money because lesbian toys are more important,” he said.
“Lightyear” earned good but not great reviews, scoring 76% with critics and 85% with audiences on Rotten Tomatoes. A frequent criticism was that the movie fails to live up to the Pixar franchise’s high standards.
Hollywood in Toto film critic Christian Toto called the film a “generic space romp unworthy of what many consider the most impressive film studio around.”
He also described the big kiss as superfluous to the plot.
“The film arrives with plenty of pre-release buzz thanks to its same-sex buss. Suffice to say the moment isn’t necessary and the romance attached to it is the only romantic coupling in the film. The subplot, to be blunt, feels inorganic,” Mr. Toto said in his review. “Same-sex couples deserve representation in a more natural fashion.”
• Valerie Richardson can be reached at vrichardson@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
According to the Bible, God instructed the ancient Hebrews about how to make sacrifices in his honor and to atone for sin at the Temple in Jerusalem.
They offered up drink, grain and animals. History has borne out that if people do not worship their creator, they will worship false gods, including themselves.
Pagan societies, on the other hand, such as the Aztecs, Toltecs, druids and others sacrificed human beings. We need not recount the details. It’s enough to know how little they valued human life, or at least human lives not their own.
I thought about this while reading about the progressive left’s latest cancel culture sacrifice. The mob regularly serves up a victim to signal its own virtue. It follows the advice of Marxist strategist Saul Alinsky to “pick the target, freeze it, personalize it, and polarize it.”
Former President Donald Trump’s trade adviser, Peter Navarro, was hauled off an airplane on June 3 and treated like a dangerous felon by FBI agents at Reagan Airport on his way to a TV show in Nashville. He had sued the Democrats’ Jan. 6 committee three days earlier over its subpoenaing him to testify about what he contends are constitutionally protected, confidential discussions in the Oval Office.
Colleges regularly demonize conservatives and cancel appearances, thus “purifying” the campuses. And the mob is still trying to destroy Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas and Mr. Trump.
This week’s sacrificial victim is Washington Commanders Defensive Coordinator Jack Del Rio. Mr. Del Rio did two things to incite the mob.
First, he recounted in a tweet how serious the 2020 BLM/Antifa race riots were in 2020 and asked why we are not talking about them. His comment came in reaction to media hysteria surrounding the Jan. 6 committee hearings, which kicked off Thursday night.
In the “peaceful protests” of 2020, rioters torched cities, murdered scores of people, beat and wounded hundreds, and caused more than $2 billion in property damage. Few were charged with any crime.
What’s more, lawlessness continues in cities where Democrats have demonized police, defunded them and, as in San Francisco, “decriminalized” offenses, making that city unlivable. (Frisco voters just ousted leftwing District Attorney Chesa Boudin in a recall, so there’s hope for the City by the Bay.)
The more grievous sin that Mr. Del Rio committed was his contrasting the BLM/Antifa riots with the Jan. 6 Capitol riot:
“I can look at images on the TV [of the George Floyd protests] — people’s livelihoods are being destroyed. Businesses are being burned down. No problem. And then we have a dust-up at the Capitol, nothing burned down, and we’re going to make that a major deal. I just think it’s kind of two standards, and if we apply the same standard and we’re going to be reasonable with each other, let’s have a discussion. That’s all it was. Let’s have a discussion.”
He later apologized for using the term “dustup,” but didn’t back away from his point that the 2020 riots should get far more attention. He spoke for millions of Americans, appalled at the city-by-city destruction while Washington gazed at its navel and made Jan. 6 out to be an “insurrection” up there with Pearl Harbor as a “threat to our democracy.”
Washington Post sports columnist (no section is safe anymore) Barry Svrluga wrote that Mr. Del Rio is “unfit” to lead a football unit. He falsely accused Mr. Del Rio of floating the “offensive idea that the violence in these two cases are similar in origin.” Mr. Del Rio did no such thing.
Mr. Del Rio also noted, “I love being an American, and that means I’m free to express myself.” Well, we shall see about that in this time of cancel culture and spineless corporatism.
Mr. Svrluga spent several paragraphs justifying the 2020 riots as understandable because America is so racist. He misdescribed the Jan. 6 protesters as “an armed mob” (with no guns). Then, he burped up this:
“Condemn violence in all of its forms. But differentiate between fact and fiction, between systemic failures and vast conspiracies.”
You mean like the way his paper and The New York Times won Pulitzers for aiding and abetting the Russian collusion hoax while covering up Hillary Clinton’s weaponization of the FBI, CIA and Justice Department? They also ignored Hunter Biden’s laptop until the fix was in.
Mr. Svrluga takes the obligatory swipe at “the false notion that the 2020 election was stolen from President Donald Trump.”
I just finished reading Molly Hemingway’s book “Rigged: How the Media, Big Tech and the Democrats Seized Our Elections.” She precisely documents election manipulation and media complicity that produced the Biden win.
Dinesh D’Souza’s film “2000 Mules” irrefutably reveals evidence of systemic vote fraud in several battleground state cities in the wee hours of Election Night. “False” and “baseless,” right?
I hope Mr. Del Rio survives to coach another day. It’s time the sacrificing “woke” mob went home empty-handed.
• Robert Knight is a columnist for The Washington Times. His website is roberthknight.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
A 15-year-old boy was shot to death and three adults, including a police officer, were wounded after a musical event lacking a permit erupted into chaos on a District of Columbia street Sunday night, police said.
The wounded police officer and the other adults were recovering at hospitals, Metropolitan Police Chief Robert J. Contee III told reporters at the scene of the shooting. The incident took place near 14th and U streets NW, about 2 miles north of the White House.
Social media had promoted a free music event known as Moechella and several hundred people were gathering in the area around 6 p.m., Contee said. Police arrived to assist the crowd and people stayed mostly to the sidewalks as music played from a truck, he said.
In the hours that followed a fight broke out, and then an incident of an undetermined nature caused people to scatter, Contee said. Police shut down the gathering, he said, because the event appeared to have become unsafe.
Several people were hurt in the rush to leave the area and were being assisted by public safety first responders when the shooting occurred, Contee said. He said the events occurred between 6 and 8:30 p.m.
A handgun was recovered from one of the victims but not the firearm believed to have caused the death and injuries, Contee said. No police fired their weapons and there was no exchange of gunfire, he said.
The police chief said officials would be speaking to event organizers and considering what legal action could be taken because the event lacked a permit.
“We will certainly want to make sure that people are held accountable when they hold unpermitted events in our city,” he said.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. — Andrew Gillum, the 2018 Democratic nominee for Florida governor, is facing 21 federal charges related to a scheme to seek donations and funnel a portion of them back to him through third parties, the U.S. attorney’s office announced Wednesday.
Gillum, 42, and co-defendant Janet Lettman-Hicks, 53, face 19 counts of wire fraud. Gillum is also charged with making false statements to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The U.S. attorney’s office said the pair “conspired to commit wire fraud, by unlawfully soliciting and obtaining funds from various entities and individuals through false and fraudulent promises and representations that the funds would be used for a legitimate purpose.”
Lettman-Hicks then used her company to fraudulently give money to Gillum disguised as payroll payments, the office said in a press release.
It’s the latest trouble for Gillum, who narrowly lost to Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis in a race that required a recount.
Gillum served as mayor of Tallahassee before running for governor.
In March 2020, Gillum was found intoxicated and unconscious in a hotel room with two men, including one who works as a male escort. Two days later he entered a rehabilitation center, and later did a television interview and said he‘s bisexual.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
Two actors from the Netflix series “The Chosen One” are dead and six crew members are injured following an accident in Mexico.
Officials said a van the crew was traveling in crashed and flipped on Thursday on a desert road near their filming location on the Baja California Sur peninsula.
Local media reported the crash on Thursday.
The Baja California Department of Culture on Friday identified the actors as Raymundo Garduño Cruz and Juan Francisco González Aguilar.
The series, which has not yet been released, is being filmed by an independent production company.
Netflix says the series is based on a comic book series about a 12-year-old boy who “learns he’s the returned Jesus Christ, destined to save humankind.”
• Joseph Clark can be reached at jclark@washingtontimes.com.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Religious freedom wins! American exceptionalism wins!
Move over Maverick, the dinosaurs have arrived to claim their throne.
“Jurassic World: Dominion” took a mighty bite out of the box office with $143.4 million in North American ticket sales, according to studio estimates Sunday. Including earnings from international showings - the film opened in various markets last weekend - “Jurassic World: Dominion,” released globally by Universal Pictures, has already grossed $389 million. And it’s just getting started.
“We couldn’t be happier,” said Jim Orr, Universal’s head of domestic distribution. “‘Jurassic World: Dominion’ had a very broad and ridiculously enthusiastic audience.”
The hefty haul is yet another sign that the box office is continuing to rebound this summer. With the blockbuster successes of films like “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness,” “Top Gun: Maverick” and now “Jurassic World 3,” audiences are coming back to movie theaters more consistently.
The film, which had a reported $185 million price tag not accounting for marketing and promotion costs, opened on 4,676 screens in the U.S. and Canada, starting with preview showings Thursday. Audiences were 56% male and 54% over the age of 25, according to Universal.
Critics were not kind to the dino extravaganza, but audiences seem to be enjoying themselves based on exit polls. Moviegoers gave it an A- CinemaScore and an 81% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes, suggesting that word of mouth will be strong in the coming weeks.
“You want to see dinosaurs on the big screen, it doesn’t matter what critics thought,” said Paul Dergarabedian, the senior media analyst for Comscore.
And many moviegoers did opt for the biggest screens possible. Globally, IMAX showings of “Jurassic World: Dominion” represented $25 million of the total. The 3D format also accounted for around 25% of worldwide ticket sales.
“The appetite for the colossal creatures in this franchise is still voracious, and the way audiences want to experience this movie is in 3D,” said Travis Reid, the CEO and president of Cinema for RealD, in a statement.
Both “Top Gun: Maverick” and “Jurassic World: Dominion” are an important caveat for an industry that continues to learn new lessons about pandemic-era moviegoing every week. Although both films are legacy sequels, neither are of the superhero variety, which, for a long time, had seemed like the only pandemic-proof genre.
“Top Gun: Maverick” is still coasting in rarefied skies too: It fell only 44% in its third weekend with an estimated $50 million to take second place, bringing its North American total north of $393.3 million. “Doctor Strange 2,” in its sixth weekend, was a distant third with $4.9 million.
This weekend is only the third of the pandemic era in which the total domestic box office surpassed $200 million, according to box office tracker Comscore. The others were “Spider Man: No Way Home,” in December, and “Doctor Strange 2,” in May. But this is the first time there has been space for two movies to do well.
“Pretty much all the big blockbuster weekends that we’ve had over the pandemic have been dominated by one movie,” Dergarabedian said. “In this case, we have two big blockbusters in theaters at once. This is the recipe for success that theater owners have been waiting for over the course of the pandemic. It’s an important milestone.”
“Dominion,” a co-production of Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment, is the third film in the “Jurassic World” trilogy, which began in 2015 and introduced characters played by Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard. The newest installment brings back actors Laura Dern, Sam Neill and Jeff Goldblum from Steven Spielberg’s 1993 “Jurassic Park.”
Colin Trevorrow, who stewarded the “World” trilogy and directed the first film, returned to direct “Dominion,” in which dinosaurs are no longer contained and locusts are threatening the world’s food supply.
The filmmakers have said “Dominion” is intended to be the last of the “Jurassic World” films, which have been enormously profitable with over $3 billion in ticket sales. The first earned over $1.7 billion globally alone. Including the original “Jurassic Park” trilogy, that number skyrockets to $5 billion.
“Jurassic World 3” should continue performing throughout the summer, Orr said. Universal Pictures also has a number of diverse, high-profile and theatrical-only releases coming in the next few weeks, including the horror film “The Black Phone,” “Minions: The Rise of Gru” and Jordan Peele’s “Nope.” And this vote of confidence in movie theaters is promising.
“This is a tremendous start to our summer,” Orr said.
Estimated ticket sales for Friday through Sunday at U.S. and Canadian theaters, according to Comscore. Final domestic figures will be released Monday.
1. “Jurassic World: Dominion,” $143.4 million.
2. “Top Gun: Maverick,” $50 million.
3. “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness,” $4.9 million.
4. “The Bob’s Burgers Movie,” $2.3 million.
5. “The Bad Guys,” $2.3 million.
6. “Downton Abbey: A New Era,” $1.7 million.
7. “Everything Everywhere All At Once,” $1.3 million.
9. “Sonic the Hedgehog 2,” $710,000.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Roe v. Wade overturned: Pro-lifers persistence paid off
Founding Fathers never intended U.S. to be secular or hostile to religion
MOSCOW (AP) — Shackled and looking wary, WNBA star Brittney Griner was ordered to stand trial Friday by a court near Moscow on cannabis possession charges, about 4½ months after her arrest at an airport while returning to play for a Russian team.
The Phoenix Mercury center and two-time U.S. Olympic gold medalist also was ordered to remain in custody for the duration of her criminal trial. Griner could face 10 years in prison if convicted on charges of large-scale transportation of drugs. Fewer than 1% of defendants in Russian criminal cases are acquitted, and unlike in the U.S., acquittals can be overturned.
At Monday’s closed-door preliminary hearing at the court in the Moscow suburb of Khimki, Griner‘s detention was extended for another six months. Photos obtained by The Associated Press showed the 31-year-old in handcuffs and looking straight ahead, unlike a previous court appearance where she kept her head down and covered with a hood.
Her detention and trial come at an extraordinarily low point in Moscow-Washington relations. She was arrested at Sheremetyevo Airport less than a week before Russia sent troops into Ukraine, which aggravated already-high tensions with sweeping sanctions by the United States and Russia’s denunciation of U.S. weapon supplies to Ukraine.
Amid the tensions, Griner’s supporters had taken a low profile in hopes of a quiet resolution, until May, when the State Department reclassified her as wrongfully detained and shifted oversight of her case to its special presidential envoy for hostage affairs — effectively the U.S. government’s chief negotiator.
Griner’s wife, Cherelle, urged President Biden in May to secure her release, calling her “a political pawn.”
Her supporters have encouraged a prisoner swap like the one in April that brought home Marine veteran Trevor Reed in exchange for a Russian pilot convicted of drug trafficking conspiracy.
Russian news media have repeatedly raised speculation that she could be swapped for Russian arms trader Viktor Bout, nicknamed “The Merchant of Death,” who is serving a 25-year sentence on conviction of conspiracy to kill U.S. citizens and providing aid to a terrorist organization.
Russia has agitated for Bout’s release for years. But the discrepancy between Griner’s case — she allegedly was found in possession of vape cartridges containing cannabis oil — and Bout’s global dealings in deadly weapons could make such a swap unpalatable to the U.S.
Others have suggested that she could be traded in tandem with Paul Whelan, a former Marine and security director serving a 16-year sentence on an espionage conviction that the United States has repeatedly described as a set-up.
U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken, asked Sunday on CNN whether a joint swap of Griner and Whelan for Bout was being considered, sidestepped the question.
“As a general proposition … I have got no higher priority than making sure that Americans who are being illegally detained in one way or another around the world come home,” he said. But “I can’t comment in any detail on what we’re doing, except to say this is an absolute priority.”
Any swap would apparently require Griner to first be convicted and sentenced, then apply for a presidential pardon, Maria Yarmush, a lawyer specializing in international civil affairs, told Kremlin-funded TV channel RT.
Copyright © 2022 The Washington Times, LLC.
Click to Read More and View Comments
Terms of Use / Privacy Policy / Manage Newsletters

Singer Stacy Francis is showing no sympathy for Wendy Williams in the aftermath of her long-running daytime talk show ending its run last week, calling her “mean.”
The former “R&B Divas LA” star ripped the public outpouring of support for the self-proclaimed “Queen of All Media,” who has been battling health and financial issues this past year. Williams was absent for the entirety of her nationally syndicated chatfest’s 14th and final season.
Stacy Francis (left) and Wendy Williams (Getty Images)
In a blistering social media post, Francis urged people to “stop being fake and stop pretending” that Williams’ bad karma didn’t catch up to her.
The Brooklyn native has a long history with Williams, dating back to her days as a shock jock on WBLS-FM.
“In 1998 Wendy Williams went on air on a popular radio show in NYC and lied to the public about something she observed when she saw me in front of the Broadway theater I was starring at,” the former X-Girlfriend frontwoman wrote in a Facebook post on Sunday. “She lied to the public about many celebrities. She attacked people. She got cussed out by folks. She built her brand gossiping and invalidating and hurting others.”
The star of Broadway’s “Footloose” adaptation would later gain international attention as a standout contestant on the first season of “X Factor USA” for her renditions of the Aretha Franklin classic “(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman” and Prince’s “Purple Rain.”
To promote her appearances, she would appear on “The Wendy Williams Show” during its early years.
Francis said that although she “forgave her” when she appeared on the show, she added that Williams “still had this shady way of handling the news and people.”
“And there are many fans that love and support her because there is this ugly monster people like to feed,” she claimed. “This reality show grime that exist that people love. So stop being surprised that her time on tv ended the way it did. She never stopped being shady.”
The 53-year-old mother of two did say that she believed Williams will rebound “and end up with some 100 million dollar deal on Spotify or something and the support will continue.”
Stacy Francis posted comments about Wendy Williams on Facebook.
Francis is no stranger to scandal.
In the aftermath of the 2012 death of Whitney Houston, the singing Scientologist told “Access Hollywood” about an altercation she had with the Grammy-winning diva at her last public appearance. Houston allegedly got into a spat with Francis after assuming she was also seeing a former R&B singer she was romantically linked to.
The final new episode of “The Wendy Williams Show” aired last Friday in national syndication. Vanessa Williams, who was the very first celebrity guest booked on the show in 2009, showed up for the farewell that was hosted by best-selling author Sherri Shepherd.
It included a video montage of the best moments from the shoestring budget-produced show’s first 13 seasons including appearances by Halle Berry, Justin Bieber and Aretha Franklin.
Executive producer Suzanne Bass was flanked by fellow producers Norman Baker and Joelle Dawson-Calia and the entire production staff thanked the audience on the last segment of the show.
Williams stepped away from the program in 2020, citing a series of medical troubles, including a longtime battle with Graves’ disease and a breakthrough case of COVID-19. The 57-year-old Asbury Park, N.J., native publicly hoped to return for at least one more season.
On its social media accounts, “The Wendy Williams Show” posted a photo of her famous purple chair on an otherwise empty stage under a caption thanking fans for tuning in.
Howard Bragman, Williams’ last known publicist of record, told the Daily News that he is no longer working with her.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Jim Seals, of the soft-rock duo Seals and Crofts, died Monday.
He was 80 years old.
No other details have been released.
Seals & Crofts (Michael Ochs Archives)
Seals was born in Texas in 1941. He first collaborated with Darrell “Dash” Crofts in the 1950s and the two moved to California and worked as a songwriting duo before writing and recording their own hits, like “Summer Breeze” and “Diamond Girl.”
After signing with Warner Bros., they scored a hit with “Summer Breeze” in 1972. The duo disbanded in 1980, but reunited multiple times afterward.
Seals is survived by his wife of 57 years, Ruby Jean, and three children: Joshua, Juliette, and Sutherland.
“My heart just breaks for his wife Ruby and their children,” cousin Brady Seals of the country band Little Texas told Variety. “Please keep them in your prayers. What an incredible legacy he leaves behind.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

What’s your favorite scary movie? For one actress, at least, it won’t be “Scream 6.”
Series star Neve Campbell won’t return for next year’s “Scream 6″ after she was apparently low-balled during salary negotiations.
“Sadly I won’t be making the next ‘Scream’ film,” Campbell said in a statement to Deadline.
“As a woman I have had to work extremely hard in my career to establish my value, especially when it comes to ‘Scream’,” she said. “I felt the offer that was presented to me did not equate to the value I have brought to the franchise.”
Actress Neve Campbell arrives at the premiere of the Weinstein Company's "Scream 4" Presented by AXE Shower at Grauman's Chinese Theatre on April 11, 2011 in Hollywood, California. (Frazer Harrison/Getty Images)
The previous five films in the franchise — which each starred Campbell — have made nearly $750 million at the box office.
“It’s been a very difficult decision to move on. To all my ‘Scream’ fans, I love you. You’ve always been so incredibly supportive to me. I’m forever grateful to you and to what this franchise has given me over the past 25 years,” Campbell added.
Campbell is staying busy. She is currently on Netflix’s “The Lincoln Lawyer” and has other projects in the works, like “Twisted Metal,” according to IMDB.
The next “Scream” will hit theaters March 31, 2023. It will be directed by Matt Bettinelli-Olpin and Tyler Gillett who directed the 2022 reboot following the death of Wes Craven, who directed the first four films in the series. Series stalwart Courtney Cox is set to reprise her role along with “Scream 4″ star Hayden Panettiere.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A woman who wrote an essay called “How to Murder Your Husband” was convicted Wednesday of murdering her husband.
Nancy Crampton Brophy, now 71, gunned down her husband Daniel Brophy in 2018 at Oregon Culinary Institute. Daniel Brophy was 63 at the time.
Prosecutors showed that Crampton Brophy was driving her van near the institute in Portland shortly before the murder, local NBC affiliate KGW reported. When investigators first interviewed Crampton Brophy, she claimed she was at home when her husband was shot.
Nancy Crampton Brophy is pictured on the opening day of the trial, April 4, 2022, in Portland. (Dave Killen/AP)
The Brophys were also battling financial trouble, and Crampton Brophy attempted to collect her husband’s life insurance policy shortly after the murder, prosecutors said.
A former cellmate testified against Crampton Brophy as well, according to KGW. The cellmate said Crampton Brophy specified the distance of the shooting and nearly admitted to the killing. Brophy was killed with two bullets to the chest.
Crampton Brophy pleaded not guilty, and her attorneys argued that the prosecution relied on circumstantial evidence. The lawyers promised to appeal the verdict.
The judge banned any mention of Crampton Brophy’s “How to Murder Your Husband” essay, which was published on her personal website in 2011.
“After all, if the murder is supposed to set me free, I certainly don’t want to spend any time in jail,” Crampton Brophy wrote in the ostensibly tongue-in-cheek essay. “And let me say clearly for the record, I don’t like jumpsuits and orange isn’t my color.”
Crampton Brophy certainly failed on that account, since she’s been behind bars since her arrest in September 2018. She went on to discuss various potential methods, writing of guns: “loud, messy, require some skill.”
The judge said “any minimal probative value of an article written that long ago is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice and confusion of the issues.”
Brophy will be sentenced on June 13.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Scott Disick is on the market again.
The reality show star, who shares three kids with ex-girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian, has split from model girlfriend Rebecca Donaldson just two months after they went public with their relationship, sources close to him told E! News Thursday.
“Although they had a short-lived romance, it was definitely serious,” the insider said of the relationship, saying it ended in recent weeks. “He enjoyed his time with her but realized he is not in a place to seriously date right now.”
Scott Disick and Rebecca Donaldson attend the premiere of Hulu's new show "The Kardashians" on April 07, 2022 in Los Angeles, Calif. (Emma McIntyre/Getty Images for ABA)
Another source told the outlet that the split was made “amicably,” and that, thanks to the urging of Donaldson, 27, the “Keeping Up with the Kardashians” star might now “spend some time focusing on himself and finding what makes him happy.”
Disick, 39, according to the initial insider, “wants to be single and live freely.”
The couple made their red carpet debut at the April premiere of “The Kardashians” in Los Angeles, which a source told the outlet, resulted from “being out one night and [having] totally hit it off.”
In response to the recent engagements of exes Sofia Richie and Kardashian, Disick posted on Instagram in late April, “In the 305 just call me good luck chuck.”
The 2007 flick, “Good Luck Chuck,” sees Dane Cook as a man who discovers he’s the last man many women sleep with right before they meet their soulmate.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

“A Strange Loop,” a bold and profane show from Michael R. Jackson that delivered bracingly honest criticism of the American theater world, reached the pinnacle of the industry on Sunday, winning the Tony Award for best new musical.
The meta musical about a Black gay usher who aspires to write a musical took home the prestigious honor after scoring a field-topping 11 nominations and winning two in a historically diverse season on Broadway.
James Jackson Jr., left, Jason Veasey, Michael Lyles, Jaquel Spivey, L Morgan Lee, Andrew Morrison and Antwayn Hopper during a performance of "A Strange Loop" in New York.  (Marc J. Franklin/AP)
The introspective 100-minute show, a favorite of critics since it arrived at the Lyceum Theater in April, beat out the hot-selling and musically electrifying “Six” and the Bob Dylan-inspired “Girl from the North Country” to capture the statuette.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Winners and losers  ]
“MJ,” “Mr. Saturday Night” and “Paradise Square” were also nominated in the best new musical category.
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
The award marks yet another honor for Jackson, 41, who won a Pulitzer for the musical and received Tony nominations for best book of a musical and best original score. He won the best book award.
“I just wanted to write something that to me felt like real life,” Jackson said ahead of the ceremony. “You know, a depiction of a Black gay man’s experience that was very nuanced, complex and real.”
[ ‘A Strange Loop’ creator Michael R. Jackson on Tony Awards, his love for Liz Phair and his issue with Tyler Perry ]
Jaquel Spivey, making his Broadway debut, stars in the show. He was nominated for the Tony for best leading actor in a musical.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
The 75th annual Tony Awards, honoring the best and brightest from Broadway’s 2021-2022 season, have wrapped up at Radio City Music Hall in Manhattan. Voters spread the love around, and no single dominant production emerged.
Still, it was a banner night for a gender-tweaked version of Stephen Sondheim’s classic “Company,” which honored its source material with an elaborate set and a magnetic supporting performance from Patti LuPone, and “The Lehman Trilogy,” an ambitious retelling of the rise and fall of Lehman Brothers.
“Company” won five Tonys, including the award for best revival of a musical. It was the final production Sondheim worked on before his death at age 91.
“The Lehman Trilogy” won five Tonys, too, including the best new play honor.
Also shining bright were Michael R. Jackson’s “A Strange Loop,” (two wins) which earned the prestigious award for best new musical; and “MJ,” a jukebox about Michael Jackson, which picked up four wins.
Here is the final list of winners (bolded) selected from the field of 136 nominations.
“Girl From the North Country”
James Jackson Jr., left, Jason Veasey, Michael Lyles, Jaquel Spivey, L Morgan Lee, Andrew Morrison and Antwayn Hopper during a performance of "A Strange Loop."  (Marc J. Franklin/AP)
“For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf”
“How I Learned to Drive”
The cast of 'Take Me Out.' (Joan Marcus)
Hugh Jackman, Sutton Foster, and the cast of "The Music Man."  (Joan Marcus)
Conor McPherson, “Girl From the North Country”
Billy Crystal, Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, “Mr. Saturday Night”
Christina Anderson, Craig Lucas and Larry Kirwan, “Paradise Square”
Michael R. Jackson, “A Strange Loop”
Tom Kitt and Michael Korie, “Flying Over Sunset”
Jason Robert Brown and Amanda Green, “Mr. Saturday Night”
Jason Howland, Nathan Tysen and Masi Asare, “Paradise Square”
Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss, “Six”
Michael R. Jackson, “A Strange Loop”
Simon Russell Beale, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Adam Godley, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Adrian Lester, “The Lehman Trilogy”
David Morse, “How I Learned to Drive”
Adam Godley in "The Lehman Trilogy" (Julieta Cervantes)
Gabby Beans, “The Skin of Our Teeth”
Mary-Louise Parker, “How I Learned to Drive”
Billy Crystal, “Mr. Saturday Night”
Hugh Jackman, “The Music Man”
Jaquel Spivey, “A Strange Loop”
Billy Crystal in "Mr. Saturday Night."  (Matthew Murphy)
Sharon D Clarke, “Caroline, or Change”
Carmen Cusack, “Flying Over Sunset”
Sutton Foster, “The Music Man”
Mare Winningham, “Girl From the North Country”
Chuck Cooper, “Trouble in Mind”
Jesse Tyler Ferguson, “Take Me Out”
Michael Oberholtzer, “Take Me Out”
Jesse Williams, “Take Me Out”
Uzo Aduba and Ron Cephas Jones in "Clyde's." (Joan Marcus)
Kenita R. Miller, “For Colored Girls”
John-Andrew Morrison, “A Strange Loop”
Jeannette Bayardelle, “Girl From the North Country”
Shoshana Bean, “Mr. Saturday Night”
Jayne Houdyshell, “The Music Man”
L Morgan Lee, “A Strange Loop”
Michael Carnahan and Nicholas Hussong, “Skeleton Crew”
Es Devlin, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Adam Rigg, “The Skin of Our Teeth”
The Lehman Trilogy (Julieta Cervantes)
Beowulf Boritt and 59 Productions, “Flying Over Sunset”
Arnulfo Maldonado, “A Strange Loop”
Derek McLane and Peter Nigrini, “MJ”
Montana Levi Blanco, “The Skin of Our Teeth”
Sarafina Bush, “For Colored Girls”
Fly Davis, “Caroline, or Change”
Santo Loquasto, “The Music Man”
Jiyoun Chang, “For Colored Girls”
Jon Clark, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Yi Zhao, “The Skin of Our Teeth”
Bradley King, “Flying Over Sunset”
Jen Schriever, “A Strange Loop”
Justin Ellington, “For Colored Girls”
Palmer Hefferan, “The Skin of Our Teeth”
Nick Powell and Dominic Bilkey, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Simon Baker, “Girl From the North Country”
Ian Dickinson for Autograph, “Company”
Drew Levy, “A Strange Loop”
Lileana Blain-Cruz, “The Skin of Our Teeth”
Camille A. Brown, “For Colored Girls”
Sam Mendes, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Stephen Brackett, “A Strange Loop”
Conor McPherson, “Girl From the North Country”
Lucy Moss & Jamie Armitage, “Six”
Camille A. Brown, “For Colored Girls”
Warren Carlyle, “The Music Man”
Bill T. Jones, “Paradise Square”
Simon Hale, “Girl From the North Country”
Jason Michael Webb and David Holcenberg, “MJ”
Charlie Rosen, “A Strange Loop”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

From “Fight Club” to a different kind of group.
Brad Pitt’s participation in an Alcoholics Anonymous group was what helped him get sober following his 2016 divorce from Angelina Jolie, he told GQ in the magazine’s August cover story.
“I had a really cool men’s group here that was really private and selective, so it was safe,” the 58-year-old Oscar winner said about his 18-month experience in Alcoholics Anonymous.
Brad Pitt arrives at the Oscars on Sunday, Feb. 9, 2020, at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles.  (Jordan Strauss/Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP)
But the actor had some initial trepidation, given horror stories he’d seen play out online involving those in AA.
“I’d seen things of other people who had been recorded while they were spilling their guts,” said Pitt. “And that’s just atrocious to me.”
In this Nov. 4, 2015, file photo Angelina Jolie Pitt and Brad Pitt pose for a photo at the WSJ Magazine Innovator Awards 2015 at The Museum of Modern Art in New York.  (Charles Sykes/AP)
He explained his going cold turkey with smoking as a consequence of being unable to smoke in moderation.
“I don’t have that ability to do just one or two [cigarettes] a day,” said Pitt. “It’s not in my makeup. I’m all in. And I’m going to drive into the ground. I’ve lost my privileges.”
Prior to getting sober, Pitt and 47-year-old Jolie —whose marriage ended in 2016 and jumpstarted a lengthy custody battle involving their six children — purchased a Provence vineyard, Château Miraval, in 2008. The Academy Award-winning actress just sold her stake, a move which Pitt said earlier this month sought “to inflict harm” on him.
While Pitt left much to be desired insofar as the specifics of his career trajectory — current producing projects aside — the actor did reveal that he feels like he’s “on my last leg.
“This last semester or trimester. What is this section gonna be?” he said. “And how do I wanna design that?”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The lines are short and the votes are few at ballot boxes across New York City halfway through early voting in the state’s June primary election.
In the first four days of early voting in the June 28 primary, some 35,000 New Yorkers made their voices heard at polling stations, according to an unofficial tally by the city Board of Elections.
About 4% of active voters in New York City eligible to vote in the primary had cast votes, according to Elections Board records. Independents cannot vote in the state’s closed primaries.
A voter marks her ballot as she votes for the first time during early voting in the primary election, Monday, June 14, 2021, at the Church of St. Anthony of Padua in the Soho neighborhood of Manhattan, New York.  (Mary Altaffer/AP)
This month’s primary is covering races for governor, lieutenant governor and state Assembly, among others. Gov. Hochul appears to hold a commanding lead in the Democratic primary for governor, but the race on the Republican side has proved spirited.
[ New York Voting Guide: What voters should know for June 28 primary ]
Primaries to determine New York’s representation in the House and state Senate were delayed by a head-spinning court-ordered redistricting process. They are not to take place until August.
The split primary may be crushing turnout, which can prove flimsy in the best of circumstances in years when the White House is not at stake.
“A lot of the foot soldiers that would be out pulling people out for a primary are not going to be out,” said Sid Davidoff, a longtime lobbyist and fixture in New York politics. “A bifurcated election just sets up the reality of a low-turnout primary.”
Signs alert people to a voting site in Manhattan as voters head to the polls for the Democratic primary for mayor and other elected positions on June 22, 2021 in New York City.  (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
In the June primary, the nine-day early voting period began Saturday, when about 10,000 New Yorkers voted, according to the city Elections Board. Saturday was the only day so far in which recorded turnout topped 10,000 votes.
The low-drama Democratic race for governor may be putting a double damper on voting. Democrats outnumber Republicans by more than six to one in the city.
Statewide, the gap is smaller, but Democrats still outnumber Republicans by more than two to one.
Early voting ends Sunday. According to a so-called Wait Time Map maintained by the Board of Elections, almost every voting site in the city had a wait time under 20 minutes as rush hour approached Wednesday evening.
The lone outlier was a voting site in the Norwood area of the Bronx, where the listed wait time was 20 to 50 minutes.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Gisele Bündchen shared a video of Tom Brady in their bathroom Monday as an advertisement for Brady’s new branded underwear line.
“Somebody’s got new underwear!” Gisele jokes before Brady throws up a towel to block the camera.
“What is this? Let me see. Let me see your underwear,” the 41-year-old supermodel insists. “Is that Brady Brand underwear?”
Brady, 44, launched his apparel brand earlier this year, continuing a pivot to post-career ambitions despite his continued dominance of the NFL.
Tom Brady and Gisele Bündchen attends the 2019 Hollywood For Science Gala on Feb. 21, 2019 in Los Angeles, Calif. (Kevin Winter/Getty Images)
The underwear line, which includes $20 boxer briefs and $15 briefs, is available beginning Thursday but already has a waitlist.
In a press release, Brady Brand described its line as “the perfect men’s underwear collection just in time for Father’s Day.”
Monday’s Instagram post led to hilarious comments from fans, including one demanding “DROP AN ONLY FANS, TOM” while another quipped, “Congrats Tom! You’re the second best underwear model in the family.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A wrongful-death lawsuit against music mogul Suge Knight has ended in a mistrial.
Knight pleaded no contest to voluntary manslaughter in September 2018 after he ran over Terry Carter after the two argued while discussing how Knight would get paid for the movie “Straight Outta Compton” in January 2015. He also seriously injured Cle “Bone” Sloan while driving away in a pickup truck from a Tam’s Burgers restaurant.
He was sentenced to 28 years in prison.
Marion "Suge" Knight is seen in 2015.  (Nick Ut / AP)
The suit was filed by Carter’s widow, Lillian, and daughters Crystal and Nekaya. However, the jury said last week it was unable to get to the nine vote necessary to reach a verdict. After days of deliberating and no resolution with the jury deadlocked 7-5, Compton Superior Court Judge Thomas Long declared a mistrial.
“It was so intense, someone walked by the jury room and thought a real fight had broken out. There was yelling,” an anonymous juror told Rolling Stone.
Terry Carter and his wife Lillian Carter. Terry Carter is one of two fatal hit-and-run victims allegedly run down by Marion "Suge" Knight. (Family Handout)
The Carter family said they planned to refile their lawsuit.
Knight cofounded Death Row Records, making stars out of rappers like Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg and Tupac Shakur.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A jealous husband who lured his wife’s coworker to a New Hampshire park, murdered him and then forced his wife to behead the victim and bury the body was sentenced Friday to life in prison plus 45 years.
Armando Barron, 32, was convicted Thursday of the first-degree murder of 25-year-old Jonathan Amerault, as well as 12 other charges, including kidnapping, for the September 2020 killing.
“The depravity of your actions and single handedly causing the pain and suffering and death of Jonathan Amerault show an extreme indifference to the value of human life,” Judge Elizabeth Leonard said.
“Your actions were brutal. They were absolutely horrific. They were selfish, and they were completely senseless.”
Armando Barron (New Hampshire State Police)
Britany Barron, 33, testified that she and Amerault had been texting when her husband found out and flew into a rage, assaulting her for hours at their Jaffrey home, including sticking a gun in her mouth. She also confessed that she and Amerault had kissed twice.
“Don’t do anything stupid or the girls are going to walk into something [expletive] gruesome,” Armando told her of their three young children, who had been sent to their grandmother’s house next door, Britany testified.
Armando then used Britany’s phone to text Amerault and lure him out to Annett State Park, where he assaulted the man and ordered Britany to shoot him. When she refused, she testified, Armando forced her to slit Amerault’s wrists, then forced the pair into the car.
Amerault begged her to use a machete on the floor to hit her husband, Britany testified, but she was scared to “test him.” Instead, her husband got in the car and shot Amerault three times.
Armando’s lawyers argued that Britany was the one who actually fired the gun.
Britany Barron (New Hampshire State Police)
Armando then followed in their car while Britany drove Amerault’s car back to their house, then the three traveled 200 miles north to a remote campsite where Armando forced Britany to decapitate Amerault with a saw they brought from home.
“He said that we needed to cut off his head so that there would be no dental records of the body,” she testified.
Armando left Britany to wrap and bury the body, which was found the next day in a swamp by New Hampshire Fish and Game officers. Britany was still at the campsite.
She pleaded guilty last year to three counts of falsifying evidence and was released from jail on parole last month.
“My son Jonathan was a thousand times more of a man than this lowlife could ever even dream of being. The loss of Jonathan to this world is incredibly sad,” Justine Amerault said in court Friday.
“But the saddest part of all is that in spite of him being surrounded by so many wonderful people, this evil creature just slithered right through us all and took him from us. And the last hours of Jonathan’s beautiful life were in the company of this ugly, hideous, demented creature.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The chase on June 3, 1985, ended with an explosion that hurled metal shards, debris, and body parts 100 yards in all directions.
Moments earlier, the black Chevy Blazer had been rolling along Route 150, a major highway in North Carolina. Police followed behind, and an airplane kept track of the vehicle’s path.
The driver, her first cousin, Fred Klenner, 32, known as Fritz, periodically slowed or stopped to get off some rounds from an Uzi submachine gun. He wounded three officers.
Susie Newsom Lynch, 39, and her sons, Jim, 9, and John, 10, were his passengers.
Susie Lynch with her sons.
After four miles, the Blazer slowed, then stopped and blew up.
Newsom Lynch’s body was ripped apart. Klenner, who had been thrown from the truck into a ditch, lingered for a moment, but as soon as police reached him, he gave one parting gurgle and died.
The boys were dead in the back seat, their arms wrapped around their mother’s two black chow dogs, which had also perished.
But it wasn’t the explosion that killed the children.
Autopsies would later reveal something horrible. There were traces of cyanide in their bodies and bullet wounds in their heads. Residue on their mother’s hands suggested that she had fired a weapon shortly before she died.
It appeared that Newsom Lynch had murdered her own children, wrote journalist Jerry Bledsoe in his book on the case “Bitter Blood: A True Story of Southern Family Pride, Madness, and Multiple Murder.”
Authorities speculated that the explosion — likely a murder/suicide— was the last act in a vicious custody battle over the two boys.
Newsom Lynch was in a frenzy over the possibility that the courts would give the kids to her ex — Tom Lynch, a dentist living in Albuquerque, N. M. They separated in 1979, and the boys stayed with their mom. He remarried and moved on with his life. But she made it very difficult for Tom to visit his children. Shortly after they separated she took them for an extended stay in Taiwan.
Newsom Lynch and her sons returned to the United States and moved in with her parents — Robert, 65, and Florence, 63, — in a tony suburb of Winston-Salem, NC. Susie’s grandmother, Hattie Newsom, 85, also lived there. The family patriarch was a top executive at R.J. Reynolds, and Newsom Lynch had grown up in luxury, spoiled, willful, and prone to tantrums when she didn’t get her way. Over the years, she became increasingly unstable.
Her relationship with her parents became strained when she started spending time with Klenner.
Not long after the couple’s 1982 divorce, two of Lynch’s relatives were murdered. In July 1984, his sister, Dr. Jane Lynch, 39, and his mother, Delores, 68, were shot dead in their home in a wealthy Louisville, Ky., suburb. Burglary was quickly ruled out. The place had not been ransacked, and no valuables had been taken.
Less than a year later, Newsom Lynch’s parents and grandmother were murdered in their Winston-Salem home. Once again, burglary did not seem to be the motive. Nothing was missing, not even a wad of cash —about $600 — that was lying on an etagere.
Police were beginning to speculate that the five murders were committed by Klenner. His motive, they believed, was to eliminate a source of grief for his kissing cousin.
Many who knew him called Klenner “Dr. Crazy.” It was a nickname used often by the gun dealers who sold him his arsenal.
After his death, police investigating the two places he lived — Newsom Lynch’s apartment and his parents’ home — found an impressive collection of weapons. These included pistols, shotguns, machine guns and assault rifles, knives, Mace, gas masks, and thousands of rounds of ammunition, Bledsoe wrote.
Klenner was the son of a respected alternative-medicine doctor — Fred Klenner — a proponent of high-dose vitamin C as a cure for such ills as polio, pneumonia, and cancer. He had a thriving practice.
The doctor assumed that his son would take over and was thrilled when he got into his alma mater, Duke University School of Medicine.
Klenner never finished; in fact, he never even enrolled. But that didn’t stop him from running around in a white coat, saying he was an MD, a scientist conducting top-secret research, and a CIA agent. Nor did his lack of medical training or a license stop him from taking over the practice after his father died in 1984.
Newsom Lynch had started going to Dr. Klenner, her uncle, for intravenous vitamin therapy to fight fatigue soon after returning from Taiwan. Then she took up with her cousin. Eventually, they moved in together and told people they were married.
Police planned to arrest Klenner on June 3. But when they arrived, he took off toward Greensboro on his fatal road trip. He had a load of weapons, Newsom Lynch by his side, and two innocent children with a pair of big dogs in the back seat.
The question of who was going to get the children was the most likely motive, but money also may have played a role. Newsom Lynch was in line for a large inheritance from her grandmother.
“Almost everyone who died was going to testify in that custody case,” Forsyth County NC. Sheriff Preston Oldham told reporters as the cleanup of the explosion site began. He added that with the major players dead, it would be impossible to find out exactly what happened or why. “Only God knows, because everybody’s gone.”
JUSTICE STORY has been the Daily News’ exclusive take on true crime tales of murder, mystery and mayhem for more than 100 years. Click here to read more.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Rita Ora snaps a selfie alongside co-star Jamie Foxx as they kick off filming for "Tin Soldier" action movie on Tuesday, June 7, 2022. Ora captioned the snap: "Tin Soldier coming soon." (Rita Ora via Instagram)
Lights, camera, action! Check out these famous celebs in action as they film Hollywood’s upcoming blockbusters.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A 15-year-old boy killed in a shooting at an unpermitted Washington, D.C., concert on Sunday was yelling for his mother before his death, a witness said.
Authorities say three other victims, including a police officer, were also wounded in the shooting, which occurred at around 6 p.m. at the Moechella music festival that commemorated Juneteenth.
Witness Daniel Dyson told local news station Fox 5 DC that he was near the 15-year-old, who has not been identified, when the teenager was shot.
“He was screaming out for his mom,” Dyson said. “And it’s hurtful to hear that, man. And no one was able to help him.”
Dyson added that it “bothers” him that the teenager was killed.
“It don’t matter what you color is — your race, what kind of uniform you’re wearing,” Dyson told the TV outlet. “It needs to come to a stop. And if it don’t it’s going to be innocent kids dying every day because people don’t want to do this.”
The scene after the shooting in Washington, D.C. on Sunday. (Bryan Olin Dozier/NurPhoto/Shutterstock/Bryan Olin Dozier/NurPhoto/Shutterstock)
[ Teen dies, 3 others shot including cop, during downtown D.C. music concert Moechella ]
Authorities have not announced any suspects or arrests.
The officer who was wounded in the shooting was in stable condition Sunday after being hospitalized, police said. The cop is expected to be OK after being shot in a lower extremity.
“I was sitting next to a cop,” Dyson told Fox 5 DC. “Next thing you know, shots rang out. He did not want to stay down. He proceeded on. He was shot in the leg. And he kept moving. He went to the fire. He did not run away.”
Several hundreds of congertgoers attended the event in downtown D.C., where people were playing music on a truck, Washington Metropolitan Police Department chief Robert Contee told reporters after the shooting.
Contee says the other two victims were in stable condition.
“At some point during the course of this gathering there was some type of incident or fight that happened between some of the individuals who were in attendance,” Contee said.
“That incident was broken up. Shortly thereafter there was a secondary incident — we’re unsure of what that incident was, but people started to scatter at that point.”
About 100 officers responded to the scene but none fired their weapons, Contee said.
He said the incident played out over about two hours, with the concert being broken up by authorities. Officials then tried to help concertgoers whose legs were trampled amid the mayhem.
Juneteenth, which became a national holiday last year under the Biden Adminstration, recognizes the emancipation of enslaved African-Americans in the United States.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

There’s a new superhero for New Jersey to marvel at.
A massive Ms. Marvel cutout now sits atop a billboard along the New Jersey Turnpike to commemorate the release of Marvel Studios’ latest series.
Drivers can look out for the superpowered promotion, which reads “Welcome to New Jersey,” at Exit 14 in Newark.
The cutout arrived ahead of the debut of “Ms. Marvel,” which comes out Wednesday on Disney+ and introduces teenager Kamala Khan as the studio’s first project to center on a Muslim superhero.
Ms. Marvel sits atop a billboard along the New Jersey Turnpike. (Damien Donck)
Kamala, who is portrayed by Iman Vellani, lives in Jersey City and is obsessed with superheroes — before she obtains cosmic powers and becomes one herself.
Adil El Arbi, who directed the premiere and finale episodes of “Ms. Marvel” with filmmaking partner Bilall Fallah, says they aimed to make Jersey City feel like “a character” on the six-part series.
“I hope that we managed to have a great, cool, urban presence of that city,” El Arbi told the Daily News. “It adds just so much more personality to the show.”
[ Benedict Cumberbatch and Elizabeth Olsen reveal how ‘Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness’ changes Marvel ]
"Ms. Marvel" arrives Wednesday on Disney+. (Damien Donck)
El Arbi and Fallah want Kamala — who originated in the Marvel comic books nearly a decade ago — to become synonymous with Jersey City in the same way fellow superhero Peter Parker, or Spider-Man, is associated with Queens.
“We’re big fans of [director] Spike Lee and the way that he shows New York City as a character. ... ‘Do the Right Thing’ and ‘Clockers.’ That’s a big, big inspiration in our lives,” El Arbi said.
“We said, ‘OK, this has got to be the same way that New York is to Spike Lee. This is what Jersey needs to be to Kamala Khan.’”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

“Bachelor” alum Lauren Bushnell Lane and country star and husband Chris Lane are expecting their second child later this year, the couple confirmed to People Monday — the same week their son Dutton celebrates his first birthday.
“To be quite honest, I’ve never been more shocked in my entire life, because this was very much an unexpected surprise,” Bushnell Lane, 32, told the outlet.
Chris Lane and Lauren Bushnell Lane attend the 2019 CMT Music Award at Bridgestone Arena on June 5, 2019 in Nashville, Tenn. (Jason Kempin/Getty Images for CMT)
“When we found out, Dutton was almost 8 months old and I didn’t feel anything,” said Bushnell Lane. “I truly had no symptoms. I was actually more so taking a pregnancy test just reconfirm that was not what was going on! And to surprise and to Chris’ surprise, it was very much positive.”
The “Hold You Tonight” singer, 37, agreed that the happy news for the couple, who tied the knot in October 2019, “was very shocking!”
“Wasn’t necessarily the plan, but we’re so thankful that we’re able to have another,” said Bushnell Lane. “We had planned on having at least two kids, so we’re very thankful that it was able to happen for us, even if it wasn’t necessarily on our exact timing.”
Though his family tends to “make a lot of boys,” Lane said that his parents “are dying for a little girl, so we’ll see!
While Bushnell Lane insisted this “never happened,” her husband told People: “If it’s a boy, we agreed that I would get to name him. And if it’s a girl, we agreed that she would get to name her.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A band of robbers face federal charges for ambushing an upstate pot seller in a Brooklyn Airbnb, fatally shooting the dealer as the thieves tried to grab hockey bags full of weed, prosecutors said.
Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn announced Wednesday they’ve indicted a half-dozen suspects in connection with the Dec. 3, 2021, robbery turned bloodbath in Brighton Beach.
Two large black bags filled with marijuana are seen outside a Brighton Beach house where a 46-year-old man was fatally shot during a robbery on Dec, 3, 2021.  (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
The victim, Gregory Baratta, 46, of Poughkeepsie, and his nephew Jonathan Zephir rented an Airbnb on Brighton 4th Court near Ocean Parkway the night before the shooting, expecting to make a wholesale marijuana sale.
Gregory Baratta (obtained by Daily News)
Just after midnight, Zephir and two more men arrived with four large duffel bags of marijuana, worth at least $500,000, prosecutors said.
Photo showing the defendant and a co-conspirator as they fled from a home duffel bags. (Court Documents )
But their buyers turned out to be part of a crew that’s targeted drug dealers in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Staten Island, according to court filings; just after 2:15 a.m., the rental home became the scene of a shootout.
The gunfire left Baratta mortally wounded , and his nephew hit in the leg.
“Knowing the people responsible will be brought to justice will give a little closure but the hole left in our lives will last forever,” Baratta’s sister, Corinne Baratta, told the Daily News Wednesday. “Our lives are forever changed.
Two of the robbers, Marcus Ricketts, 45, and Mark Goulbourne, 48, fled with their guns, but a third, Romeo Jonas, 34, was shot in the stomach.
Ricketts hopped on a Citibike, propping one of the duffel bags on the handlebars as pedaled off, prosecutors said. Goulbourne, meanwhile, called his brother, Jonathan Goulbourne, 43, who showed up with a car to escape.
Cops found Baratta’s body in the Airbnb, along with two guns, 15 shell casings, a money counting machine, a vacuum sealing machine, a bag containing real and counterfeit U.S. currency and a duffel bag with vacuum-sealed bags of marijuana inside.
Nearby, police found two more guns and two large duffel bags with about 140 pounds of marijuana. The fourth duffel bag was never found, prosecutors said.
Baratta’s sister remembered him as a devoted family man.
“Gregory was a loving son, a loving brother to his brother and sister, a husband, a father, to three beautiful daughters, a grandfather to a beautiful little girl, an uncle, and he had several aunts, uncles and cousins, all who loved him dearly,” she said.
“He was everyone’s friend and everyone who knew him loved him. He had a heart of gold and always (lent) a loving hand to those in need. He had a soft spot in his heart to those less fortunate.”
Authorities arrested Jonathan Goulbourne, Ricketts and Baratta’s nephew in February.
Two more suspects, Chevonne Williams, 43, and Amari Webber, 31, were arrested Tuesday in Georgia for their role in the heist, while another, Juvanie Crossgill, 27, was charged on June 15.
Mark Goulbourne remains on the loose.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A 17-year-old mother faces murder and manslaughter charges for throwing her newborn son out a fifth-floor window in the Bronx, cops said Thursday.
The teenager, whose name was not released because she is younger than 18, showed up at Lincoln Hospital on Oct. 24, admitting that she gave birth in her apartment on E. 158th St., and threw her one-day-old son out of the window, cops said.
Hospital staff called 911, and police raced to her home, where they found the baby dead in a flowerbed.
An autopsy determined in April that the baby was a victim of homicide and not a stillbirth, police said.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

It’s safe to say the play earned interest.
“The Lehman Trilogy,” an ambitious retelling of the 163-year rise and fall of Lehman Brothers, won the Tony Award for best new play on Sunday, topping a field of well-crafted productions.
Adam Godley, Simon Russell Beale, Adrian Lester in "The Lehman Trilogy." (Julieta Cervantes)
Across more than three hours — so long it had two intermissions — the epic play wowed audiences in a run that began four days before the pandemic started and ended in January.
Ben Power harnessed the masterwork from Stefano Massini, an Italian playwright, in an English-language adaptation, and Sam Mendes directed the production.
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
With the win, “The Lehman Trilogy” beat out the gripping “Skeleton Crew,” set at a distressed Detroit auto plant during the Great Recession, and the dark and surprising mystery “Hangmen,” about an English executioner who has hung up his noose.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Winners and losers ]
It also topped “The Minutes,” a brisk take on small-town government with a twist ending, and “Clyde’s,” a comedy about ex-convicts working at a sandwich shop.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The umps at the Tony Awards have made their call: “Take Me Out” was a home run.
The buzzy take on Richard Greenberg’s story about the chaos that ensues when a star Major League Baseball player comes out as gay won the Tony for best play revival on Sunday.
Jesse Williams, center, and cast during a performance of the Broadway revival of the baseball-themed "Take Me Out," in New York. (Joan Marcus/AP)
The well-reviewed production received some unwanted attention this spring after a theatergoer managed to film one of the play’s stars, Jesse Williams, naked during a performance, and posted the video online.
The award on Sunday brought attention on the fast-paced play back into fair territory.
“Take Me Out” beat out a packed field of contenders in the best play revival category that included “American Buffalo,” “For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf,” “How I Learned to Drive” and “Trouble in Mind.”
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
The original Broadway production of “Take Me Out” crossed home with the best play honor at the 2003 Tony Awards. The revival closed Saturday.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Winners and losers ]
The revival was boosted by an oh-so-cool performance from Williams as Darren Lemming, the ball club’s star, a side-splitting turn from Jesse Tyler Ferguson as the outfielder’s business manager and an intense outing from Michael Oberholtzer as the team’s homophobic flamethrowing closer.
All three earned Tony nominations in the best featured actor in a play category, and Ferguson won.
“If you’re going to lose, lose to Jesse Tyler Ferguson,” Oberholtzer cracked to reporters on Sunday night.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

In November 2001, David Gunby died of lifelong kidney disease in a Fort Worth, Texas hospital.
Gunby, 58, became the 17th murder victim of Charles J. Whitman, the monster who put shooting massacres on the curriculum in America’s schools.
On Aug. 1, 1966, Gunby, a student at the University of Texas at Austin, had forgotten a book at the library. He turned around to get it when a bullet crashed into his back.
Smoke rises from the sniper's gun as he fired from the tower of the University of Texas administration building in Austin, Texas, on crowds below.  (AP)
Doctors trying to save him discovered that Gunby had been living with only one functioning kidney. That kidney was now damaged by bullet fragments.
The electrical engineering student survived, but the “mad sniper’s” bullet would take his life 35 years later, a death that would be ruled a homicide.
“If his eyes were open, he was in pain,” Gunby’s son told the Fort Worth Star-Telegram. “The only reason my dad has died is because of Charles Whitman.”
Shootings at schools and campuses happened before, but the number of dead usually could be counted on one hand. Whitman’s rampage at the university killed 13 on the spot. Another 31 were wounded, and one died the next day.
As a prelude to the massacre, the one-time altar boy and Scoutmaster took two more lives — his wife, Kathleen, and his mother, Margaret.
One of the sniper's victims in place in a waiting ambulance during the shooting spree at the University of Texas at Austin, on Aug. 1, 1966. (Anonymous/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
On the morning on Aug. 1, Whitman, pretending to be a maintenance worker, hauled a dolly loaded with rifles, pistols, shotguns, and a Bowie knife to his sniper’s lair on the observation deck of the 307-foot-tall tower. He also brought along canned food, Excedrin, coffee, water, and a plastic bottle of gasoline.
Students were heading out for their lunch breaks a little before noon when Whitman, 25, a former Marine, took his first shots. A pregnant woman, a lifeguard, a visiting mathematics professor, a 22-year-old police officer, an electrician, and a Peace Corps volunteer were among the first to fall as the shooter sprayed bullets with great accuracy.
the foot locker and supplies sniper-slayer Charles J. Whitman carried with him when he ascended the University of Texas tower to terrorize the campus with fatal rifle fire. (Ted Powers/AP)
Three police officers and one civilian, a military veteran, entered the tower through an underground tunnel, took the elevator to five flights below the observation deck, then went up the rest on foot. They found a family of tourists — two dead, two injured — sprawled in the stairwell. The body of a receptionist had been dumped behind a couch near the entrance.
Patrolman Ramiro Martinez and officer Houston McCoy ended the rampage at 1:20 p.m., shooting Whitman dead.
At his mother’s apartment, police found her corpse and a note: “I have just taken my mother’s life.” At the couple’s apartment, there was another note next to his wife, who had five stab wounds in the chest. “Mon. 3 a.m. Both Dead.”
Whitman left a long note in which he wrote of suffering from mental anguish and tremendous headaches.
Charles J. Whitman, a 24-year-old student at the University of Texas, in a 1966 photograph.  (ASSOCIATED PRESS)
“After my death,” he said, “I wish that an autopsy would be performed on me to see if there is any visible physical disorder.”
An autopsy revealed a pecan-sized tumor on his brain, but doctors did not believe that it had triggered his violence.
Despite outward appearances, this tall, handsome, intelligent All-American boy was a time bomb — and he knew it.
In March, Whitman sought the help of Dr. Maurice Heatly, a psychiatrist at the university health center. They talked for two hours.
Whitman was “oozing with hostility,” Heatly recalled. The angry young man said he hated his cruel, domineering father and was upset about his parents’ recent separation.
Then, in a chilling statement, he told the psychiatrist that he was “thinking about going up on the tower with a deer rifle and start shooting people.”
Still, Heatly did not think these thoughts were signs of a psychopath.
When the killer’s brain structure offered no explanation, blame was placed on guns and society. Then, as now, the country was in the grip of a crime nightmare that defied explanation.
Richard F. Speck, in court in Peoria, Ill., on April 17, 1967, after he was convicted of the mass slaying of eight nurses in south Chicago. (ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Whitman’s rampage was preceded by another mass killing just weeks earlier. In July, Richard Speck, a violent young drifter, murdered eight student nurses in Chicago. He had been arrested 41 times and sported a tattoo announcing he was “born to raise hell.” Speck’s arraignment occupied space on the same front pages that covered the tower shooting.
Together, these cases are often seen as the opening volley in the age of mass murder in America.
Speck killed with his hands and knives. But Whitman, a crack shot who learned his skills while hunting with his father and later in the Marines, became a rallying cry for a growing anti-gun movement.
"The Right To Bear Arms," by Carl Bakal. (McGraw Hill)
A book — ”The Right to Bear Arms” by Carl Bakal — hit bookstores shortly before the Texas campus bloodbath. “A strange and peculiarly American plague has long swept our land — a plague of guns,” Bakal wrote.
The FBI reported that 57% of homicides in 1965 — 5,614 — were committed with firearms. (According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the number of gun murders in 2020 was 19,384.)
Gun-control legislation that would crimp firearm sales — introduced by Sen. Thomas J. Dodd (D-Conn.) in 1963 — had stalled in the Senate. Within a day of the massacre, politicians called for passage of the bill, stricter laws, and societal changes.
President Lyndon B. Johnson signs a gun control bill at the White House, Oct. 22, 1968. From left: Sen. Thomas Dodd (D-Conn.), almost hidden; James V. Bennett, retired director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons; Rep. Emanuel Celler (D-N.Y.); Joseph Barr, undersecretary of the Treasury; Rep. Seymour Halpern (R-N.Y.); Secretary of the Treasury Henry Fowler; Rep. Edward G. Biester Jr. (R-Penn.), and Fred M. Vinson Jr., assistant attorney general.  (AP)
President Johnson made a plea to “press urgently for legislation now pending in Congress to help prevent a criminal from obtaining firearms.” It passed in 1968.
But not everyone was convinced that gun laws were the answer.
“It appears there is nothing you can do short of outlawing guns for every person in the country,” Texas Governor John Connally said after the massacre. “And even that probably wouldn’t do it.”
JUSTICE STORY has been the Daily News’ exclusive take on true crime tales of murder, mystery and mayhem for more than 100 years. Click here to read more.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The makers of “Ms. Marvel” can feel the power of their new superhero series.
Muslim directors Adil El Arbi and Bilall Fallah can’t wait for audiences to experience Marvel Studios’ first project centering on a Muslim superhero, introducing the character Kamala Khan as a Pakistani-American teenager from Jersey City who obtains cosmic abilities.
“It reminds me of my sister, my nieces, (Adil’s) wife, our aunties,” Fallah told the Daily News. “Now they have somebody that they can look up to that resembles them. I hope that it will inspire a lot of girls in the world, but at the same time, it’s also a very universal story and I think it’s going to touch everybody, no matter the race, gender or religion.”
Debuting Wednesday on Disney+, the six-part “Ms. Marvel” stars newcomer Iman Vellani as Kamala, who idolizes the powerful Captain Marvel but never imagines she could one day become a superhero herself.
That all changes when Kamala acquires superpowers from a magical bangle,  beginning a whirlwind journey as she tries to understand her newfound strength.
Iman Vellani as Ms. Marvel/Kamala Khan in "Ms. Marvel."  (Courtesy of Marvel Studios)
“It’s an origin story, so we just follow this teenage girl who is between two worlds, between her American culture and Pakistani-Islamic culture,” Fallah said.
“At school, she’s trying to be cool but she’s clumsy and she doesn’t know who she wants to be. It’s like an identity crisis. Then all of a sudden, she gets this power, and now she’s between the superhero world and being a normal human being.”
“Ms. Marvel” marks the latest high-profile project for El Arbi and Fallah, who are of Moroccan heritage. The filmmaking duo previously directed the 2020 action-comedy “Bad Boys for Life,” and have the DC Comics movie “Batgirl” starring Leslie Grace due out later this year.
El Arbi, 33, and Fallah, 36, directed the premiere episode and the finale of “Ms. Marvel” and also served as executive producers on the series.
“When we were editing ‘Bad Boys for Life,’ we were talking to each other and saying, ‘What’s the next step?’ And the next step had to be Marvel, because that’s the biz so you’ve got to be part of the (Marvel Cinematic Universe),” El Arbi told The News. “We were joking around and saying, ‘But if we are going to do a Marvel show, it’s going to have to be a Muslim character, right?’ Not knowing that (one) existed and they were planning to do that.”
“We were also surprised by how authentic and how much they really went deep into that Muslim aspect and the subject matter,” El Arbi said. “It felt also just very relatable and realistic to us.”
[ Benedict Cumberbatch and Elizabeth Olsen reveal how ‘Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness’ changes Marvel ]
Directors Adil El Arbi and Bilall Fallah with executive producer Sana Amanat (left to right) on the set of "Ms. Marvel." (Daniel McFadden/Daniel McFadden)
Kamala first appeared in the Marvel comics in 2013, and became the company’s first Muslim character to lead her own comic book the following year.
El Arbi and Fallah aimed to capture the essence of the comics by mixing animation into the live-action “Ms. Marvel” episodes.
“The comics were a great base and a great source material to be inspired by,” El Arbi said. “We also had Sana Amanat, who was co-creator of the comics, to be there as a producer, so we had a really great guidance in that aspect.
“At the same time, we loved the vibrancy and the colors, on a visual level, of the comics. We loved (the 2018 movie) ‘Into the Spider-Verse,’ so we were always saying it would be cool to have a live-action version of that, and that’s how we came up with the idea of coming up with those animation sequences to really get inside the head, the fantasy moments, of Kamala Khan.”
The “Ms. Marvel” series is only the beginning for the title superhero. The Kamala character next appears in the 2023 movie “The Marvels,” which also stars franchise veterans Brie Larson and Teyonah Parris.
“She’s so young. There’s such a big future for her,” Fallah said. “I hope it will be like Peter Parker from Queens. That’s the bar, that she has this long, long future ahead of her.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

In 1995, Menzel auditioned for her first Broadway show and landed the part in "Rent." Menzel was nominated for her first Tony Award for playing Maureen Johnson in the popular musical. After "Rent," Menzel went on to release her first solo album while still continuing her stage career. In 2003, Menzel landed one of the biggest roles of her life in the Broadway classic "Wicked" along with Kristin Chenoweth. (Handout, Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP Photo)
Before Sarah Jessica Parker hit television screens across the county as Carrie Bradshaw in "Sex and the City," she was making a name for herself on the stage. Her first role on Broadway was in William Archibald's "The Innocents" as a child. In 1977, Parker was cast in the Broadway musical "Annie" (pictured left) first as a small role until she succeed two more actresses to play Annie starting in 1979. After playing Annie for a year, Parker moved on to television acting where she would rise to prominence. (Denise Truscello/Getty Images)
At the age of 12, actress Anna Kendrick was cast in her first prominent acting role as Dinah in the Broadway musical "High Society" in 1998. Her role in the musical lead to a Tony Award nomination, making her the third youngest Tony Award nominee. Kendrick is pictured at her first Tony Award red carpet in the bottom left photo. From there, Kendrick went on to appear in numerous other stage productions including "A Little Night Music" and "Camp." (Ron Galella/WireImage, Joel Ryan/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Lea Michele got her start on Broadway at the young age of 8. In 1995, Michele went to her first audition for Les Miserables where she sang the song "Angel of Music" from the musical "The Phantom of the Opera" since it was the only one she knew at the time. Although Michele had originally gone to support a friend, she ended up landing the part herself as Young Cosette in the 1995 play. She then moved to Toronto, Ontario to perform in the Canadian production of "Ragtime" (pictured left). After taking off time to concentrate on school, Michele returned to Broadway during her senior year of high school in "Fiddler on the Roof." (Catherine Ashmore, Matt Sayles/Invision/AP Photo)
While still in high school, John Travolta landed a role in the touring company of the musical "Grease" as well as on Broadway in "Over Here!" His Broadway debut made way for his acting career as he soon after moved to Los Angeles to join show business. By 1977, Travolta was cast in the movie version of "Grease" in lead role Danny Zuko. (AP Photo, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Kristen Bell took an interest in theater at a young age participating in her school's drama club and music clubs. Bell went on to NYU's Tisch School of the Arts where she ended up leaving a few credits shy of graduating to take a roll in the Broadway musical "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" (pictured left). A few years later, Bell starred in "The Crucible" before moving to California to pursue a successful career in television acting. (Joan Marcus, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Julie Andrews got her start in theater while still living in London with her parents. In 1954, on the eve of her 19th birthday, Andrews made her debut performance on Broadway portraying Polly Browne in "The Boy Friend" (pictured left backstage). Upon the ending of the musical, Andrews was immediately cast in "My Fair Lady" on Broadway. It was also around the same time that Andrews made her first appearance on television in the tv-film "High Tor." (Bob Wands/AP Photo, Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Kristen Chenoweth appeared in numerous stage performances throughout high school and into college before making her Broadway debut. Chenoweth traveled to New York City to help a friend move when she auditioned and landed her first role as Arabella Rittenhouse in the musical "Animal Crackers." From there, Chenoweth appeared in a number of regional theatre productions before starring as Hyacinth in the Roundabout Theater Company production of "Scapin" (pictured bottom left). (Handout, Charles Sykes/Invision/AP Photo)
While in high school, actress Diane Keaton participated in her school's singing and drama clubs where she performed various plays. Upon graduating and moving to Manhattan, Keaton became an understudy to Sheila in the original Broadway production of "Hair" (pictured bottom row, middle in left photo). After being in "Hair" for months, Keaton moved on to Woody Allen's production of "Play It Again, Sam" where she would be nominated for her first Tony Award. (Keystone Features/Getty Images, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
Although actor Hugh Jackman always had an interest in theatre growing up, he didn't land a role on stage until 1996 when he played Gaston in a local production of "Beauty and the Beast" and later in "Sunset Boulevard." In 1998, Jackman became well known when he played Curly in the Royal National Theatre's acclaimed production of "Oklahoma!" in London (pictured left). (Handout, Charles Sykes/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Meryl Streep appeared in various school plays throughout high school and college before getting noticed by people both on campus and off. She appeared in more than a dozen stage productions while at the Yale School of Drama, so many that she got sick from being overworked. After graduating, Streep moved to New York City where she was cast in "Trelawny of the Wells" at the Public Theater. Streep appeared in 5 more roles before starring in the musical "Happy End" on Broadway where she won an Obie Award for her performance. (Suzanne Vlamis/AP Photo, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
In 1996 at the age of 25, Diggs played landlord Benny in the Tony Award winning production "Rent" (right). After "Rent" came to an end, Diggs appeared as Mr. Black in the off-Broadway production of "The Wild Party." At the same time, Diggs also played The Bandleader in the 2002 version of the long-running Broadway revival of "Chicago." (Handout, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
At the young age of 6, Nick Jonas was discovered in a barber shop and was referred to a professional show business manager. A year later, Jonas was cast in his first Broadway play as Tiny Tim and young Scrooge in "A Christmas Carol." In the years that followed, Jonas starred as Little Jake in "Annie Get Your Gun" in 2001, Chip in "Beauty and the Beast" in 2002 and Gavroche in "Les Miserables" in 2003. (Carlos Larios/Invision/AP Photo, NicholasJBroadway via YouTube)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A 70-foot yacht called the Elusive was unable to avoid a fiery end over the week when it caught fire in a New Hampshire harbor.
The 2007 Marlow was heading toward Wentworth Marina Saturday when one of the passengers on board noticed black smoke below deck, according to the New Hampshire State Police. Within minutes, the entire boat was filled with smoke and all three passengers and two family dogs jumped overboard to escape.
Arthur Watson, 67; Diane Watson, 57, and Jarrod Tubbs, 33, were rescued by nearby boats and taken to Portsmouth Hospital, where they were treated and released.
A 70-foot yacht on fire in a New Hampshire harbor. (New Hampshire State Police)
The two dogs, who were not named by police, were also rescued.
The tide drifted the Elusive out of the harbor and eventually sank off the coast of Maine despite the work of multiple local agencies, according to officials.
A cause of the fire has not yet been determined.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

“Surely,” says Martin McDonagh, “when you go home after killing 400 people, something must remain.”
The British playwright and screenwriter isn’t talking about a murderous criminal, but the ramrod-straight men who did the bidding of the British state, hanging convicted criminals all the way up until the abolishment of capital punishment in 1964.
These professional executioners are the subject of the play “Hangmen,” which is up for five Tony Awards on Sunday, including a competitive Best Play nomination for McDonagh (his chief rival is “The Lehman Trilogy,” another U.K. import).
Alfie Allen, left, and David Threlfall in 'Hangmen.' (Joan Marcus)
Also nominated are the leading actor David Threlfall, who plays hangman Harry Wade, the featured Alfie Allen who plays one of McDonagh’s signature mysterious strangers and the designers Anna Fleischle and Joshua Carr, whose vivid work includes a jaw-dropping depiction of the relative normalcy of a northern British pub with the horrifying contrast of the hanging cell, replete with a last drop to hell.
The Anglo-Irish McDonagh is no stranger to Broadway or to Tony nominations: his previous plays include “The Beauty Queen of Leenane,” “The Lonesome West,” “The Pillowman” and “A Behanding in Spokane.” Over his career, he’s seen dramatic shifts in Broadway playwriting, mostly trends he has stubbornly resisted.
“I wanted to debate capitol punishment,” he said from London, “but not in some obviously didactic way. Basically, the play is a comedy thriller with a heavy subject matter that is debated and discussed.
“There are a lot of didactic plays out there now where every single person in the theater already agrees with the point of view. I’ve always preferred to strike both sides of the argument and not have all the sympathetic characters in the play be me, or reflect my views. Otherwise, nothing on the stage ever is unexpected. And I always get bored if there are no surprises on stage.”
Martin McDonagh attends the opening night of "Hangmen" on Broadway at Golden Theatre on April 21, 2022 in New York City.  (Jason Mendez/Getty Images)
Boredom hardly is a likely emotion at “Hangmen,” a tense and terse drama filled with dark twists and oblique digressions. It’s about a whole lot of things, not least the price paid by functionaries carrying out the state’s unsavory business. McDonagh always has been interested in devils, including the ones that wear wigs and carry gavels.
And close readers of his works also know he is interested in the price paid by storytellers, too.
“Hangmen” nearly was hung out to dry forever by COVID-19, a fate McDonagh says he would have survived but that would have been a “crushing blow for the kids in the cast who saw this as their big chance.”
The cast of 'Hangmen' on Broadway. (Joan Marcus)
But the production finally opened and made it to Tony night.
“There has been a creepy sense of déjà vu about the whole thing,” McDonagh says of the start-and-stop progression, lasting across two very abnormal seasons.
No wonder he and his “Hangmen” felt so at home.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Scott Disick is on the market again.
The reality show star, who shares three kids with ex-girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian, has split from model girlfriend Rebecca Donaldson just two months after they went public with their relationship, sources close to him told E! News Thursday.
“Although they had a short-lived romance, it was definitely serious,” the insider said of the relationship, saying it ended in recent weeks. “He enjoyed his time with her but realized he is not in a place to seriously date right now.”
Scott Disick and Rebecca Donaldson attend the premiere of Hulu's new show "The Kardashians" on April 07, 2022 in Los Angeles, Calif. (Emma McIntyre/Getty Images for ABA)
Another source told the outlet that the split was made “amicably,” and that, thanks to the urging of Donaldson, 27, the “Keeping Up with the Kardashians” star might now “spend some time focusing on himself and finding what makes him happy.”
Disick, 39, according to the initial insider, “wants to be single and live freely.”
The couple made their red carpet debut at the April premiere of “The Kardashians” in Los Angeles, which a source told the outlet, resulted from “being out one night and [having] totally hit it off.”
In response to the recent engagements of exes Sofia Richie and Kardashian, Disick posted on Instagram in late April, “In the 305 just call me good luck chuck.”
The 2007 flick, “Good Luck Chuck,” sees Dane Cook as a man who discovers he’s the last man many women sleep with right before they meet their soulmate.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The chase on June 3, 1985, ended with an explosion that hurled metal shards, debris, and body parts 100 yards in all directions.
Moments earlier, the black Chevy Blazer had been rolling along Route 150, a major highway in North Carolina. Police followed behind, and an airplane kept track of the vehicle’s path.
The driver, her first cousin, Fred Klenner, 32, known as Fritz, periodically slowed or stopped to get off some rounds from an Uzi submachine gun. He wounded three officers.
Susie Newsom Lynch, 39, and her sons, Jim, 9, and John, 10, were his passengers.
Susie Lynch with her sons.
After four miles, the Blazer slowed, then stopped and blew up.
Newsom Lynch’s body was ripped apart. Klenner, who had been thrown from the truck into a ditch, lingered for a moment, but as soon as police reached him, he gave one parting gurgle and died.
The boys were dead in the back seat, their arms wrapped around their mother’s two black chow dogs, which had also perished.
But it wasn’t the explosion that killed the children.
Autopsies would later reveal something horrible. There were traces of cyanide in their bodies and bullet wounds in their heads. Residue on their mother’s hands suggested that she had fired a weapon shortly before she died.
It appeared that Newsom Lynch had murdered her own children, wrote journalist Jerry Bledsoe in his book on the case “Bitter Blood: A True Story of Southern Family Pride, Madness, and Multiple Murder.”
Authorities speculated that the explosion — likely a murder/suicide— was the last act in a vicious custody battle over the two boys.
Newsom Lynch was in a frenzy over the possibility that the courts would give the kids to her ex — Tom Lynch, a dentist living in Albuquerque, N. M. They separated in 1979, and the boys stayed with their mom. He remarried and moved on with his life. But she made it very difficult for Tom to visit his children. Shortly after they separated she took them for an extended stay in Taiwan.
Newsom Lynch and her sons returned to the United States and moved in with her parents — Robert, 65, and Florence, 63, — in a tony suburb of Winston-Salem, NC. Susie’s grandmother, Hattie Newsom, 85, also lived there. The family patriarch was a top executive at R.J. Reynolds, and Newsom Lynch had grown up in luxury, spoiled, willful, and prone to tantrums when she didn’t get her way. Over the years, she became increasingly unstable.
Her relationship with her parents became strained when she started spending time with Klenner.
Not long after the couple’s 1982 divorce, two of Lynch’s relatives were murdered. In July 1984, his sister, Dr. Jane Lynch, 39, and his mother, Delores, 68, were shot dead in their home in a wealthy Louisville, Ky., suburb. Burglary was quickly ruled out. The place had not been ransacked, and no valuables had been taken.
Less than a year later, Newsom Lynch’s parents and grandmother were murdered in their Winston-Salem home. Once again, burglary did not seem to be the motive. Nothing was missing, not even a wad of cash —about $600 — that was lying on an etagere.
Police were beginning to speculate that the five murders were committed by Klenner. His motive, they believed, was to eliminate a source of grief for his kissing cousin.
Many who knew him called Klenner “Dr. Crazy.” It was a nickname used often by the gun dealers who sold him his arsenal.
After his death, police investigating the two places he lived — Newsom Lynch’s apartment and his parents’ home — found an impressive collection of weapons. These included pistols, shotguns, machine guns and assault rifles, knives, Mace, gas masks, and thousands of rounds of ammunition, Bledsoe wrote.
Klenner was the son of a respected alternative-medicine doctor — Fred Klenner — a proponent of high-dose vitamin C as a cure for such ills as polio, pneumonia, and cancer. He had a thriving practice.
The doctor assumed that his son would take over and was thrilled when he got into his alma mater, Duke University School of Medicine.
Klenner never finished; in fact, he never even enrolled. But that didn’t stop him from running around in a white coat, saying he was an MD, a scientist conducting top-secret research, and a CIA agent. Nor did his lack of medical training or a license stop him from taking over the practice after his father died in 1984.
Newsom Lynch had started going to Dr. Klenner, her uncle, for intravenous vitamin therapy to fight fatigue soon after returning from Taiwan. Then she took up with her cousin. Eventually, they moved in together and told people they were married.
Police planned to arrest Klenner on June 3. But when they arrived, he took off toward Greensboro on his fatal road trip. He had a load of weapons, Newsom Lynch by his side, and two innocent children with a pair of big dogs in the back seat.
The question of who was going to get the children was the most likely motive, but money also may have played a role. Newsom Lynch was in line for a large inheritance from her grandmother.
“Almost everyone who died was going to testify in that custody case,” Forsyth County NC. Sheriff Preston Oldham told reporters as the cleanup of the explosion site began. He added that with the major players dead, it would be impossible to find out exactly what happened or why. “Only God knows, because everybody’s gone.”
JUSTICE STORY has been the Daily News’ exclusive take on true crime tales of murder, mystery and mayhem for more than 100 years. Click here to read more.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Prince Charles and his son Prince William honored the past and looked to the future Saturday as they paid tribute to Queen Elizabeth II at a star-studded concert outside Buckingham Palace celebrating the monarch’s 70 years on the throne.
Diana Ross, rock band Queen, Duran Duran, Alicia Keys and others performed in front of some 22,000 people gathered on the Mall for the open-air “Party at the Palace,” which rounded up the third day of a four-day holiday weekend dedicated to celebrating the queen’s Platinum Jubilee.
The 96-year-old monarch did not attend the concert, but she delighted the crowds when she appeared in a surprise video recorded with an animated version of another British national treasure: Paddington Bear.
Rod Stewart performs during the Platinum Party At The Palace at Buckingham Palace on Saturday. (WPA Pool/Getty Images)
The queen revealed she shared Paddington’s love of marmalade sandwiches in a comedy skit that was shown to open the concert, which culminated in speeches by the monarch’s son and grandson.
Charles opened his short speech by addressing the queen as “Your Majesty, mummy,” then paid tribute to her “lifetime of selfless service.”
Diana Ross closes out the star-studded event. (WPA Pool/Getty Images)
The queen’s eldest son and heir recalled the ever-growing list of world leaders Elizabeth has met and the endless stacks of state papers she has reviewed during a reign that has now stretched from the early days of the Cold War to the information age. But he also highlighted his mother’s role as a symbol of stability, unifying the U.K. and the Commonwealth as they negotiated this rapidly changing world.
“You have met us and talked with us. You laugh and cry with us and, most importantly, you have been there for us, for these 70 years,” Charles said as scenes from the queen’s life were projected on the palace walls. “You pledged to serve your whole life — you continue to deliver. That is why we are here. That is what we celebrate tonight.”
The words 'Thank You Ma'am' are illuminated over Buckingham Palace during the Platinum Jubilee concert. (Alberto Pezzali/AP)
William preceded his father with remarks that underscored the queen’s long-time commitment to the environment as he highlighted the need to combat climate change.
Recalling the queen’s 1989 Christmas message, in which she called on all nations to work together to protect the earth for “our children and children’s children,” William said: “It’s my firm hope that my grandmother’s words are as true in 70 years’ time as they are tonight, that as nations we come together in common cause, because then there is always room for hope.”
The queen has not attended any of the festivities since Thursday due to what the palace describes as “episodic mobility issues.” But her absence at the concert didn’t dampen the party atmosphere among the crowds.
Brian May of Queen performs at the Platinum Jubilee concert taking place in front of Buckingham Palace on Saturday. (AP Photo/Alberto Pezzali, Pool) (Alberto Pezzali/AP Photo)
“It’s a magical experience ... (This is) never again going to happen in our lifetime, and it’s just absolutely incredible to be a part of this,” said Sam Ahcquoim, from Cornwall in southwestern England. “I’ve been really, really excited and just can’t wait to get in there now and start dancing.”
The monarch also opted not to attend the Epsom Derby earlier Saturday, and was represented at the prestigious annual horse race by her daughter, Princess Anne.
The queen is widely known as an avid horse lover, and she has only missed the Epsom Derby a handful of times. On Saturday, five of her former racehorses were paraded, and 40 jockeys who have ridden for the queen formed a guard of honor before the national anthem was played.
“She’s been breeding horses for over 60 years. She knows all the blood lines and she’s won lots of races and she’s very knowledgeable,” Frankie Dettori, who lined part of the course with fellow jockeys, told the BBC.
Britain's Prince Charles, with wife Camilla, speaks of his mother, Queen Elizabeth II, at Saturday's show. (Eddie Mulholland/AP)
“I’m sure today she’ll find a TV and she’s going to watch it live, because she loves the Derby so much,” he added.
It was the second time in as many days that the queen’s mobility issues have robbed crowds of a chance to see her.
On Friday, the queen skipped a special service of Thanksgiving in her honor at St. Paul’s Cathedral in London. Palace officials said she had experienced “some discomfort” at events the day before, which included waving to huge crowds from Buckingham Palace.
Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, were among nearly 50 members of the royal family who gathered Friday at St. Paul’s Cathedral to honor the absent head of state. It was the couple’s first public appearance in the U.K. since they stepped back from royal duties and moved to California two years ago.
People wave Union flags as they gather in the Mall ahead of the Platinum Party at the Palace on Saturday. (Dan Kitwood/Getty Images)
Apart from attending Friday’s service, the couple has so far stayed out of the limelight. Their two children, Archie and Lilibet, who turned one Saturday, haven’t yet made an appearance during this trip. A spokesperson for the couple said they were spending the day “privately” and were not joining some 30 other royals at Saturday’s concert.
Meanwhile, members of the royal family travelled to Wales and Northern Ireland as part of celebrations across the U.K.
William and his wife Kate brought two of their three children — 8-year-old Prince George and 7-year-old Princess Charlotte — to Cardiff Castle in Wales before a separate concert in the castle grounds in honor of the queen.
The queen’s youngest son, Prince Edward, and his wife Sophie, Countess of Wessex, visited a 1950s-themed seaside funfair in Belfast. Edward tried his hand at pulling a pint of Guinness at a diner, while Sophie took in a ‘50s and ‘60s dance demonstration.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The Fourth of July is a time for fireworks, but let’s face it: Been there, done that.
You’ve seen plenty of pyrotechnics, but what you may not have seen are some of the under-the-radar series that get overlooked in a time of peak TV.
The July 4th long weekend gives you an extra day to sneak in a summer binge. Here are six shows that you didn’t watch but should have.
[ ‘Reservation Dogs’ sheds new, ‘three-dimensional’ light on Native communities ]
“Reservation Dogs” is set to begin its second season next month, but you can catch up on the first now. (Shane Brown/FX)
Last year saw two shows about Native American communities (a bleak yet remarkable record): Ed Helms’ sitcom “Rutherford Falls,” about a white man coming to terms with his ancestors’ role in taking over a First Nation town, and “Reservation Dogs,” the darkly comedic coming-of-age story of a group of Indigenous teens in Oklahoma.
The first was cute and fun, the latter was at once a painfully honest portrayal of youth, a fascinating look into a tight-knit community and a heartwarming story of loyalty. There’s a bite to the comedy, the sharp wit of a teenager who’s a little sad and not hiding it as well as he thinks, and yet a warmth of four friends who have gone through it all together.
The first season of “Reservation Dogs” is on Hulu and the second premieres on Aug. 3.
Alicia Vikander stars as an actress in “Irma Vep.”  (carole bethuel/Carole Bethuel/HBO)
Olivier Assayas’ remake of his own 1996 film, about an actress who escapes into her role in a remake of the French silent crime movie “Les Vampires,” is both too meta and too pretentious but that’s also why it works. Alicia Vikander, who stars as the disillusioned movie star fresh off a breakup and sick of her cookie-cutter superhero press tour, has an air of disapproval for everyone around her while also being fascinated by her strange new world, full of druggie actors and chaotic directors.
“Irma Vep” manages to satirize the entertainment industry, from the people to the “content,” while still existing as a good show in and of itself.
The eight-episode limited series airs on HBO on Mondays and is set to wrap on July 25.
[ ‘The Umbrella Academy’ dives headfirst into the apocalypse once again ]
Elliot Page and Tom Hopper in “The Umbrella Academy.”  (CHRISTOS KALOHORIDIS/NETFLIX/Christos Kalohoridis/Netflix)
Now three seasons in, it’s not entirely clear if “The Umbrella Academy” is actually good or just addictively weird, but the positive thing is that a show that may just be addictively weird gets to exist.
Based on the comic series by My Chemical Romance singer Gerard Way and Gabriel Bá, the show follows a family of superhero adopted siblings in their quest to stop the apocalypse every season. No seriously, there’s a new apocalypse every season. Redundant, sure, but they manage to make it fun. And weird.
There are musical breaks and time travel, a robot mom and a talking chimpanzee. And in between the second and third seasons, when Elliot Page came out as trans, the show wrote that in as well, one of the best, kindest representations of transition we’ve seen on TV yet.
All three seasons of “The Umbrella Academy” are now on Netflix.
Rose Matefeo (right, with Nikesh Patel) created and stars in “Starstruck." (Mark Johnson/HBO Max)
Thanks to movies like “Marry Me” and “Fire Island,” romcoms are finally getting their much deserved comeback, but “Starstruck” got there first.
What happens when a 20-something woman getting by on a bunch of odd jobs spends the night with a movie star? Exactly what you want to happen: it gets messy. Creator Rose Matafeo, who stars as Jessie, is straight out of a screwball comedy without coming off as a caricature, a chaotic character getting by on good luck and an undeniable charm.
The first two seasons of “Starstruck” are on HBO Max and it was just renewed for a third season.
[ ‘American Auto’ takes down the corporate car industry in NBC workplace comedy ]
Ana Gasteyer (right) heads a strong cast in “American Auto.”  (NBC/Ron Batzdorff/NBC)
“Abbott Elementary” got all the attention during the fall, and for good reason, but the networks may be on their best run of sitcoms in the better part of a decade.
Among them was “American Auto,” a workplace comedy set in the c-suite of a Detroit car manufacturer filled with employees so incompetent that the only surprise is that it takes them until the seventh episode to face a recall.
The surrounding cast, including the neurotic head of PR (Harriet Dyer), the failson (Jon Barinholtz) and the guy from the factory floor brought in to serve as the voice of the common man (Tye White), are great, but it’s Ana Gasteyer’s Katherine Hastings, the newly hired CEO, who stands out the most, providing a stunning takedown of the #GirlBoss narrative rivaled only by Amanda Seyfried as Elizabeth Holmes in “The Dropout.”
“American Auto” will return to NBC midseason, so there’s plenty of time to catch up on Peacock.
Jeremy Allen White is cooking up some good things in "The Bear." (Matt Dinerstein)
Despite the overwhelming popularity of food-centric reality shows, it’s actually been a while since we had a good scripted restaurant show. Not a bar, a good old fashioned restaurant where people are screaming and oil is spraying and meals are getting cold.
Welcome to “The Bear,” which FX has been passing off as a comedy, but is instead the most stressful show you’ve ever seen (yes, including “Yellowjackets”).
We meet rising star Carmen (Jeremy Allen White of “Shameless”) weeks after he’s given up his Michelin dreams and goes home to Chicago to run the family hut, The Original Beef of Chicagoland, after his brother’s death and is immediately thrown into the kitchen where anything that can go wrong does go wrong. The staff is disrespectful. The financials are a disaster. But the place is home and “The Bear” makes it easy to see why you always go back.
All eight episodes are on Hulu.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

On a residential block in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, a nondescript eatery has become all the rage by putting an inventive twist on a New York staple.
The Black-owned Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. attracts celebrities and regular crowds alike thanks to its unusual pizza toppings: oxtail, jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles and black truffle alfredo shrimp. The white and red pies sell from $21 to $100.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren, pictured here.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
Opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren, a former high-end sneaker “concierge,” the shop has over 100,000 followers across social media platforms including Instagram, Facebook, TikTok and Twitter, and has catered to such celebs as model Chanel Iman, hip hoppers Pharrell Williams, Lil Yachty, The Lox and Jim Jones, as well as pro football stars Victor Cruz and Sterling Shepard.
The VH1 reality show “Black Ink Crew” has scheduled a taping at the venue this week.
But McIaren particularly enjoys keeping his local clientele fed and happy.
“I’m here for the community, and this community don’t have nothing like it,” Mclaren told the Daily News. “All these kids just running into the Chinese restaurant, which is kind of what I grew up on ... We don’t get to try new things. We don’t get to expand our taste buds. So you got to think about these people that’s in Bed-Stuy. Ninety percent of my customers didn’t even know what a truffle was. I want to change that.”
The Black-owned eatery offers unusual toppings: Jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles, fried salmon diavlo, black truffle alfredo shrimp.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
On an average day, 100 pies are sold, and on weekends, cars are double-parked from one end of the street to the other. About 90% of his customers are New Yorkers mostly from Brooklyn, but he recalled a group of Brazilians coming in every day one recent week and trying different slices.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn, New York, was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
A native of East Flatbush, Mclaren runs the shop with his wife, Ashlee. He learned the restaurant business working at a local pizzeria in his teens and then toiling for national chains such as IHOP, TGI Fridays, Friendly’s, Red Lobster and even Brooklyn favorite Junior’s.
Mclaren then launched a successful sneaker resale business that flourished on social media, attracting clientele like British Formula One superstar Lewis Hamiltonand music stars Rihanna, Cardi B and Offset. But when the business started to fade, a friend approached him to open a pizza shop.
“If I put my name on it, we got to use the best of the best ingredients and we’ve got to come up with something different because we’re in New York City and we’re off the beaten path,” he said. ”So I started thinking outside the box.”
He first hit pay dirt making 20 pizza pies loaded with lobster and shrimp and selling them for $100 each. He sold out in four hours.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn, New York, was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren. The Black-owned eatery offers unusual toppings: Jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles, fried salmon diavlo, black truffle alfredo shrimp. The white and red pies sell from $21 to $100. (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
The oxtail pizza soon became a menu favorite. “It took about two or three times to get it where I thought it would be perfect,” he shared. It takes two staffers up to two hours to debone 30 to 40 pounds of the juicy meat daily, he said.
While his social media savvy has helped grow his business, Mclaren credits his customers for being willing to try something that’s “new and different.”
Cuts & Slices offers unusual toppings: The Tulum pie, inspired by a recent vacation to the exclusive Mexican resort destination, was designed by Randy Mclaren's wife Ashlee.  It's topped with ground beef, jalapenos, fried ripe sweet plantains and Mexican cheese. (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
“I think it’s due to the fact that it’s something so unique. No one else actually has oxtail pizza, or has actually put lobster, shrimp and black truffle alfredo on pizza.”
“It’s something different that draws people from all over the country,” he said. “And once they try it the first time and pretty much blows their mind, they fall in love with the pizza. And they keep coming back and tell all of their friends about it.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Johnny Sibilly isn’t interested in giving the “ABCs of what it means to be queer.”
Sibilly and fellow “Queer as Folk” cast members agree: If you don’t know what something means, Google it.
Russell T. Davies’ original series, which premiered in 1999, followed three gay men in Manchester, England. A year later, Showtime premiered its own version, set in Pittsburgh and expanding its umbrella to cover more versions of queer. On Thursday, the latest iteration hits Peacock, pegged as a “reimagining” of the 1999 series, this time in New Orleans and an even bigger world: a pregnant lesbian couple, a trans woman, drag queens and more gorgeous gay men than you can count.
This version of “Queer as Folk” takes no time to explain who it is or why it’s here. This is just its world.
“It’s important to make queer things for queer people. Sometimes the first draft of queer stuff is like, ‘OK we’re going to explain our existence to you, it’s OK, Baby, come on in, the water’s warm,’ ” Ryan O’Connell, who stars as Julian, a nerd with cerebral palsy who still lives at home with his mother, (Kim Cattrall), and also serves as a writer and co-executive producer, told the Daily News.
“This is like, ‘Well, we don’t care if you’re comfortable or not; this is our lives.’ ”
Devin Way stars in “Queer as Folk.” (Peacock/Alyssa Moran/Peacock)
“Queer as Folk” isn’t shy about its sexuality. In fact, it revels in it. Every position, version and style. One person, two people, more. Straight, gay. Abled and not.
“In so much queer TV and film, queer characters are sanctified and made to be these really palatable versions of what queerness is,” Fin Argus, who plays Mingus, a high school student trying to find his place, told The News.
[ Why showrunner Stephen Dunn started ‘Queer as Folk’ with a Pulse-like shooting ]
“It’s important to see characters that can be messy and are human and maybe don’t like each other but can still be part of the same community,” Argus said. “Not everyone is going to get along, but there’s still this thread that keeps people connected.”
Mingus (Fin Argus) and his high school teacher Ruthie (Jesse James Keitel) find common ground outside the classroom. (Peacock/Alyssa Moran/Peacock)
Showrunner Stephen Dunn described his show as “real, raw, authentic queer stories.” Sometimes that’s a queer couple [CG and Jesse James Keitel] expecting twins and figuring out how to be parents. Sometimes that’s Mingus, experimenting as a drag queen and with his own sexuality. Sometimes that’s Brodie [Devin Way], who has dropped out of medical school and come home with no plans. Sometimes that’s a fatal shooting at Babylon, a gay nightclub. Sometimes that’s a montage of sex scenes.
“There are people who are like, ‘Oh, this is very woke,’ and I’m like, ‘Our existence is woke?’ That’s very weird to me,” Sibilly, who plays Noah, a successful lawyer with less success in his personal life, told The News.
“Especially if you go out in New Orleans, there’s such a great, diverse group of people littering the streets, the restaurants. It doesn’t feel like we’re checking boxes. We’re just showing the world how it is and how it exists.”
Keitel, the trans actress playing semireformed party girl and high school teacher Ruthie, whose partner, Shar, is pregnant, stressed the messiness of it all. These characters aren’t perfect, nor should they pretend to be.
Noah (Johnny Sibilly), right, and Julian (Ryan O’Connell), left, are coming to grips with their shifting realities. (Peacock/Peacock)
“We get to see queer people living their lives authentically and unapologetically and surrounded by their peers in a community who love and embrace them,” she told The News.
“I think people forget that queer people are normal. We’re normal people, real people with hopes and dreams and layers and strife and conflict. They mess up.”
Through the tragedy of the nightclub shooting, “Queer as Folk” finds its light. There are no explanations of Grindr. There are no straight characters to guide you into their world. It just exists.
“As queer people, we go through things in our lives that you would consider traumatic and it is in spite of all of those things what makes us special: our humor that we get out of the dark moments, our friendships, our chosen family,” Sibilly told The News.
“It’s about not what happens to you, but what you do with it that matters. It’s a very relatable queer thing to rise from the ashes.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The shooting of drill rapper Avanti Frowner, 27, aka Vontae, is shot and killed during a robbery at a Bronx pharmacy. (New York Daily News Exclusive)
Police on Saturday released images of the five muggers wanted for killing Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at a Bronx pharmacy.
Victim Avanti Frowner, 27, who raps under the Vontae stage name, was in New York City to scout out locations for a music video set to be filmed later in the month when he was killed at the Amazing Community Pharmacy on E. Tremont Ave. near Arthur Ave. in Tremont at about 1:40 p.m. Thursday, police said.
Shooting victim and Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae.  (YouTube)
Vontae and a friend from California traveling with him were buying over-the-counter eye drops at the pharmacy when two of the five suspects approached, wanting to know if he wanted to buy some pot, police sources said.
The rapper declined, but the two weed sellers and three others demanded his property and his gold chain, which carried his signature nameplate, cops said.
Surveillance footage obtained by the Daily News shows Vontae and a man wearing a white T-shirt and white do-rag struggling inside the pharmacy as a terrified employee crouches behind the counter.
As an attacker forcefully pulls Vontae to the ground, three other suspects storm the store and pile on top of him while drug store employees run down a staircase into the basement, the video shows.
The employee crouched behind the counter and moves to the back of the store while one of the men hit Vontae over the head with a long umbrella.
Images of the murder of Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at  the Amazing Community Pharmacy on E. Tremont Ave. near Arthur Ave. in the Bronx on Thursday, June 9, 2022.
The do-rag-wearing assailant fumbled with a gun before he shot the drill rapper several times.
As Vontae laid on the floor of the pharmacy bleeding, he fired another shot into his chest before he took off with the massive “Moneygang Vontae” nameplate from his neck, cops said.
EMS rushed Vontae to St. Barnabas Hospital, where he died.
The NYPD released these pictures of the suspects in the killing of Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at a Bronx pharmacy.  (NYPD / DCPI)
He and his friend had arrived in the city Thursday morning, checked into a hotel near the pharmacy and left, but only his companion returned, telling the front desk clerk Vontae had been killed.
It was not immediately clear if the muggers knew who Vontae was, even though Moneygang Vontae posted photos of himself wearing the nameplate in the Bronx shortly before the shooting.
So far, the robbery and the killing appeared to be a crime of opportunity, a police source said.
NYPD officers investigate the shooting of rapper Moneygang Vontae, at the Amazing Pharmacy in the Bronx. (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
The drill rap music genre continues to capture police attention. Rappers belittle and call out rival gang members in their hit songs, fueling gun violence across the city, police say.
Cops released the images of the muggers in the hopes that someone recognizes them.
Anyone with information regarding their whereabouts is urged to call NYPD Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS. All calls will be kept confidential.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The man in charge of the disastrous police response to the Texas school shooting was placed on administrative leave Wednesday.
Pete Arredondo, the Uvalde school district police chief, will be on leave until multiple investigations into the shooting are completed, Uvalde CISD superintendent Hal Harrell said in a press release.
Arredondo will be temporarily replaced by Mike Hernandez, Harrell said.
Pete Arredondo stands at a news conference on May 26. (Dario Lopez-Mills/AP)
Shortly after the shooting, Arredondo was sworn into the Uvalde city council. He tried to take a leave of absence from the council at a meeting Tuesday night but other members rejected it.
The Texas Senate and the federal Justice Department are among the agencies investigating the May 24 massacre at Robb Elementary School, where Salvador Ramos, 18, killed 19 children and two teachers.
Arredondo was the commander on the scene that day and told officers to wait outside two classrooms while Ramos massacred children. One of the officers under Arredondo’s command, Ruben Ruiz, tried to storm in to save his wife, Eva Mireles, but was stopped and detained.
Texas state police leader Steve McCraw ripped into Arredondo at a Texas Senate hearing on Tuesday.
“The only thing stopping a hallway of dedicated officers from entering 111 and 112 was the on-scene commander, who decided to place the lives of officers before the lives of children,” McCraw said. “The officers had weapons; the children had none. The officers had body armor; the children had none. The officers had training; the subject had none.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Before Monday’s tragic mass shooting, affluent Highland Park, Ill., had another claim to fame – as the film set for several iconic 1980s movies.
One was “The Color of Money,” starring Paul Newman, Tom Cruise and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, in which Fast Eddie Felson teaches pool hustling to a mentee.
The tony neighborhood also formed the backdrop for family tension in “Ordinary People,” the 1980 drama starring Robert Redford, Mary Tyler Moore, Donald Sutherland, Judd Hirsch and Timothy Hutton, about a family being ripped apart after the death of a son.
Tom Cruise laughs in a scene from the film 'Risky Business', 1983. (Warner Bros./Getty Images)
There was also the 1992 “Prelude to a Kiss,” a rom-com with Meg Ryan, Alec Baldwin, Kathy Bates and Ned Beatty.
Classic holiday movie “Home Alone” was also filmed there, as was John Hughes’ cult favorite “Sixteen Candles.”
The Chicago suburb, population 30,176, also played roles in “Risky Business” and “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off.”
House featured in the 1990 movie "Home Alone." (Nam Y. Huh/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Many of the films were directed by Hughes, who favored Glencoe Beach (“Ferris Bueller”), used an outside shot of Glencoe Union Church at the end of “Sixteen Candles,” a corner store that Macaulay Culkin’s “Home Alone” character shoplifts a toothbrush from, and Northbrook Court mall’s exterior, which made a cameo in “Weird Science,” according to Visit Chicago North Shore.
“It’s a place of movie magic and one of the 100 wealthiest cities in America,” tweeted Chicago Sun-Times columnist Richard Roeper at the end of the day in which six people died and 24 were wounded by a shooter who let loose into a parade in yet another gun massacre. “No place is safe. No place.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Don’t touch that dial — Ernie Anastos is coming back to television.
The 78-year-old veteran newsman signed off from Fox 5 for the last time in June 2019, leaving some to believe they’d seen the end of a TV career that spanned four decades on New York stations. But after hosting Friday’s Folio Awards for journalists on Long Island, Anastos told the Daily News by phone that he thought someday he’d be on the air again.
“I always had that feeling, so yeah,” he said. “It was a nice break for me.”
Ernie Anastos is coming back after a break. (Courtesy Ernie Anastos)
Anastos’ two year hiatus — which included a one-year study break — ends when his weekly syndicated program “Positively America With Ernie Anastos” begins airing the week of Sept. 10. It is being distributed by Gray Television.
That show will see the famously upbeat Emmy Award winner speaking to people on the street about current events and interviewing guests including filmmaker Ken Burns, sports announcer Bob Costas and singer Marie Osmond.
Anastos said that when COVID started shutting nearly everything down in 2020, it was a “strange time in many ways.” It was also a good time for him to take a break and continue his education. Taking classes online through Harvard Business School proved to be just what he needed. He especially liked that virtual classrooms let him meet students from around the globe.
“The whole thing was exciting,” he said.
Ernie Anastos had stints at ABC 7, CBS 2 and Fox 5 in New York.
But now he’s ready to get back to what he knows and loves — talking to people in person and hearing their stories.
“I love being out on the street,” Anastos said. “I will be talking to people, about things that are important to them, getting their reactions to different ideas.”
Among his objectives with “Positively America” will be listening to people’s concerns, then helping to seek out solutions.
“At the end of the interview I want to provide helpful information,” he said. “Where can I go? What can I do?”
[ Ernie Anastos is leaving TV to go back to college ]
One thing Anastos said he won’t be talking about on the program is the divisive world of politics. He believes the fact that he doesn’t get political makes him more relatable to the wide range of people he wants to speak to for other stories.
“As far as politics go, I have never been affiliated with a party,” he said. “I walk down that straight line and I look to hear both sides.”
The ubiquitous presenter, who has also worked for ABC 7 and CBS 2, said his quest for objectivity follows him into the voting booth.
“When I go to vote, and this has happened to me many times, I go in there and I’m in there for a long time,” he said.
When he finally emerges, Anastos said he’s had people outside the booth comment on how much time he spent checking a box.
“I said, ‘You know what? I had a difficult time making a decision,’” he explained.
[ Fox News celebrates a quarter-century of ... whatever it is they’re doing over there ]
In addition to returning to broadcasting, he said he’d like to someday pursue one of his other loves by somehow getting involved with a minor-league baseball team.
“Wouldn’t that be fun?” he asked.
Despite being born in New Hampshire, Anastos’ years in New York have made him a Yankees fan. But of course, maintaining his spirit of objectivity, the newsman said he also has “a lot of respect for the Mets” and will host former Amazin’s manager Bobby Valentine on “Positively America.”
He also hasn’t ruled out someday going back to school.
“I may age, but I’ll never be old,” Anastos said. “My heart is young.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

It didn’t take long for Tom Hanks to get all shook up about joining the new “Elvis” biopic.
Director Baz Luhrmann says Hanks jumped at the chance to portray the rock ‘n’ roll icon’s controversial manager, Col. Tom Parker, in the new movie, which hits theaters Friday.
“I went to see him. I said, ‘Look, I want you for this role,’ and usually it takes a month to get someone like that on board,” Luhrmann told the Daily News.
“I told him about the toxic relationship between Col. Tom Parker and Elvis, and honestly 20 minutes in, he just turned to me and said, ‘Well, if you want me, I’m your guy.’ I walked out and honestly I said to my guys, ‘Did he just say yes?’ And he did, and he never looked back.”
Tom Hanks (left) and Baz Luhrmann on the set of "Elvis." (Warner Bros. Pictures)
The movie explores how Parker, a one-time carnival worker, discovered Presley during the 1950s and helped elevate him to mainstream stardom, before being accused years later of financially manipulating the singer.
“The character of Col. Tom Parker is gargantuan,” Luhrmann said. “He’s a gargantuan kind of carny. Think of J. Edgar Hoover plus a carny plus a sort of wackadoo, the Penguin with a chain saw. Mash them all together. He’s that out-there. I thought, ‘You need a really great actor to do it.’ Tom’s not just a great actor of our time, but of all time.”
In addition to showcasing the different eras of Presley’s musical career, “Elvis” covers the artist’s venture into acting, which Parker played a significant role in as well.
[ ‘Elvis’ director Baz Luhrmann says film humanizes the icon, shares how Elvis Presley’s family reacted to it  ]
Austin Butler plays Elvis Presley and Tom Hanks is Col. Tom Parker in "Elvis."  (Warner Bros. Pictures)
Luhrmann, 59, says his favorite Presley movie was one of the star’s earliest: the 1958 musical drama “King Creole.”
“If you look at him in that, he’s really terrific actually, and you really can see that he had great potential to grow as an actor,” Luhrmann said. “Of course, as the (new) film points out, that was stymied.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

“Bachelor” alum Lauren Bushnell Lane and country star and husband Chris Lane are expecting their second child later this year, the couple confirmed to People Monday — the same week their son Dutton celebrates his first birthday.
“To be quite honest, I’ve never been more shocked in my entire life, because this was very much an unexpected surprise,” Bushnell Lane, 32, told the outlet.
Chris Lane and Lauren Bushnell Lane attend the 2019 CMT Music Award at Bridgestone Arena on June 5, 2019 in Nashville, Tenn. (Jason Kempin/Getty Images for CMT)
“When we found out, Dutton was almost 8 months old and I didn’t feel anything,” said Bushnell Lane. “I truly had no symptoms. I was actually more so taking a pregnancy test just reconfirm that was not what was going on! And to surprise and to Chris’ surprise, it was very much positive.”
The “Hold You Tonight” singer, 37, agreed that the happy news for the couple, who tied the knot in October 2019, “was very shocking!”
“Wasn’t necessarily the plan, but we’re so thankful that we’re able to have another,” said Bushnell Lane. “We had planned on having at least two kids, so we’re very thankful that it was able to happen for us, even if it wasn’t necessarily on our exact timing.”
Though his family tends to “make a lot of boys,” Lane said that his parents “are dying for a little girl, so we’ll see!
While Bushnell Lane insisted this “never happened,” her husband told People: “If it’s a boy, we agreed that I would get to name him. And if it’s a girl, we agreed that she would get to name her.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Harry Styles canceled a concert in Copenhagen on Sunday after a shooting at a mall in the Danish capital city left three people dead.
The pop star, 28, had been scheduled to perform at the nearby Royal Arena on Sunday night as part of his “Love on Tour.”
“I’m heartbroken along with the people of Copenhagen,” Styles tweeted. “I adore this city. The people are so warm and full of love.  I’m devastated for the victims, their families, and everyone hurting.  I’m sorry we couldn’t be together. Please look after each other.”
Three people were also critically wounded in the shooting at the Field’s shopping mall, officials say. Authorities arrested a 22-year-old man in connection with the incident.
Harry Styles at the Grammys in 2021. (Kevin Winter/Getty Images for The Recording A)
The mall is located less than a mile away from Royal Arena.
Queen Margrethe and her family called for “unity and care” after the shooting, which was the deadliest in Denmark since February 2015.
“We do not yet know the full extent of the tragedy, but it is already clear that more people have lost their lives and that even more have been injured,” the family’s statement said.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Incisive, witty, and incredibly smart, Ephron left behind journalism, essays, movies, and plays when she died a decade ago. She also left a legion of fans.
Nora Ephron, director, on the set of the movie "Bewitched," with Michael Caine and Nicole Kidman, 2005. (Columbia Pictures/Courtesy Everett Collection)
Ephron was one of those rare people others flock to because she was so warm, giving, and right. No matter the situation, she could see through the nonsense and advise. By doing so, she built a tribe of loyal devotees.
Young women journalists and screenwriters wanted to be like her. A few have somehow convinced themselves that they now wear her crown. Luckily, Kristin Marguerite Doidge, author of “Nora Ephron: A Biography,” doesn’t fall into this trap. She wisely does not try to be Ephron.
“Nora Ephron: A Biography,”  by Kristin Marguerite Doidge (Chicago Review Press)
Still, Doidge’s book is the work of a fan, albeit one who spent seven years laboring over it. She follows the logical chronological path for this, tracing Ephron’s life from birth to death. She details how, along the way, Ephron helped pioneer New Journalism, ruffled feathers, won an Oscar, and had plays on Broadway.
Ephron was a genuine chronicler, brilliant at so many forms of writing. The child of two writers, she had been raised that way, taught to be a dispassionate observer. When, as an adult, she went to visit her dying mother in the hospital, the woman urged her to take notes. “Everything is copy,” she told her daughter.
Ephron was born in New York in 1941, the eldest of the four daughters of playwrights and screenwriters Henry Ephron and Phoebe Wolkind. The family moved to California, where Ephron’s parents wrote for the movies. It was a privileged Beverly Hills life, but Ephron was determined to return to Manhattan.
Director Nora Ephron and John Travolta on the set of "Michael" in 1996. (New Line Cinema/Courtesy Everett Collection)
The two passions – words and food – that guided Ephron started early. Her mom taught her to read by the time she was 4. At the time, reading wasn’t a skill expected to be mastered until first grade.
When Phoebe asked her oldest daughter to help the cook plan menus, Nora had another idea – she always had another idea – and this one led to the other guiding force in her life. Instead of helping to plan, she learned to cook. And she was learning the art of what makes a great dinner.
“A certain schedule and elegance was maintained each and every day: Phoebe and Henry would arrive home at four-thirty, and while they sipped cocktails in the den, the children would join them for crudités,” Doidge writes. “Dinner would follow promptly at six-thirty – prepared by the family cook – and by seven-fifteen, they’d be on to the next of their evening activities: playing charades, reading poetry, perhaps, or singing rounds.”
Well-planned dinner parties were one of Ephron’s signatures, as were fostering friendships. People relied on her for sound advice. Doidge traces some friendships back to Ephron’s summer camp days.
At Wellesley from 1958 to 1962, Ephron made more lifelong friends. She later upset some when she published a typically honest and biting piece, quoting friends and not asking for permission before publishing.
After graduation, Ephron followed her dream to New York, landing a job in Newsweek’s mail room. She encountered the sexism typical of the time.
“’Why do you want to work here?’ the man interviewing her asked.
‘Because I hope to become a writer,’ she replied.
‘Women don’t become writers at Newsweek,’ he said.”
Ephron wrote during her time off and during the 1962 newspaper strike produced a parody of Leonard Lyons’ gossip column in the New York Post. Its publisher at the time, Dorothy Schiff, was savvy enough to hire people for the paper who could write well enough to parody it. When the strike ended, Ephron was on her way with a $98-a-week job as a reporter.
As she would prove throughout her life, Ephron could write gracefully about everything. She was assigned all, from murders to celebrities.
“It may not have been glamorous,” Doidge writes, “but it was everything she’d dreamed of since her mother’s gift of ‘A Treasury of Great Reporting’ she’d received for Christmas as a little girl.”
Around the time she became engaged to her first husband, Dan Greenburg, Ephron decided to try magazine writing. Newspaper writers had taken to freelancing and producing longer, deeper, and more personal pieces during the strike. Ephron would go on to publish several books of profiles and essays.
All three of Ephron’s husbands were writers. Her widower, Nicholas Pileggi, wrote “Goodfellas.” She had two sons with her second husband, Carl Bernstein. He cheated on her, but she exacted revenge in “Heartburn,” a roman-a-clef novel about an adulterous husband.
Doidge’s book recounts a delicious quote from Ephron about Bernstein, who broke the Watergate story with Bob Woodward.
From left to right: Adam Sandler, director Nora Ephron and Steve Martin on the set of "Mixed Nuts" in 1994. (TriStar Pictures/Courtesy Everett Collection)
“For many years, I have lived with the secret of Deep Throat’s identity,” Ephron had said. “It has been hell, and I have dealt with the situation by telling anyone who pretty much asked me, including total strangers, who Deep Throat was. Not for nothing is indiscretion my middle name.”
Those two sentences explain why she spoke to women whose husbands had cheated on them and why she is a goddess among the writers who followed her.
The bio follows Ephron through her hard work with her sister, Delia Ephron, as they wrote together. Ephron’s screenplays included “Silkwood,” “When Harry Met Sally,” “Sleepless in Seattle,” “Michael,” “You’ve Got Mail,” and “Julie & Julia,” several of which she directed.
Three years after her novel “Heartburn” was published, it was released as a film. Ephron’s mentor Mike Nichols directed, and Meryl Streep and Jack Nicholson starred.
As she was moving into films, Rob Reiner recalls lunch meetings with Ephron and how she ordered: “I’ll have the avocado and bacon sandwich with sprouts, please, but I’d like the mayonnaise on the side, the bread toasted and slightly burnt, and the bacon crisp.”
The director knew that had to go into the script for “When Harry Met Sally.” Ephron made ordering food an art. That specificity became so famous that later, while ordering on a plane, the flight attendant asked Ephron if she had ever seen the movie.
Her final play, “Lucky Guy,” about former Daily News and Post columnist Mike McAlary and the usual newsroom denizens, starring Tom Hanks, opened on Broadway after she died.
Nora Ephron (left) and J.J. Sacha engaged in a very academic biscuit dialogue with Ed Levine and modeling biscuits at the Serious Eats offices in New York in 2009.  (Robyn Lee for Serious Eats)
What comes through is that Ephron made everyone feel special; her opinion mattered, her presence was vital. And how, even toward the end, when she had been diagnosed with myelodysplasia, she didn’t stop – not to tell friends and certainly not to wallow. She had too much to do.
Plus, if it leaked out, then her movie projects would not get funded. Ephron was determined to keep her diagnosis secret. Only her closest circle knew.
From all accounts, Ephron was inclusive and collaborative on movie sets, listening to ideas, collaborating, and ensuring everyone was very well fed. Actors would worry about the weight they packed on during Ephron’s movies.
Director Nora Ephron on the set of "This is my life," in 1992.  (20thCentFox/Courtesy Everett Collection)
“She was organized and as precise as a surgeon when it came to the way she approached the story, her collaborators said, and on the business side, she had developed a reputation for turning in movies on time and on budget.”
Along the way, she kept encouraging people, especially young journalists whom, she told, “keep scribbling.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

On a residential block in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, a nondescript eatery has become all the rage by putting an inventive twist on a New York staple.
The Black-owned Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. attracts celebrities and regular crowds alike thanks to its unusual pizza toppings: oxtail, jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles and black truffle alfredo shrimp. The white and red pies sell from $21 to $100.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren, pictured here.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
Opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren, a former high-end sneaker “concierge,” the shop has over 100,000 followers across social media platforms including Instagram, Facebook, TikTok and Twitter, and has catered to such celebs as model Chanel Iman, hip hoppers Pharrell Williams, Lil Yachty, The Lox and Jim Jones, as well as pro football stars Victor Cruz and Sterling Shepard.
The VH1 reality show “Black Ink Crew” has scheduled a taping at the venue this week.
But McIaren particularly enjoys keeping his local clientele fed and happy.
“I’m here for the community, and this community don’t have nothing like it,” Mclaren told the Daily News. “All these kids just running into the Chinese restaurant, which is kind of what I grew up on ... We don’t get to try new things. We don’t get to expand our taste buds. So you got to think about these people that’s in Bed-Stuy. Ninety percent of my customers didn’t even know what a truffle was. I want to change that.”
The Black-owned eatery offers unusual toppings: Jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles, fried salmon diavlo, black truffle alfredo shrimp.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
On an average day, 100 pies are sold, and on weekends, cars are double-parked from one end of the street to the other. About 90% of his customers are New Yorkers mostly from Brooklyn, but he recalled a group of Brazilians coming in every day one recent week and trying different slices.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn, New York, was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
A native of East Flatbush, Mclaren runs the shop with his wife, Ashlee. He learned the restaurant business working at a local pizzeria in his teens and then toiling for national chains such as IHOP, TGI Fridays, Friendly’s, Red Lobster and even Brooklyn favorite Junior’s.
Mclaren then launched a successful sneaker resale business that flourished on social media, attracting clientele like British Formula One superstar Lewis Hamiltonand music stars Rihanna, Cardi B and Offset. But when the business started to fade, a friend approached him to open a pizza shop.
“If I put my name on it, we got to use the best of the best ingredients and we’ve got to come up with something different because we’re in New York City and we’re off the beaten path,” he said. ”So I started thinking outside the box.”
He first hit pay dirt making 20 pizza pies loaded with lobster and shrimp and selling them for $100 each. He sold out in four hours.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn, New York, was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren. The Black-owned eatery offers unusual toppings: Jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles, fried salmon diavlo, black truffle alfredo shrimp. The white and red pies sell from $21 to $100. (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
The oxtail pizza soon became a menu favorite. “It took about two or three times to get it where I thought it would be perfect,” he shared. It takes two staffers up to two hours to debone 30 to 40 pounds of the juicy meat daily, he said.
While his social media savvy has helped grow his business, Mclaren credits his customers for being willing to try something that’s “new and different.”
Cuts & Slices offers unusual toppings: The Tulum pie, inspired by a recent vacation to the exclusive Mexican resort destination, was designed by Randy Mclaren's wife Ashlee.  It's topped with ground beef, jalapenos, fried ripe sweet plantains and Mexican cheese. (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
“I think it’s due to the fact that it’s something so unique. No one else actually has oxtail pizza, or has actually put lobster, shrimp and black truffle alfredo on pizza.”
“It’s something different that draws people from all over the country,” he said. “And once they try it the first time and pretty much blows their mind, they fall in love with the pizza. And they keep coming back and tell all of their friends about it.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

With the Highland Park shooting on the nation’s 246th birthday, the U.S. had marked its 309th mass shooting this year, according to a nonprofit that tracks gunfire incidents.
To date this year, there have been on average 11 mass shootings per week, the nonprofit Gun Violence Archive’s data show. The group classifies an incident as a mass shooting when four or more people, excluding the shooter, are shot or killed.
Law enforcement search after a mass shooting at the Highland Park Fourth of July parade in downtown Highland Park, Ill., a suburb of Chicago, on Monday, July 4, 2022.  (Nam Y. Huh/AP)
At least six people were killed and 30 or more wounded Monday when a gunman rained bullets down upon an Independence Day parade in an affluent suburb about 25 miles north of downtown Chicago. The gunman, who as of Monday afternoon was still at large, found his way to a rooftop to wreak his havoc as hundreds of people, including parents with strollers and kids on bikes, fled the scene.
A Lake Forest, Ill., police officer walks down Central Ave in Highland Park, Ill., on Monday, July 4, 2022, after a shooter fired on the northern suburb's Fourth of July parade.  (Brian Cassella/AP)
A massive manhunt was underway as police urged people to shelter in place Monday afternoon. Police sought a slightly built white man, between ages 18 and 20, with long black hair and wearing a white or blue T-shirt.
Two police officers stand their at post the day after a deadly mass shooting on the Westside of Highland Park, Ill. on Tuesday, July 5, 2022, as the American flag flies at half-staff on the Eastside. A shooter fired on an Independence Day parade from a rooftop, spraying the crowd with gunshots initially mistaken for fireworks before hundreds of panicked revelers of all ages fled in terror. (Charles Rex Arbogast/AP)
On Monday evening, police identified 22-year-old area resident Robert Crimo III as a person of interest. He was driving a silver 2010 Honda Fit, and cops said he should be considered armed and dangerous.
Highland Park Police Commander Chris O’Neill urged people to shelter in place as police sought the killer in a “very active apprehension effort.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The LGBTQ community is finally coming out — of the shadows of COVID.
After two years of virtual celebrations, fully-masked demonstrations, socially-distanced commemorations and full-on cancellations, LGBTQ Pride month is here again.
While the pandemic is far from over, a combination of vaccinations, booster shots and CDC-approved antiviral drugs all point to a Pride month, where your biggest fear is what you are missing out on.
So, fear not. Here’s a little guide to get you started.
Famous LGBTQ artists at Livingston Public Library
Art educator and painter Suzanne Altman explores the lives, works, and impact of some of the world’s best-known openly LGBTQ artists in this presentation about how they have used their art as a tool for social and political change. Expect to hear about Keith Haring, David Hockney, Catherine Opie, John Singer Sargent, and Diane Arbus — and also about those who were less open about their sexuality, including Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci. Free, no registration required. 7 p.m. 10 Robert H Harp Dr, Livingston, NJ
Pride Night at Payette Brewery in Boise, Idaho
Official Pride celebrations in Idaho’s capital city won’t start until September, but that didn’t stop the Boise Gay Men’s Chorus and the Boise Women’s Chorus to mark Pride Month with a Taproom Takeover at Payette Brewery. The choruses, whose mission is to open hearts and minds through music, are organizing the event to highlight positive community LGBTQ awareness. Music lovers of all ages are invited. Payette Brewery will donate 50% of beer sales to the groups. 6-10 p.m. 733 S. Pioneer St Boise, Idaho.
PrideFest at Abington Free Library
LGBTQ kids, teens, their families and friends are invited to celebrate Pride Month at a celebration with crafts, music, food, giveaways, a story corner, as well as a meet-and-greet with local authors Eric Bell (”Alan Cole is Not a Coward”) and Charles A. Busch, whose debut book, ”Every Variable of Us,” was named by Vogue Teen as one of “25 Books by Black Authors We Can’t Wait to Read in 2022.″ Free, no registration required. 6 - 7:30 p.m. Raindate: June 21. 1030 Old York Road, Abington, Pa.
Kids, teens, and their families are invited to join us for PrideFest!  Crafts, music, food, giveaways, community organizations, story corner and more!  Meet local LGBTQ+ authors Charles Bush and Eric Bell, and purchase their books! pic.twitter.com/ukeA8KeF0J
Celebrate Pride: Stonewall & Greenwich Village LGBT History Tour
Honor history and celebrate Pride by walking along the same path explored by previous generations who fought for the rights of the LGBTQ community of yesterday and today. Ken Lustbader and Jay Shockley, co-directors of the NYC LGBT Historic Sites Project, are guiding history buffs and Pride enthusiasts through a tour of sites associated with the early LGBTQ activism and history, which influenced culture, politics, and behavior in the U.S. 6 p.m. Christopher St. at W. Fourth St., Manhattan
Celia Gooding, left, and Laila Kelly pose for a picture in front of the Stonewall Inn before the Queer Liberation March in New York, Sunday, June 30, 2019. (Seth Wenig/AP)
“The Women’s House of Detention: A Queer History of a Forgotten Prison” Eric Marcus in conversation with author Hugh Ryan at Housing Works Bookstore
The incredible story about a little-known prison in Greenwich Village that housed tens of thousands of queer women, trans men and gender-nonconforming people between 1929 and 1974, most of them incarcerated for being improperly feminine, is the subject of a new book by award-winning author and historian Hugh Ryan. “The Women’s House of Detention” has been hailed by critics as a “vital contribution to LGBTQ history” that is “compelling from start to finish.” Ryan sits down with fellow LGBTQ history extraordinaire Eric Marcus, founder and host of the “Making Gay History” podcast, for a conversation about his latest work. 1 p.m. 126 Crosby St., Manhattan
“Edie Windsor: Champion for Marriage Equality” at the New-York Historical Society
The legacy of one of the greatest warriors in the fight for LGBTQ history in the U.S. is being highlighted by New York City’s oldest museum. Edith (Edie) Windsor, who died in 2017 at the age of 88, was the lead plaintiff in the 2013 Sumpre Court case that overturned Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act, a landmark victory that forced the federal government to recognize same-sex marriages. “Edie Windsor was a trailblazer in every sense of the word,” Louise Mirrer, the museum’s president and CEO told the Daily News. “We’re commemorating Pride Month with this special installation featuring the suit she wore to the Supreme Court in 2013 as she advocated for marriage equality, and we’re honored these items will be joining the New-York Historical Society’s collection,” she added. Runs through Oct. 9. 170 Central Park West, Manhattan.
Edith Windsor attends the New York City Gay Pride 2017 march on June 25, 2017  in New York City. (Dimitrios Kambouris/Getty Images)
Naima Green: “A Sequence for Squeezing” at Baxter St at the Camera Club of New York
A new exhibition by the artist and photographer Naima Green, in which she explores play and pleasure while focusing on the experiences of Black, Brown, and queer individuals, opens at Baxter St at the Camera Club of New York, an artist-run organization and one of the city’s oldest art nonprofit spaces. “A Sequence for Squeezing” is centered around two sequences of photographs in which the artist turns her camera toward solitary moments of pleasure and relief — an expansion of themes Green visited in previous works, such as the sensuality of enjoying food, and the exploration of water as a site for pleasure and freedom. Opening reception: 6 - 8 p.m. Runs through July 23. 126 Baxter St., Manhattan.
Our Night Out Wilmington: Pride Month celebration
Our Night Out is a social group for members of the LGBTQ community in Willmington, Del., that meets on the third Thursday of the month. Naturally, that means that Our Night Outters are celebrating Pride this week. The event will be held at Constitution Yards, a pet-friendly seasonal beer garden, so participants are free to bring their four-legged friends along. “So grab your friends, come out in your most colorful outfits, grab a few drinks, play a few games, and stay a while,” organizers said. “We’re hoping for a big crowd for Pride month.” Free. 6-9 p.m. 308 Justison St., Willmington, Del.
Saint Paul Seniors Pride in the Park
East Side Elders, a nonprofit that helps senior citizens in St. Paul, Minn., live independently in their own homes is celebrating its first Pride Party. All LGBTQ seniors, their families and caregivers are invited for a night at the Phalen Picnic Pavilion. The event will include dinner, a dance party, a variety show and more. A limited number of rides are available. Call (651) 808-1901 to RSVP. Free, 5-8 p.m. 1600 Phalen Drive, St. Paul, Minn.
Save the date for our Pride Party on June 16th! Dinner, Dance Party, and a Variety Show for LGBTQ+ seniors, friends, and caregivers. Join us at the Phalen Pavilion from 5pm to 8pm June 16th! pic.twitter.com/r4n9xjxjFI
Ladyland Festival at Avant Gardner
Ladyland is a Coachella-esque outdoor queer music festival produced by NYC clubland powerhouse Ladyfag — or the “reigning queen of nightlife,” according to Vogue. This colorful celebration of unity and diversity is seen by many as a kick-off to Pride weekend festivities in New York City. This year, the impressive lineup of talent, headlined by superstar DJ Honey Dijon, includes Tinashe, Sevdaliza and “RuPaul’s Drag Race” royalty Vanessa Vanjie. 140 Stewart Ave., Brooklyn
Movies Under the Stars: “Pride”
Fire up that popcorn machine, pick up some rainbow cookies and head to Greenwich Village for a special showing of the award-winning 2014 film “Pride.” Based on a true story, this feel-good gem features a group of LGBTQ activists who raise money to help families affected by the 1984 miner’s strike in the U.K. Free, movie begins at dusk, James J Walker Park at Hudson St., Manhattan.
Drag Queen Story Hour Milwaukee: Swimming with Pride 2022
The always-fabulous drag queens of the Milwaukee, Wisc., branch of Drag Queen Story Hour are taking their charisma, uniqueness, nerve and talent to the pool. According to organizers, the event will feature “local merfolk” reading stories to children and their families. The first 50 children receive a free pool pass, so they can jump in the water after the reading. 2 p.m. 1301 W. Hampton Ave.
Da Bronx Pride Week Festival
“RuPaul’s Drag Race” superstar and Bronx native Kandy Muse and Karen Mercedez, from the Netflix Series “The Circle,” are hosting the borough’s biggest Pride celebration. Hosted by Destination Tomorrow, New York’s only Black trans-led LGBTQ center, this all-day event will feature a march, rally, family entertainment, as well as performances by Seduction, the House of Miyake-Mugler, ballroom icon Sinia Alaia, and more. Free, noon-6 p.m, Westchester Ave., between Brook Ave. and Bergen Ave.
LGBTQ Saves Youth Pride Picnic at Trinity Park, Fort Worth, Texas
This free, annual event in North Texas offers a safe space for LGBTQ youth and their families to meet new friends, participate in fun activities, score cool goodie bags, and simply be who they are. Hamburgers and hotdogs will be provided to all participants free of charge. 10 a.m.-2 p.m. Individual sponsors and volunteers needed. 2401 University Dr., Fort Worth
Organizers for this year’s festivities are expecting more than 60,000 Pride enthusiasts from the city and beyond to celebrate LGBTQ life, culture and community. The traditional street festival will feature artists performing in 3 stages, drag shows, DJs, giveaways, over 150 vendors of arts/crafts, food and drinks, and even a pet parade. Performers include “RuPaul’s Drag Race All Stars” winner Alaska Thunderf--k, “Pose” star Dyllón Burnside and Chicago-born rapper CupcakKe. Suggested donation $15. Saturday and Sunday, rain or shine, from 11 a.m. - 10 p.m. Northalsted on Halsted Street from Addison to Grace St, Chicago, Ill.
Confetti flies as people gather at Chicago's Grant Park during the Pride in the Park festival, Saturday, June 26, 2021. (Shafkat Anowar/AP)
New York City’s most colorful riders are going hybrid for their annual Pride Ride this year. Participants of the OutCycling Pride Ride 2022 will have several options to show their Pride in person — from an easy-breezy 30-mile ride to an intimidating century (100 miles) — as well as by riding their own routes from anywhere in the world. A portion of the proceeds will go toward OutCycling’s Fearless Flyers, a program designed to teach cycling and leadership skills to LGBTQ youth. Visit outcycling.org for information.
Black of Center: Juneteenth Block Festival
For one of its first in-person Pride events since 2019, The Center, is hosting a festival to celebrate Juneteenth, focusing on Black LGBTQ artists, storytellers, businesses and vendors. Doors are open to all for an afternoon of music performances, games, storytelling, art-making workshops, community discussions, and more. Free, noon-5 p.m, 208 W. 13th St., Manhattan
Check back next week for Week 4.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Scott Disick is on the market again.
The reality show star, who shares three kids with ex-girlfriend Kourtney Kardashian, has split from model girlfriend Rebecca Donaldson just two months after they went public with their relationship, sources close to him told E! News Thursday.
“Although they had a short-lived romance, it was definitely serious,” the insider said of the relationship, saying it ended in recent weeks. “He enjoyed his time with her but realized he is not in a place to seriously date right now.”
Scott Disick and Rebecca Donaldson attend the premiere of Hulu's new show "The Kardashians" on April 07, 2022 in Los Angeles, Calif. (Emma McIntyre/Getty Images for ABA)
Another source told the outlet that the split was made “amicably,” and that, thanks to the urging of Donaldson, 27, the “Keeping Up with the Kardashians” star might now “spend some time focusing on himself and finding what makes him happy.”
Disick, 39, according to the initial insider, “wants to be single and live freely.”
The couple made their red carpet debut at the April premiere of “The Kardashians” in Los Angeles, which a source told the outlet, resulted from “being out one night and [having] totally hit it off.”
In response to the recent engagements of exes Sofia Richie and Kardashian, Disick posted on Instagram in late April, “In the 305 just call me good luck chuck.”
The 2007 flick, “Good Luck Chuck,” sees Dane Cook as a man who discovers he’s the last man many women sleep with right before they meet their soulmate.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A model presents a creation during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring/Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week in Paris, France on June 23, 2022. (JULIEN DE ROSA/AFP via Getty Images)
A model presents a creation during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring/Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week in Paris, France on June 23, 2022. (JULIEN DE ROSA/AFP via Getty Images)
A model presents a creation during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring/Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week in Paris, France on June 23, 2022. (JULIEN DE ROSA/AFP via Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model, bag detail, walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A band walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France. (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France. (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model, bag detail, walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model, bag detail, walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
The design team walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France. (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The umps at the Tony Awards have made their call: “Take Me Out” was a home run.
The buzzy take on Richard Greenberg’s story about the chaos that ensues when a star Major League Baseball player comes out as gay won the Tony for best play revival on Sunday.
Jesse Williams, center, and cast during a performance of the Broadway revival of the baseball-themed "Take Me Out," in New York. (Joan Marcus/AP)
The well-reviewed production received some unwanted attention this spring after a theatergoer managed to film one of the play’s stars, Jesse Williams, naked during a performance, and posted the video online.
The award on Sunday brought attention on the fast-paced play back into fair territory.
“Take Me Out” beat out a packed field of contenders in the best play revival category that included “American Buffalo,” “For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf,” “How I Learned to Drive” and “Trouble in Mind.”
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
The original Broadway production of “Take Me Out” crossed home with the best play honor at the 2003 Tony Awards. The revival closed Saturday.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Winners and losers ]
The revival was boosted by an oh-so-cool performance from Williams as Darren Lemming, the ball club’s star, a side-splitting turn from Jesse Tyler Ferguson as the outfielder’s business manager and an intense outing from Michael Oberholtzer as the team’s homophobic flamethrowing closer.
All three earned Tony nominations in the best featured actor in a play category, and Ferguson won.
“If you’re going to lose, lose to Jesse Tyler Ferguson,” Oberholtzer cracked to reporters on Sunday night.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

METHODOLOGY | The best beaches aren’t all necessarily just great places to swim. When curating this list, we considered which beaches stood out in terms of how pristine or distinctive their sand is, how clear the waters are, what kind of food and activities are available or even the kind of party scene they provide. Some of these beaches have been featured in movies, television shows and even hit songs. Others have won awards and recognition from travel publications and websites such as Travel + Leisure, National Geographic, Condé Nast Traveler and TripAdvisor. (Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock)
The beach can be a mesmerizing place filled with photogenic spots and relaxation.  These beaches are some of the best in the world. (Syjil Ashraf, The Active Times)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The shooting of drill rapper Avanti Frowner, 27, aka Vontae, is shot and killed during a robbery at a Bronx pharmacy. (New York Daily News Exclusive)
Police on Saturday released images of the five muggers wanted for killing Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at a Bronx pharmacy.
Victim Avanti Frowner, 27, who raps under the Vontae stage name, was in New York City to scout out locations for a music video set to be filmed later in the month when he was killed at the Amazing Community Pharmacy on E. Tremont Ave. near Arthur Ave. in Tremont at about 1:40 p.m. Thursday, police said.
Shooting victim and Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae.  (YouTube)
Vontae and a friend from California traveling with him were buying over-the-counter eye drops at the pharmacy when two of the five suspects approached, wanting to know if he wanted to buy some pot, police sources said.
The rapper declined, but the two weed sellers and three others demanded his property and his gold chain, which carried his signature nameplate, cops said.
Surveillance footage obtained by the Daily News shows Vontae and a man wearing a white T-shirt and white do-rag struggling inside the pharmacy as a terrified employee crouches behind the counter.
As an attacker forcefully pulls Vontae to the ground, three other suspects storm the store and pile on top of him while drug store employees run down a staircase into the basement, the video shows.
The employee crouched behind the counter and moves to the back of the store while one of the men hit Vontae over the head with a long umbrella.
Images of the murder of Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at  the Amazing Community Pharmacy on E. Tremont Ave. near Arthur Ave. in the Bronx on Thursday, June 9, 2022.
The do-rag-wearing assailant fumbled with a gun before he shot the drill rapper several times.
As Vontae laid on the floor of the pharmacy bleeding, he fired another shot into his chest before he took off with the massive “Moneygang Vontae” nameplate from his neck, cops said.
EMS rushed Vontae to St. Barnabas Hospital, where he died.
The NYPD released these pictures of the suspects in the killing of Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at a Bronx pharmacy.  (NYPD / DCPI)
He and his friend had arrived in the city Thursday morning, checked into a hotel near the pharmacy and left, but only his companion returned, telling the front desk clerk Vontae had been killed.
It was not immediately clear if the muggers knew who Vontae was, even though Moneygang Vontae posted photos of himself wearing the nameplate in the Bronx shortly before the shooting.
So far, the robbery and the killing appeared to be a crime of opportunity, a police source said.
NYPD officers investigate the shooting of rapper Moneygang Vontae, at the Amazing Pharmacy in the Bronx. (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
The drill rap music genre continues to capture police attention. Rappers belittle and call out rival gang members in their hit songs, fueling gun violence across the city, police say.
Cops released the images of the muggers in the hopes that someone recognizes them.
Anyone with information regarding their whereabouts is urged to call NYPD Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS. All calls will be kept confidential.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A man missing since early May fell into a plastic shredder and died at the recycling facility in South Carolina where he worked with his father.
Spartanburg County Coroner Rusty Clevenger revealed investigators discovered dried blood and small pieces of human remains in the heavy-duty machinery at Industrial Recovery and Recycling in Greer. They were identified as belonging to 22-year-old Duncan Alexander Burrell Gordon, who was last seen feeding the shredder as he worked the night shift on May 5.
22-year-old Duncan Alexander Burrell Gordon was last seen feeding the shredder as he worked the night shift on May 5.
Celvenger said the machinery involved was inspected four times since Gordon’s disappearance, including once by the missing man’s father, who worked as a supervisor at the recycling facility. During their final search attempt, which also included cadaver dogs, investigators uncovered small pieces of human fat and bone on and under a conveyor belt that feeds the shredded plastic to second machine, according to a press release obtained by The State.
“I can confirm the material is consistent with human fat, microscopically minute particles of skin and small pieces of bone,” Clevenger said
A forensic anthropologist and a forensic pathologist hired by the coroner’s office said the machine has been shut down and turned back several times and 60,000 pounds of plastic material has been processed in the weeks since Gordon vanished.
The South Carolina Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the Spartanburg County Sheriff’s Office are investigating the incident.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The driver behind the wheel of a truck powered by jet engines died Saturday while racing two airplanes at a Michigan air show.
Chris Darnell, 40, was demonstrating his truck, which can go more than 300 mph, at the Battle Creek Field of Flight Air Show and Balloon Festival Saturday when he crashed, according to the Battle Creek Police Department.
Chris Darnell, 40, was demonstrating his truck, which can go more than 300 mph, at the Battle Creek Field of Flight Air Show and Balloon Festival Saturday, July 2, 2022, when he was killed. (SHOCKWAVE Jet Trucks)
Video from the scene shows the Shockwave Jet Truck, with flames shooting out of the back, speeding down the runway at Battle Creek Executive Airport before crossing through a massive fireball. When the car emerges on the other side, it begins flipping and pieces fly through the air.
“Just one month ago Chris turned 40,” his father, Neal Darnell, wrote on Facebook. “He was so well loved by everyone who knew him. Chris so loved the air show business. He was ‘Living the Dream’ as he said.”
The air show continued as scheduled Sunday but has been dedicated to Darnell. More than $2,000 has been raised for his family so far.
“Words cannot describe the heartbreak we are experiencing,” the Battle Creek Field of Flight board members and volunteers said in a joint statement Sunday.
“The Darnells have been a part of our event numerous times over the years and our hearts have been with them since the incident occurred.”
According to his Shockwave biography, Darnell had “been involved in motorsports his entire life.”
The cause of the accident is still under investigation, the Battle Creek Police Department said.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The latest “Thor” movie is off to a thunderous start.
“Thor: Love and Thunder” opened with $143 million in North America over the weekend to dominate the box office and set a new high mark for a “Thor” film in its debut.
Only “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness,” which opened with $187 million in May, and “Jurassic World Dominion,” which debuted with $145 million last month, had bigger first weekends in 2022.
Directed by Taika Waititi, “Love and Thunder” depicts a reunion between Chris Hemworth’s Thor and Natalie Portman’s Jane Foster, who obtains superhuman abilities and becomes a new hero known as the Mighty Thor.
The film sees Thor, Mighty Thor and Tessa Thompson’s Valkyrie team up as they try to defeat the villainous Gorr the God Butcher, portrayed by Christian Bale.
The $143 million opening eclipsed the previous record for a “Thor” film that was held by 2017′s “Ragnarok,” which debuted with $122 million.
En esta imagen proporcionada por Marvel Studios, Natalie Portman y Chris Hemsworth en una escena de "Thor: Love and Thunder". (Jasin Boland/Marvel Studios-Disney via AP) (Jasin Boland/AP)
[ Natalie Portman, Tessa Thompson discuss the power of portraying female superheroes in ‘Thor: Love and Thunder’ ]
Waititi, Russell Crowe and Chris Pratt also have roles in “Love and Thunder,” which added another $159 million internationally over the weekend to bring its global gross to $302 million.
Finishing second at the North American box office was the animated “Minions: The Rise of Gru,” which made $45.6 million between Friday and Sunday.
The family film, which provides an origin story for Steve Carell’s “Despicable Me” villain, has now made $210 million domestically and $399 globally since its July 1 release.
“Top Gun: Maverick” also continued to soar, adding $15.5 million in North America over the weekend. Serving as the follow-up to 1986′s “Top Gun,” the high-flying sequel is up to $597 million domestically and nearly $1.2 billion worldwide, making it the highest-grossing movie of 2022.
Tom Cruise returned for the sequel as the hotshot pilot Maverick, who must train a new generation of Navy aviators.
Rounding out the Top 5 over the weekend were Baz Luhrmann’s “Elvis” biopic, which made $11 million domestically in its third weekend in theaters, and the dinosaur epic “Jurassic World Dominion,” which made $8.4 million during its fifth weekend.
Up next for movie theaters are the animated “Paws of Fury” and the mystery thriller “Where the Crawdads Sing,” which both come out Friday, followed by Jordan Peele’s latest horror film, “Nope,” out July 22.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The victim was shot in the head outside the studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. He died at the scene. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
A 21-year-old man was shot dead leaving a Queens recording studio early Monday, police said.
Tyda Darden was shot in the head outside the Rockwell Studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. He died at the scene.
Cops recovered shell casings from three different guns they believe were used during an exchange of gunfire that killed Darden, who was found inside the door of the studio lying in a pool of blood, a police source said.
Tyda Darden was shot in the head outside the studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
There were no immediate arrests, and the motive was not clear.
Chilling video of the ambush from a distance shows a man getting out of a parked white BMW and walking toward the studio while grabbing a gun from his lower pants leg as several others exit the studio. At least two men in the studio crowd then fire toward the BMW, and the approaching gunman opens fire at them. He then heads back to the BMW, appears to drop a gun into the car and runs into the Halsey St. L train station.
It wasn’t clear if Darden was one of the shooters that emerged from the studio.
Sources said Darden, who lived in Brooklyn, was expecting a child with his girlfriend.
He was a member of the Structure Gang and had a 2020 loaded-gun arrest on his record, according to cops. He was out on bail on the gun charge and due back in court later this month, public records show.
Neighbors said the studio Darden was killed outside of has brought trouble to the block since it opened a few years ago. Young men gather late at night to film music videos, according to neighbors.
“They come, they park everywhere, in front of the pump, the crosswalk,” said a neighbor who declined to give his name who’s lived in the area for 45 years. “It’s not surprising what happened. ... Ever since that studio opened there’s always something happening.”
The building where Darden was killed houses other businesses, including a studio where Woodrow Allbright, 50, records a podcast, “Brooklyn General Zone,” that deals with gun violence and other issues facing young New Yorkers.
“My thing is, these kids don’t have no resources,” he said. “The only thing they have is their voices. A lot of them, they’re speaking from anger, or whatever emotional standpoint they’re from or whatever they’re going through and they put it into their music.”
“None of these kids are born bad,” he added. “But with the environment they’re in, they’re conditioned to grow up and be like what they see.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

It’s no joke: President Biden is set to appear in person on “Jimmy Kimmel Live.”
Biden’s interview on the ABC program in Hollywood will take place Wednesday, marking his first in-person sit-down on a late-night show since being sworn into the Oval Office in January 2021.
Few other details have been released about Biden’s appearance, which was announced Sunday during Game 2 of the NBA Finals.
“Our very elected President @JoeBiden visits @JimmyKimmelLive Wednesday night. No malarkey,” host Jimmy Kimmel tweeted.
President Joe Biden and Jimmy Kimmel (AP)
Biden is scheduled to appear this week with other leaders at the Summit of the Americas in Los Angeles to discuss a “sustainable, resilient, and equitable future” for the Western Hemisphere, his administration says.
His appearance on “Kimmel” marks his latest crossover with the entertainment world since beginning his presidency. Last week, Biden met with the seven-member Korean-pop group BTS to discuss anti-Asian hate crimes and inclusion.
And last year, Biden welcomed pop star Olivia Rodrigo to the White House to encourage young people to get vaccinated against COVID-19.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The rapper Trouble, an accomplished artist from Atlanta whose big-name collaborators included hip-hop stars Drake, Quavo and Fetty Wap, was fatally shot in Georgia, officials said.
Trouble, 34, whose real name was Mariel Semonte Orr, died of a gunshot wound at a hospital Sunday after authorities with the Rockdale County Sheriff’s Office responded to an apartment complex after 3 a.m., the Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported.
Trouble in Atlanta in 2020. (Paras Griffin/Getty Images  for Starz)
The sheriff’s office didn’t immediately respond to a request from the Daily News for comment Monday, but said in a Facebook announcement that 33-year-old Jamicheal L. Jones is wanted for murder, aggravated assault, home invasion and battery.
Officials say Jones didn’t know the rapper, but knew a woman that Trouble was said to be visiting at the apartment complex, according to the Journal-Constitution.
The rapper’s death was confirmed Sunday by his record label, Def Jam.
“Our thoughts and prayers are with the children, loved ones, and fans of Trouble,” the label’s post reads. “A true voice for his city and an inspiration to the community he proudly represented.”
Trouble released his debut album, “Edgewood,” in 2018. The album included the songs “Bring it Back,” which features Drake, “Come Thru,” which features The Weeknd, and “Rider,” which features Quavo and Fetty Wap.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

It’s safe to say the play earned interest.
“The Lehman Trilogy,” an ambitious retelling of the 163-year rise and fall of Lehman Brothers, won the Tony Award for best new play on Sunday, topping a field of well-crafted productions.
Adam Godley, Simon Russell Beale, Adrian Lester in "The Lehman Trilogy." (Julieta Cervantes)
Across more than three hours — so long it had two intermissions — the epic play wowed audiences in a run that began four days before the pandemic started and ended in January.
Ben Power harnessed the masterwork from Stefano Massini, an Italian playwright, in an English-language adaptation, and Sam Mendes directed the production.
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
With the win, “The Lehman Trilogy” beat out the gripping “Skeleton Crew,” set at a distressed Detroit auto plant during the Great Recession, and the dark and surprising mystery “Hangmen,” about an English executioner who has hung up his noose.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Winners and losers ]
It also topped “The Minutes,” a brisk take on small-town government with a twist ending, and “Clyde’s,” a comedy about ex-convicts working at a sandwich shop.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

“Queer as Folk” is supposed to be a wild, fun, exhilarating peek into a tight-knit queer community in New Orleans. Then there’s a shooting at a gay nightclub.
The Peacock series, premiering Thursday and labeled a “reimagining” of Russell T. Davies’ original British show, draws almost immediately from the 2016 shooting at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando that left 49 people dead. For showrunner Stephen Dunn, showing the reality of this world was the only way to keep the authenticity he strove for.
“This isn’t a show about a shooting. This isn’t a show about a shooter,” Dunn told the Daily News.
“But what I learned from going to Orlando and meeting some of the survivors was seeing how the community came together, the support that happened after that. It was so inspiring and it gave me hope. I wanted to honor those experiences by making the show in an authentic way and figure out how to rebuild in a way that’s bigger, better, safer and more inclusive than the spaces that existed before it.”
[ ‘Queer as Folk’ isn’t going to teach you about gay sex ]
Fin Argus stars in “Queer as Folk.”  (Peacock/Peacock)
“Queer as Folk’s” New Orleans rebuilds after the shooting in peaks and valleys. The almost daily funerals are turned into celebrations, because the alternative, the grief, is too overwhelming. If you don’t swim, you drown.
“So many times when tragedies occur, we just focus on the bad thing,” Devin Way, who plays the floundering medical school dropout Brodie, told The News. “We don’t focus on the people and their lives after the fact, in the aftermath. It was super important to me to focus on the healing and who these people become through their emergence.
None of that is to say that the show forgets about the shooting; the horrors of that night ripple out all season through the entire community, not just the survivors. But it doesn’t get mired in the misery. They go back to work and school. The reporters leave town. The crime scene tape disappears. The party starts again. Life goes on.
“In ‘Queer as Folk,’ we’re into all types of porn,” writer and co-executive producer Ryan O’Connell, who also stars as Julian, told The News, “except for trauma porn.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

One resident and two firefighters were injured in a massive smoke-filled blaze that tore through two Brooklyn homes Saturday — while two waterlogged cats that survived the flames were pulled from the soggy debris, cops said.
The three-alarm fire erupted in a home on Sumpter St. near Thomas Boyland St. in Brownsville about 10:30 a.m. and quickly spread to the neighboring address.
The acrid smell of smoke alerted one resident to the blaze.
One of two cats rescued in a fire that started inside one Sumpter St. home in Brownsville, Brooklyn, on Saturday and quickly spread to a neighboring home.  (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
“These houses are connected together, so the smoke travels through the walls,” said one resident, who would only identify himself as Tony. “I ran to the back and saw the smoke coming through the wall. When I went downstairs, the firefighters were already chopping my door down.”
An elderly resident of the home where the fire started narrowly missed the dangerous blaze, leaving to go to Harlem when the fire broke out, his son Seku Gathers told the Daily News.
A three-alarm blaze erupted in a home on Sumpter St. near Thomas Boyland St. in Brownsville, Brooklyn, about 10:30 a.m. Saturday and quickly spread to the neighboring address.  (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
“I live in New Jersey and (a neighbor) called me and said, ‘Your dad’s house is on fire!’” said Gathers. “I raced over here to make sure he wasn’t in the home. We couldn’t get a hold of him at first, but we learned he wasn’t in the house.”
Gathers’ childhood home was totally gutted before the fire was fully extinguished by 12:15 p.m.
“Now it’s down... finished,” Gathers, 45, said, looking at the burnt husk where his father’s home once stood. “We had a lot of memories here. At least (my father) wasn’t in the house. That’s the important thing. He wasn’t in the house.”
The landlord for the home that first erupted in flames was taken to the hospital with serious injuries. His name was not released. Two firefighters also suffered minor injuries, an FDNY spokesman said.
Two cats were rescued by firefighters during a fire that started inside a Sumpter St. home and spread to a neighbor's house in Brownsville, Brooklyn, on Saturday.  (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
Two waterlogged cats were also found in the home by firefighters sifting through the rubble.
The felines, visibly unhappy about being sopping wet, were pulled from the charred debris and placed in a box to dry off.
The cause of the fire was under investigation, an FDNY spokesman said.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

CHICKEN WILD RICE SOUP | This chicken wild rice soup can be made in an Instant Pot for a speedy weeknight meal. The chickpeas and wild rice give the creamy soup a boost of nutrients and if you want, you could even leave out the chicken for a vegetarian version. You can make this ahead and freeze for later too — just don’t add in the dairy until you reheat it on the stove. For the Chicken Wild Rice soup recipe, click here. (Photo Courtesy Karrie Truman, Happy Money Saver)
Rice is the pantry staple that keeps on giving. It’s one of those groceries you can store for years, and it can help to stretch a meal to fill your belly for cheap. And while it generally plays sidekick for most meals, in some parts of the world like Asia and the Middle East, it’s the star of the show in the most delectable dishes. So why can’t rice always have that treatment? From Instant Pot rice pudding and cheesy casseroles to authentic Indian biryani and creole jambalaya, these dishes will transform that cup of rice into something truly spectacular.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A new Marvel hero, some really old dragons and Neil Patrick Harris, all just in time for summer.
Here are the buzziest new TV shows of the season to watch, try or avoid — based solely on trailers and descriptions (no spoilers here).
[ Spring 2022 TV preview: What to watch, try and avoid ]
“Irma Vep,” June 6, HBO
Alicia Vikander has been tasked to lose her mind playing Mira, an American actress who, disillusioned with her life, moves to France to star in a remake of a French silent film classic about an underground crime organization called “The Vampires.” But as Mira gets deeper into production, she begins to lose track of what’s real and what’s script. If the show can avoid falling into ugly stereotypes about crazy women, it could be a fascinating study of fiction, reality and everything in between.
“Ms. Marvel,” June 8, Disney+
Obviously, the person best suited to save the world is a teenage girl from New Jersey. Who else? After more superhero movies than you can count about buff white guys named Chris, Kamala Khan (Iman Vellani), a Pakistani-American high school student from Jersey City finally gets her MCU show as she figures out how to control the cosmic energy she can create from a magic bangle. Let the girls run the show.
“Queer as Folk,” June 9, Peacock
A “reimagining” of Russell T Davies’ groundbreaking show, “Queer as Folk” is set in New Orleans this time and follows a group of LGBTQ friends, reeling from a Pulse-like shooting and trying to get back to their brand of normal.
“The Summer I Turned Pretty,” June 17, Prime Video
Remember those empty teenage years where you just floated by, untethered from the realities and miseries of the world? “The Summer I Turned Pretty” isn’t quite as rose-colored, but Jenny Han’s (“To All The Boys”) adaptation of the first book of her same-named trilogy promises a hazy throwback to when life was at least a little easier, littered with teenage crushes and cotillion dresses.
“Loot,” June 24, Apple TV+
One of the first images released of “Loot” was of Maya Rudolph and an alpaca. Do you need more? How about Rudolph as a rich woman whose life is turned upside down when her husband betrays her, leaving her with nothing but the tabloid headlines and a charity foundation that wants nothing to do with her drama? Bring on the alpaca.
“Black Bird,” July 8, Apple TV+
This doesn’t exactly sound like an odd couple comedy, but the series, based on James Keene and Hillel Levin’s true crime memoir “In With The Devil: A Fallen Hero, A Serial Killer, and A Dangerous Bargain for Redemption,” sets up two unlikely partners: a police officer’s son (Taron Egerton) doing 10 years for drug dealing and a serial killer (Paul Walter Hauser). If the former can extract a confession from the latter, he gets out early. What happens behind bars doesn’t stay behind bars if you’re a narc.
“House of the Dragon” (Ollie Upton/HBO)
“House of the Dragon,” Aug. 21, HBO
Nothing said here is going to sway your decision in any direction. If you’re still mad about the “Game of Thrones” finale, you’re not going to watch the prequel. Or maybe you are because you miss the dragons so much. If you didn’t care about “Game of Thrones” the first time, you’re not going to watch another one.
“The Patient,” Aug. 30, FX
Steve Carell as a therapist trying to talk a serial killer (Domhnall Gleeson) out of killing again while being held hostage could be great or terrible, especially once you throw in the murderer’s mommy issues. What should put “The Patient” on the right side of that line is the creators: Joe Weisberg and Joel Fields, who last made a little show called “The Americans.” If anyone knows how to do damaged relationships, it’s them.
“God’s Favorite Idiot,” June 15, Netflix
Apart, Melissa McCarthy and Ben Falcone are two of the funniest working actors. Together, their work often boils down to ‘yeah, sure, fine,’ which is unfortunate. And yet we just keep giving them second chances. This time, Falcone plays a tech guy who gets struck by lightning and is chosen by God to help save the world. McCarthy plays his girlfriend and Leslie Bibb plays Satan. Yeah, sure, fine.
“God’s Favorite Idiot” (VINCE VALITUTTI/NETFLIX/VINCE VALITUTTI/NETFLIX)
“American Vandal” had a really simple premise: someone drew penises all over a high school and a bunch of teens try to solve the “crime.” The mockumentary style, plus the ridiculousness of the whole thing was addictive. In “Players,” co-creators Tony Yacenda and Dan Perrault are trying to capture the same mockumentary magic, but in the world of League of Legends and an esportsteam trying to capture glory. Sure, gamers are easy material to ridicule, but at some point it just seems a little cruel.
“The Old Man,” June 16, FX
FX’s “The Old Man,” starring Jeff Bridges, is based on Thomas Perry’s 2017 novel of the same name, but if you assumed it was just a ripoff of “Red,” no one would blame you either. A former CIA agent living off the grid who suddenly has to go on the run when an assassin tracks him down? Yeah, Bruce Willis already did that. But hey, “Red” was great, so who are we to complain?
Darren Star’s “Emily in Paris” was the subject of a truly ridiculous level of discourse for a mostly silly show about, well, a girl in Paris. Will his next show, about a newly single gay man in his mid-forties (Neil Patrick Harris) in New York City, cause the same agita among people who think they are too good to just watch a silly show? Please, for all our sakes, say no.
“The Terminal List” (Prime Video)
“The Terminal List,” July 1, Prime Video
Jack Carr’s 2018 novel was a best-seller, praised as an action-packed thriller about a Navy SEAL wrapped up in a government conspiracy after his platoon is ambushed. Chris Pratt as a soldier on a mission and a list of a bunch of people to kill — thus “The Terminal List” — feels like yet another anti-hero who would be better served talking through his feelings.
“Flowers in the Attic: The Origin,” July 9, Lifetime
You know what absolutely no one needs right now? A prequel series about a woman who eventually locks her grandchildren in an attic and, if the trailer is to believed, watched the incest at Foxworth Hall start early.
“Resident Evil,” July 14, Netflix
Resident Evil has been a third-person shooter game, a first-person shooter game, a six-film movie series, some novels and a few comic books. Now it’s a TV show. But has anyone stopped to ask if we actually want to watch another zombie apocalypse?
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

It didn’t take long for Tom Hanks to get all shook up about joining the new “Elvis” biopic.
Director Baz Luhrmann says Hanks jumped at the chance to portray the rock ‘n’ roll icon’s controversial manager, Col. Tom Parker, in the new movie, which hits theaters Friday.
“I went to see him. I said, ‘Look, I want you for this role,’ and usually it takes a month to get someone like that on board,” Luhrmann told the Daily News.
“I told him about the toxic relationship between Col. Tom Parker and Elvis, and honestly 20 minutes in, he just turned to me and said, ‘Well, if you want me, I’m your guy.’ I walked out and honestly I said to my guys, ‘Did he just say yes?’ And he did, and he never looked back.”
Tom Hanks (left) and Baz Luhrmann on the set of "Elvis." (Warner Bros. Pictures)
The movie explores how Parker, a one-time carnival worker, discovered Presley during the 1950s and helped elevate him to mainstream stardom, before being accused years later of financially manipulating the singer.
“The character of Col. Tom Parker is gargantuan,” Luhrmann said. “He’s a gargantuan kind of carny. Think of J. Edgar Hoover plus a carny plus a sort of wackadoo, the Penguin with a chain saw. Mash them all together. He’s that out-there. I thought, ‘You need a really great actor to do it.’ Tom’s not just a great actor of our time, but of all time.”
In addition to showcasing the different eras of Presley’s musical career, “Elvis” covers the artist’s venture into acting, which Parker played a significant role in as well.
[ ‘Elvis’ director Baz Luhrmann says film humanizes the icon, shares how Elvis Presley’s family reacted to it  ]
Austin Butler plays Elvis Presley and Tom Hanks is Col. Tom Parker in "Elvis."  (Warner Bros. Pictures)
Luhrmann, 59, says his favorite Presley movie was one of the star’s earliest: the 1958 musical drama “King Creole.”
“If you look at him in that, he’s really terrific actually, and you really can see that he had great potential to grow as an actor,” Luhrmann said. “Of course, as the (new) film points out, that was stymied.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Jennifer Hudson on Sunday joined the EGOT club, an exclusive group of distinct talents who have won Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony awards.
Hudson, 40, joined the ranks with her producer credit on Michael R. Jackson’s “A Strange Loop,” which won the Tony for best new musical.
Jennifer Hudson arrives at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Evan Agostini/Evan Agostini/Invision/AP)
Hudson, a two-time Grammy winner, received an Academy Award in 2007 for “Dreamgirls,” and an Emmy last year for “Baba Yaga,” an animated short that she helped produce.
[ Jennifer Hudson could become an EGOT at Sunday’s Tony Awards, thanks to ‘A Strange Loop’ producer Barbara Whitman ]
A former “American Idol” contestant, Hudson made her Broadway debut as a cast member in “The Color Purple” in 2015.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Members of the Ukrainian band Kalush Orchestra hope that their win at this year’s Eurovision Song Contest can translate into a much bigger victory — one against the devastating and unprovoked attacks by Russia.
The folk-rap group that mixes traditional Ukrainian rhythms with contemporary hip hop took home the top prize at the 66th edition of the wildly popular music contest that was held in Turin, Italy earlier this month.
On Sunday, the band announced on social media that they raised nearly $1.3 million for the Ukrainian army — after auctioning off the Eurovision trophy and raffling a pink bucket hat worn by band lead singer Oleh Psiuk — as they continue to defend their land from Russian-led forces.
The trophy, a glass microphone designed by the Swedish artist Kjell Engman, fetched $900,000 in the auction. The winning bid was placed by the cryptocurrency exchange platform WhiteBIT.
The winner of the hat, which was worn during the performance, was chosen at random in a raffle. Each ticket cost 200 Ukrainian hryvnia (about $7), with more than 31,088 people trying their luck, for a total of more than $300,000.
Oleh Psiuk, second from right, frontman of Ukraine's Kalush Orchestra, winners of the Eurovision Song Contest, and his band pose with the trophy in Krakovets, at the Ukraine border with Poland, Monday, May 16, 2022.  (Mykola Tys                         /AP)
The winner of the hat was Volodymyr Onyshchuk, a Ukrainian IT engineer who lives in the Czech Republic.
“You guys are amazing! We appreciate each and everyone of you who donated to this auction and a special thanks to the team Whitebit who purchased the trophy for $900,000 and are now the rightful owners of our trophy,” the group wrote on Facebook.
“Glory to Ukraine! Glory to the Armed Forces of Ukraine,” the band added.
Kalush Orchestra’s song, “Stefania,” was originally written as a tribute to the mother of lead singer Oleh Psiuk, but it turned into an anthem of resilience, amid Russia’s bloody invasion of Ukraine.
“I’ll always find my way home, even if all roads are destroyed,” Psiuk sang, representing one of the 25 countries competing in the grand finale of the song contest.
Shortly after the win, the band announced the auction and the raffle on Instagram, urging fans to donate to help the Ukrainian army, writing “Every euro you donate will help save the lives of Ukrainian soldiers!”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

For stars Keke Palmer and Uzo Aduba, “Lightyear” takes the “Toy Story” franchise to infinity and beyond by reflecting heroes of all kinds.
Disney and Pixar’s latest animated movie serves as an origin story for the fan-favorite Buzz Lightyear, but the actors agree their film’s new characters’ journeys are just as pivotal.
“It’s ‘to infinity and beyond’ for all of us,” Palmer told the Daily News.
“Leaders, heroes come in all shapes and sizes, and I think that’s the thing that ‘Lightyear’ is also writing for. That is the future. ‘To infinity and beyond’ with that. Yes, Buzz is a hero, but so are all of the faces that you are going to meet along the course of the journey.”
Zooming into theaters Friday, “Lightyear” is the first spinoff film in the “Toy Story” series, premiering nearly three decades after the original movie introduced the Buzz action figure as a favorite toy of a child named Andy.
The opening sequence of “Lightyear” informs audiences they’re watching Andy’s favorite movie, which depicts the adventures of the human space ranger Buzz Lightyear who inspired the toy.
Keke Palmer's Izzy Hawthorne (left) with Chris Evans' Buzz in “Lightyear." (Pixar/PIXAR)
“We’re so familiar with the toy, but very rarely do we ever get to learn the story behind the man, or the toy, and they have a full life,” Aduba told The News. “We get to see Buzz’s full life, along with the full lives of our own characters.”
The film picks up with Buzz, voiced by Chris Evans, and his fellow astronauts getting stranded on a strange planet. They work to develop hyperspeed technology to return to Earth, but every time Buzz goes on a test run, multiple years pass without him aging at all.
Aduba, 41, voices Buzz’s trusted partner Alisha Hawthorne, while Palmer, 28, portrays her granddaughter Izzy, whom Buzz meets decades in the future.
Buzz works alongside people from different backgrounds throughout the film, including Alisha, who is one of Pixar’s first openly LGBTQ characters.
Aduba — a three-time Emmy winner for “Orange is the New Black” and “Mrs. America” — praises “Lightyear” for showcasing “faces, ages, sizes and identities in ways that we haven’t seen before, and proving that all of those people can be heroic.”
“It certainly makes anybody who gets to see those stories dream differently,” Aduba said. “It certainly makes them dream of their own possibility. Everybody needs to see themselves on screen.”
Keke Palmer (left) and Uzo Aduba  (Getty Images)
[ ‘Toy Story 4’ feels like a nostalgia trip and a new adventure all at once ]
Joining the “Toy Story” franchise delighted Palmer, who grew up a major fan of the previous films that starred Tim Allen as Buzz and Tom Hanks as the cowboy doll Woody.
“I always loved Andy’s journey, even as the ‘Toy Story’ franchise continued to grow,” Palmer said. “We were also growing alongside Andy and understanding our relationship with our toys and the experiences that we had and how to transition.
“I think that’s why I loved (2010′s) third ‘Toy Story’ so much, because we were all adults at that point. It’s like, how do we make away with those memories and those things of the past? How do we grow and still hold on to that child that still exists in all of us? I love how that franchise continued to grow with us and taught us stuff along the way.”
Palmer, who also has the Jordan Peele-directed horror movie “Nope” out next month, loves how “Lightyear” captures the spirit of the “Toy Story” films.
“It’s such an original story,” Palmer said, “that still carries that nostalgia.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Musician Tito Puente performs on the Daily News float during the Puerto Rican Day Parade in 1995. (Susan Watts/New York Daily News)
People waving flags and cheering on the sidelines, to view the Puerto Rican Day parade on Fifth Ave.  (Ed Clarity /New York Daily News)
La Comparsa Color Cultura y Tradicion de Luquillo from Luquillo Puerto Rico marches during the 2012 Natonal Puerto Rican Day Parade along Fifth Ave. on Sunday, June 10, 2012.  (Enid Alvarez/New York Daily News)
Spectators line up to see the parade in 1977.  (Harry Hamburg /New York Daily News)
The Puerto Rican day parade banner photographed during the 1979 parade.   (William Laforce )
Spectators cheer during the 61st annual Puerto Rican Day parade on June 10, 2018 in Manhattan. (James Keivom/New York Daily News)
Members of Police Department Hispanic Society march up Fifth ave. during the 1962 parade.  (Tom Baffer )
Beauty pageant winners ride up Fifth ave. during New York's second annual Puerto Rican parade in 1959.  (Charles Payne /New York Daily News)
Marc Anthony and Jennifer Lopez participate during the Puerto Rican day parade on Fifth ave. in 2010. Anthony was named King of the parade.  (Mariela Lombard)
Floats are seen going up Fifth ave. during the parade in 1971.  (New York Daily News)
Spectators line up the streets to watch the Puerto Rican day parade in Manhattan in 1964.  (New York Daily News)
Victor Cruz, left, dances with a female police officer during the Puerto Rican Day parade along Fifth Ave. in Manhattan. (Mariela Lombard/for New York Daily News)
People line the streets to watch the parade in 1966.  (New York Daily News)
Singer Kat De Luna performs on the Daily News float at
Puerto Rican day parade on Fifth Ave.  (Mariela Lombard)
Participants march on Fifth ave. during the 61st annual Puerto Rican Day parade on June 10, 2018 in Manhattan. (James Keivom/New York Daily News)
Erik Estrada photographed during the Puerto Rican day parade in Manhattan. Estrada was named Grand Marshall for the 1979 Parade.  (William Laforce )
Musical group "Groupo Mania" photographed with Bernie Williams, center, during the Puerto Rican Day Parade on June 14, 2009 on Fifth Ave. in Manhattan. (Jeanne Noonan for New York Daily News)
Spectators cheer during the 61st annual Puerto Rican Day parade on June 10, 2018 in Manhattan. (James Keivom/New York Daily News)
Children riding on a float are photographed during the Puerto Rican Day Parade in 1995.  (New York Daily News)
Menudo perform on the New York Daily News Float at the 51st Annual Puerto Rican Day Parade along Fifth Ave. in Manhattan on June 8, 2008. (Enid Alvarez/New York Daily News)
Musician Tito Puente performs on the Daily News float during the Puerto Rican Day Parade in 1995. (Susan Watts/New York Daily News)
The National Puerto Rican Day Parade sashes photographed ahead of the parade in 2011.  (Mariela Lombard)
Paradegoers enjoying the National Puerto Rican day parade along Fifth Ave. in Manhattan in 2011. (Mariela Lombard)
Participants march on Fifth Ave. during the 61st annual Puerto Rican Day parade on June 10, 2018 in Manhattan. (James Keivom/New York Daily News)
Copies of The Daily News newspaper being handed out during the parade in 1995.  (Misha Erwitt)
Ricky Martin at the 50th annual Puerto Rican Day Parade along Fifth Ave. June 10, 2007 in Manhattan. (Robert Sabo/New York Daily News)
Actor Jimmy Smits marches during the Puerto Rican Day Parade on Fifth Ave. in 2000.  (David Handschuh)
Actress Rosie Perez, holding a sign "Paz para Vieques Peace for Vieques," during the Puerto Rican Day Parade in 2000.  (David Handschuh)
Children waving flags during the Puerto Rican Day Parade in 1997.  (Corey Sipkin/New York Daily News)
Cardinal O'Connor poses with a group from Ponce during the Puerto Rican day parade in 1995.  (Misha Erwitt )
Parade Princess Maria Flores of Caguas, Puerto Rico, waves to the crowd during the annual National Puerto Rican Day Parade in 2004.  (Robert A. Sabo /New York Daily News)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Broadway will soon have a little less “Company.”
The gender-swapped version of Stephen Sondheim’s relationship-centric musical will close on the Great White Way on July 31, the production team announced late Tuesday.
“It remains the honor of a lifetime to bring Stephen Sondheim and George Furth’s masterpiece to Broadway in Marianne Elliott’s Tony Award-winning reimagined production,” producer Chris Harper said in a statement.
“It is a testament to the dedication of everyone who works on the production that we have withstood all the challenges that Broadway has faced over the last two years to share this show with our amazing audiences.”
[ Broadway to make masks optional in July ]
Patti LuPone (left) and Katrina Lenk in "Company." (Matthew Murphy/AP)
By the time the musical closes, “Company,” starring Katrina Lenk and Patti LuPone, will have run for 300 shows on Broadway.
A North American tour of “Company” is planned for the 2023-24 season, the producers said.
“Company,” about a single woman facing her 35th birthday surrounded by couples, won five Tony Awards at this year’s ceremony: best musical revival, best director for Marianne Elliott, best featured actress for LuPone, best featured actor for Matt Doyle and best scenic design for Bunny Christie.
The reimagined show opened for previews on March 2, 2020 and was promptly shut down for more than 18 months during the pandemic before resuming previews on Nov. 15.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A 15-year-old died and three adults were wounded Sunday evening – including a cop who was hospitalized in stable condition – when gunfire broke out during an informal gathering near the Moachella Music Festival in Washington, D.C.
The tragedy unfolded at about 6 p.m. at an informal, un-permitted event “associated with a group known as Moachella,” Washington Metropolitan Police Department chief Robert Contee said at a briefing. “There was a truck that had people playing music on it.”
Several hundred people gathered in the area, Contee said, mostly on the sidewalk.
“At some point during the course of this gathering there was some type of incident or fight that happened between some of the individuals who were in attendance,” he said. “That incident was broken up. Shortly thereafter there was a secondary incident – we’re unsure of what that incident was, but people started to scatter at that point.”
Authorities then broke up the event over safety concerns, Contee said. EMS and other services were on the scene trying to clear out the area and tending to people injured when their legs and ankles got trampled as people started running.
“Shortly after that there was another incident that occurred within very close proximity of our first responders,” Contee said.
That’s when three civilians, including the teen, plus a police officer were shot, he said. The officer sustained a gunshot wound to his “lower extremity” and was “going to be ok,” Contee said. The other two victims were in stable condition as well, he added.
Several firearms were recovered, one of them from one of the shooting victims, Contee said. “We are working very closely with our partners here in the public safety cluster” and investigating.
“All of this occurred in a span of about two hours,” he said, between 6 and 8 p.m.
“The officers did not fire,” Contee said, noting that about 100 officers responded. “We had a lot of officers in the area but none of them fired any shots.”
Attendees posted Twitter video on Sunday evening of people running.
“We can confirm that one of our members working in the area of 14th and U St NW has been shot,” the union for the District of Columbia’s Metropolitan Police Department tweeted. “The member has been transported to the hospital and is in stable condition.”
Police first told WTOP-TV at about 8 p.m. that “multiple people” had reportedly been shot near the intersection of 14th and U Streets in Northwestern D.C.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Apparently basking under the golden arches these days.
Kanye West made a triumphant return to Instagram this week after a brief suspension by teasing his latest business venture.
The billionaire hip-hop superstar, fashion designer and self-proclaimed “greatest artist that God ever created,” posted an image of his upcoming redesign of McDonald’s packaging, which looks like a sandwich that appears to be inside of a clear box with the famous Golden Arches on top.
“Ye teams up with legendary Muji industrial designer Naoto Fukasawa to reimagine McDonald’s packaging,” was written in the caption to his 16 million followers.
The social media post followed a since deleted Instagram Story that the artist also known as Ye shared of the same image with the words: “Next week it’s the fries.”
The line featured on the image is a lyric from his 2005 “Late Registration” megahit “Gold Digger.”
Kanye West (Ronald Martinez/Getty Images)
No further information about the redesign has been made public, leaving many to wonder if it’s a permanent or limited-edition change, or if there’s more to the collaboration between the 24-time Grammy Award winner and the fast food chain.
McDonald’s has a long history with music superstars; from Aretha Franklin and Patti LaBelle in the 1980s, to Justin Timberlake in the early aughts.
The burger giant has recently featured acts such as K-pop boy band BTS, sexy rapper Saweetie and reggaeton hitmaker J Balvin in campaigns for curated meal concepts.
Last December, the company partnered with Mariah Carey for a month-long Christmas promotion.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Prince Charles and his son Prince William honored the past and looked to the future Saturday as they paid tribute to Queen Elizabeth II at a star-studded concert outside Buckingham Palace celebrating the monarch’s 70 years on the throne.
Diana Ross, rock band Queen, Duran Duran, Alicia Keys and others performed in front of some 22,000 people gathered on the Mall for the open-air “Party at the Palace,” which rounded up the third day of a four-day holiday weekend dedicated to celebrating the queen’s Platinum Jubilee.
The 96-year-old monarch did not attend the concert, but she delighted the crowds when she appeared in a surprise video recorded with an animated version of another British national treasure: Paddington Bear.
Rod Stewart performs during the Platinum Party At The Palace at Buckingham Palace on Saturday. (WPA Pool/Getty Images)
The queen revealed she shared Paddington’s love of marmalade sandwiches in a comedy skit that was shown to open the concert, which culminated in speeches by the monarch’s son and grandson.
Charles opened his short speech by addressing the queen as “Your Majesty, mummy,” then paid tribute to her “lifetime of selfless service.”
Diana Ross closes out the star-studded event. (WPA Pool/Getty Images)
The queen’s eldest son and heir recalled the ever-growing list of world leaders Elizabeth has met and the endless stacks of state papers she has reviewed during a reign that has now stretched from the early days of the Cold War to the information age. But he also highlighted his mother’s role as a symbol of stability, unifying the U.K. and the Commonwealth as they negotiated this rapidly changing world.
“You have met us and talked with us. You laugh and cry with us and, most importantly, you have been there for us, for these 70 years,” Charles said as scenes from the queen’s life were projected on the palace walls. “You pledged to serve your whole life — you continue to deliver. That is why we are here. That is what we celebrate tonight.”
The words 'Thank You Ma'am' are illuminated over Buckingham Palace during the Platinum Jubilee concert. (Alberto Pezzali/AP)
William preceded his father with remarks that underscored the queen’s long-time commitment to the environment as he highlighted the need to combat climate change.
Recalling the queen’s 1989 Christmas message, in which she called on all nations to work together to protect the earth for “our children and children’s children,” William said: “It’s my firm hope that my grandmother’s words are as true in 70 years’ time as they are tonight, that as nations we come together in common cause, because then there is always room for hope.”
The queen has not attended any of the festivities since Thursday due to what the palace describes as “episodic mobility issues.” But her absence at the concert didn’t dampen the party atmosphere among the crowds.
Brian May of Queen performs at the Platinum Jubilee concert taking place in front of Buckingham Palace on Saturday. (AP Photo/Alberto Pezzali, Pool) (Alberto Pezzali/AP Photo)
“It’s a magical experience ... (This is) never again going to happen in our lifetime, and it’s just absolutely incredible to be a part of this,” said Sam Ahcquoim, from Cornwall in southwestern England. “I’ve been really, really excited and just can’t wait to get in there now and start dancing.”
The monarch also opted not to attend the Epsom Derby earlier Saturday, and was represented at the prestigious annual horse race by her daughter, Princess Anne.
The queen is widely known as an avid horse lover, and she has only missed the Epsom Derby a handful of times. On Saturday, five of her former racehorses were paraded, and 40 jockeys who have ridden for the queen formed a guard of honor before the national anthem was played.
“She’s been breeding horses for over 60 years. She knows all the blood lines and she’s won lots of races and she’s very knowledgeable,” Frankie Dettori, who lined part of the course with fellow jockeys, told the BBC.
Britain's Prince Charles, with wife Camilla, speaks of his mother, Queen Elizabeth II, at Saturday's show. (Eddie Mulholland/AP)
“I’m sure today she’ll find a TV and she’s going to watch it live, because she loves the Derby so much,” he added.
It was the second time in as many days that the queen’s mobility issues have robbed crowds of a chance to see her.
On Friday, the queen skipped a special service of Thanksgiving in her honor at St. Paul’s Cathedral in London. Palace officials said she had experienced “some discomfort” at events the day before, which included waving to huge crowds from Buckingham Palace.
Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, were among nearly 50 members of the royal family who gathered Friday at St. Paul’s Cathedral to honor the absent head of state. It was the couple’s first public appearance in the U.K. since they stepped back from royal duties and moved to California two years ago.
People wave Union flags as they gather in the Mall ahead of the Platinum Party at the Palace on Saturday. (Dan Kitwood/Getty Images)
Apart from attending Friday’s service, the couple has so far stayed out of the limelight. Their two children, Archie and Lilibet, who turned one Saturday, haven’t yet made an appearance during this trip. A spokesperson for the couple said they were spending the day “privately” and were not joining some 30 other royals at Saturday’s concert.
Meanwhile, members of the royal family travelled to Wales and Northern Ireland as part of celebrations across the U.K.
William and his wife Kate brought two of their three children — 8-year-old Prince George and 7-year-old Princess Charlotte — to Cardiff Castle in Wales before a separate concert in the castle grounds in honor of the queen.
The queen’s youngest son, Prince Edward, and his wife Sophie, Countess of Wessex, visited a 1950s-themed seaside funfair in Belfast. Edward tried his hand at pulling a pint of Guinness at a diner, while Sophie took in a ‘50s and ‘60s dance demonstration.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Director Baz Luhrmann is ready for a little more conversation about Elvis Presley.
The Australian filmmaker hopes his new biopic, “Elvis,” showcases the King of Rock and Roll’s full story by depicting the highs and lows of his prolific life and career.
Luhrmann’s research included repeated visits to the Graceland mansion where Presley lived, and meeting early on with family members such as Elvis’ wife, Priscilla Presley, whom the director says wrote him an effusive letter after seeing the movie.
“She said, ‘I’ve had to put up with a lifetime of people impersonating, and my husband was not an impersonation. He was a person.’ I thought that was the most telling thing,” Luhrmann told the Daily News.
Coming to theaters Friday, “Elvis” stars Austin Butler as Presley, and follows the singer’s transformation from a young rebel known for his controversial gyrating dance moves to a cultural icon whose many hits include “Can’t Help Falling in Love,” “Hound Dog” and “A Little Less Conversation.”
The film also explores how manager Col. Tom Parker, portrayed by Tom Hanks, helped propel Presley to global superstardom, before being accused of manipulating the artist for his own personal gains.
Austin Butler stars as the titular icon in "Elvis."  (Warner Bros. Pictures)
It was important to show the “connective tissue between (Presley) and Black music,” said Luhrmann, who believes the singer had an “almost supernatural relationship” with the gospel genre.
“He was a uniter,” Luhrmann, 59, said. “He really was someone who, in his spirit, believed in what made us the same, not what made us different. But the forces around him were the opposite to that.”
[ Baz Luhrmann says Tom Hanks committed to ‘Elvis’ role in 20 minutes ]
The role of Presley garnered tremendous interest among Hollywood actors, with pop star Harry Styles among those who auditioned. The job ultimately went to Butler, whom Luhrmann says impressed him from the beginning.
“I get this video of this young guy, wrapped in a bathrobe, playing ‘Unchained Melody’ and looking up to the sky and crying. It was like watching just something real,” Luhrmann said of Butler’s audition.
“And then when I found out he was coming in, and Denzel Washington rings me and says, ‘You’re about to meet a young actor whose work ethic is like no other,’ because Denzel and he had been in a play together. When he walked in, he was already down Elvis Presley boulevard, in terms of his process.
“It kind of didn’t stop from there. ... He just got deeper and deeper and deeper until finally, in my view, their souls meshed.”
Baz Luhrmann (left) with Olivia DeJonge and Austin Butler on the set of "Elvis." (Warner Bros. Pictures)
Butler, 30, really sang in scenes featuring the young Presley, while his voice was blended with the real singer’s to depict his later years.
“Elvis” is the latest high-profile film for Luhrmann, who also co-wrote and produced the movie. He previously directed “Moulin Rouge!” starring Nicole Kidman, as well as the Leonardo DiCaprio-led projects “The Great Gatsby” and “William Shakespeare’s Romeo + Juliet.”
Luhrmann says he was able to get “some insights” for “Elvis” during those initial meetings with the singer’s daughter, Lisa Marie Presley, and granddaughter, Riley Keough, as well as with Priscilla.
“I can’t tell you in my life if I’ve ever had a screening I’ve been more nervous about than the screening that I had when I finally had to show (Priscilla) the film, because I wanted her there to see that I did everything I could to tell the truth but also to be fair,” Luhrmann said.
He says he’ll “cherish” Lisa Marie’s reaction to the film as well.
“She knew her father’s vibe, but it’s one thing to grow up not knowing your father and having lost him,” Luhrmann said. “It’s another thing that one half of the world thinks he’s a god, and the other half thinks he’s a Halloween costume and a joke. It came home to me how difficult that’s been for her, and then somewhat the lifting of that burden has really come home for me, too.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A tiny shop in 1970s London, in neon pink letters, shouted to passersby: SEX.
The shop, covered in graffiti and barbed wire, sold fetish gear and bondage kits. But it also collected people: Vivienne Westwood, who would go on to become one of the most influential fashion designers in the industry; her partner Malcolm McLaren, a music promoter who put the Sex Pistols and the New York Dolls on the stage; bassist Glen Matlock, who worked the register on Saturdays; sales assistant Pamela Rooke, who, under the single name Jordan, became a face of the punk movement. Chrissie Hynde, a founding member of the Pretenders, hung around. John Lydon auditioned in the back room.
In “Pistol,” the Danny Boyle-directed Sex Pistols series premiering Tuesday on Hulu, SEX isn’t just a shop. It’s a spark plug.
“That kind of creativity begets more creativity,” Talulah Riley, who plays Westwood, then just an upstart designer sketching outfits in the back of her shop, told the Daily News.
“We’re quite used to counterculture movements today but that was really paving the way in modern times of really putting one’s self out there for an artistic movement or for pure creativity or chaos or going against the status quo. I think there’s probably a certain amount of bravery involved to be there. You had to really want to be there and believe in being there, because it was socially isolating from the rest of society.”
Chrissie Hynde (Sydney Chandler) and Vivienne Westwood (Talulah Riley) played vital roles in spurring the punk movement. (Miya Mizuno/FX)
The punk movement of the 1970s wasn’t a reaction to one specific thing, but to all of it. It was anti-establishment as a principle. It was anti-authoritarian, anti-capitalist, anti-war and anti-consumerism. And yet it also created music, fashion, art. It offered an alternative.
“There was a need for something new, a need for change,” Maisie Williams, the “Game of Thrones” alum who plays Jordan, told The News.
“We see the punk movement as political and aggressive and painful, but as the show depicts, it was an art movement. You have the music, the fashion, all the art transforming as one.”
[ Danny Boyle tells Daily News how he captured the chaos that was the Sex Pistols in ‘Pistol’ ]
The Sex Pistols, in most retellings, were at the heart of the punk movement. But creator Craig Pearce didn’t want “Pistol” to be about the musicians. They were just part of the story.
“It’s not a band pic. It’s not just about the Sex Pistols,” he told The News. “It’s about a movement, a cultural movement.”
Jordan (Maisie Williams) was a staple at shows and at Westwood’s SEX shop in London.
The Sex Pistols are the stars of “Pistol,” though. They get front billing, the posters and the title. But there is creative concern and care taken to making sure that everyone else — Jordan, Vivienne, Chrissie (who is likely the most successful musician out of all of them) — get their piece of the story, too.
The punk movement was about saying no. “Pistol” celebrates the rebelliousness, if not encourages it. The Sex Pistols were profane and dirty but they stood for change.
“The older generation will always try to impose order because it suits them,” Boyle told The News, “and the young should always disrespect that.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Thieves punched and threw a man to a Manhattan sidewalk during a caught-on-camera mugging, police said Saturday.
The 20-year-old man was on St. Nicholas Ave. near W. 189th St. in Washington Heights about 6:40 p.m. Tuesday when a man sucker punched and shoved him to the ground, police said.
Three other men bum-rushed the victim as he sat on the sidewalk and removed a chain from his neck.
A crew of thieves punched and threw a man to a Manhattan sidewalk during a caught-on-camera mugging, police said Saturday. (New York Daily News Exclusive)
The callous thieves also made off with the man’s glasses before they ran off, cops said.
Medics took the man to New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center.
Police released video of the men in the hopes someone may recognize them.
Anyone with information is asked to call Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

An engrossing production of Stephen Sondheim’s classic “Company” that reversed the gender of the lead character and carried on its composer’s spirit after he died in November won the Tony Award for best musical revival on Sunday.
The production, which honored its extraordinary source material with an elaborate set and a magnetic supporting performance from Patti LuPone, was the final production Sondheim worked on before his death at age 91.
Marianne Elliott directed the production of the half-century-old musical, which arrived on Broadway for previews in March 2020 before coronavirus dropped a curtain on the Theater District.
The cast of "Company" performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
“Company” finally opened in December at the Bernard Jacobs Theatre, where it continues to run. The production received nine Tony nominations across eight categories, including best direction of a musical.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Complete list of nominees ]
Elliott’s choice to change the gender and tweak the name of the lead character, Bobbie (played by Katrina Lenk), helped keep the story fresh.
“Company” revolves around a New Yorker in their mid-30s who is under pressure from friends to find a partner, a situation perhaps more potently relatable for the modern 30-something woman than man.
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
With memorable tunes like “The Little Things You Do Together,” “You Could Drive a Person Crazy” and “Being Alive,” the original Broadway production won the best new musical Tony in 1971. Another remake won for best revival of a musical in 2007.
The latest “Company” beat out two other nominated shows, “The Music Man” and “Caroline, or Change,” in the best musical revival category.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Sylvester is getting a closer look.
The late disco great is the subject of a “Sound Barrier,” a new documentary podcast launching on Spotify June 22.
Hosted by Dr. Jason King, a journalist, musician and New York University professor, the series will chronicle the musical career and impact of the genre-defying, gender-bending and influential icon.
Jason King (left), co-founder of The Clive Davis Institute of Recorded Music at NYU, is doing a podcast on disco singer Sylvester. (Getty/Getty Images)
The vocal powerhouse behind timeless disco classics such as “You Make Me Feel (Mighty Real),” “Dance (Disco Heat)” and “Do You Wanna Funk,” Sylvester was a trailblazer in Black music and LGBTQ+ culture. Long before “Rupaul’s Drag Race,” Boy George, Billy Porter and Lil Nas X shook up pop culture, the Watts, Calif.-born, openly gay Black man dressed in drag unapologetically and still achieved crossover status.
“I’m thrilled to be honoring one of my favorite artists of all time” King told The Daily News on Tuesday.
“I’ve been pretty much obsessed with Sylvester since I was 6 years old,” he revealed. " I teach Sylvester regularly in my undergraduate classes, I’ve worked on major label Sylvester reissues, I’ve extensively written about and lectured on him.”
King, who is also the Chair of The Clive Davis Institute of Recorded Music at New York University, called the eight-episode podcast “one of the deepest dives into Sylvester’s life and work that’s ever been produced.”
The Alberta, Canada, native previously produced a multi-day conference on the artist at New York University in 2004, featuring Porter and dance singer Martha Wash — who was a protégé and background singer for Sylvester before achieving success as one of The Weather Girls.
“It’s a true passion project for me,” King said, adding: “It’s also a chance to pay tribute to an underappreciated musician who was truly ahead of his time on many levels.”
Featuring never-before-heard interviews with Sylvester, never-before-heard music and demos, “Sound Barrier” will also include interviews with artists such as Porter, Mykki Blanco, Big Freedia, Patti LaBelle, John Waters, Stephen Winter, and close associates.
The “Someone Like You” singer died in 1988 at the age of 41, one of the first public figures to succumb from AIDS-related complications.
Since his death, Sylvester has been the subject of several biographical books, and a popular episode of the Unsung documentary television series. In more recent years, acclaimed theater performer Anthony Wayne portrayed the artist — also known as “the undisputed First Lady” of San Francisco’s Castro district — in the Off-Broadway musical “Mighty Real: A Fabulous Sylvester Musical.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Life finds a way — and so did “Jurassic World Dominion” director Colin Trevorrow.
The filmmaker says it felt special to bring back actors Sam Neill, Laura Dern and Jeff Goldblum in their first movie together since Steven Spielberg’s 1993 original “Jurassic Park.”
“I remember taking a picture, just on my phone, of the three of them in a Jeep together. I sent it to Steven Spielberg and it really moved him,” Trevorrow, 45, told the Daily News. “It was surprisingly emotional seeing the three of them back together again, and that made me feel like we’ve done something meaningful for somebody who I respect and care about.”
In theaters Friday, “Dominion” serves as the epic conclusion to Trevorrow’s “Jurassic World” trilogy and is the sixth film overall in the “Jurassic Park” franchise.
Laura Dern (right) and DeWanda Wise in "Jurassic World Dominion." (John Wilson/Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment)
The movie picks up with dangerous dinosaurs — including some genetically enhanced species — living in civilization among humans after their island home of Isla Nublar was destroyed.
“This is a very different kind of film,” Trevorrow said. “It’s about these creatures having to co-exist with humans on the planet, and genetic power having been wielded in a way that has had dire consequences, that could destroy life as we know it. We might go extinct just like the dinosaurs.”
“Dominion” was a long time in the making for Trevorrow, who directed 2015′s “Jurassic World” and has been a writer on all three of the trilogy’s films. He says he always had the final images of “Dominion” in his head as he worked on the franchise.
Shepherding the returns of Neill as paleontologist Dr. Alan Grant, Dern as paleobotanist Dr. Ellie Sattler and Goldblum as mathematician Dr. Ian Malcolm was “an honor,” says Trevorrow, but also “a huge responsibility.”
[ ‘Top Gun: Maverick’ stars trained like real pilots through Tom Cruise’s intense flight program ]
“I started by just having conversations with each of them, along with Emily Carmichael, my co-writer, and listening, and asking them where they felt these characters had been the past 28 years, how they feel about the new world that we’ve created since they’ve been gone from this franchise,” Trevorrow said.
“Then we built characters from there that reflected, in some cases, where they are in their lives.”
Neill, Dern and Goldblum each have prominent roles in the film alongside Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard, who play the main characters of the “Jurassic World” trilogy.
Trevorrow enjoyed balancing the characters’ journeys with action-packed dinosaur chases and exhilarating fight scenes, aiming to make the film feel as real as possible.
Laura Dern and Sam Neill reunite in "Jurassic World Dominion." (Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment)
“We had many more animatronics than we’d ever had on any of the ‘Jurassic World’ films,” Trevorrow said. “We also used puppetry. We used partial animatronics, and then we built I think 112 sets, so all of the environments that we’re in are real places.”
Trevorrow was a 16-year-old aspiring filmmaker when he first saw “Jurassic Park.” He believes the movie’s legacy transcends entertainment.
“In real-world terms, there is a legacy of children seeking out careers in science, and paleontology specifically. So many young girls went on to be scientists because Ellie Sattler was their hero,” Trevorrow said. “It’s very rare when a movie can have that kind of impact, and really send people on a different path in their lives.”
[ Benedict Cumberbatch and Elizabeth Olsen reveal how ‘Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness’ changes Marvel ]
"Jurassic World Dominion" roars into theaters Friday. (Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment)
Trevorrow doesn’t expect to make another “Jurassic” movie, but that doesn’t mean the beloved dinosaur franchise will go extinct.
“I think I’ve said what I have to say, but I would never want to be the one to say that a younger filmmaker who also grew up on dinosaurs, who has their own imagination they can apply to this, shouldn’t have the opportunity to do it,” Trevorrow said.
“We’ll never stop being fascinated by dinosaurs. ... I’m sure there’s more stories to be told.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Football star-turned-senate candidate Herschel Walker said Saturday that he “never denied” having four children.
Walker, 60, has made his 22-year-old son Christian a key figure in his public life, including his Republican campaign to represent Georgia in the Senate. But this week, reports revealed that Walker actually has three other children too, two more sons and a daughter.
Herschel Walker speaks in Athens, Ga., on May 23. (Megan Varner/Getty Images)
“I’ve never denied any of my kids and I love them more than I love anything,” Walker said at a Christian political conference in Nashville. “And they didn’t do anything, which just makes me want to fight harder because I’m tired of people misleading the American people.”
One of Walker’s go-to campaign moves has been criticizing “fatherless households.”
“I want to apologize to the African-American community, because the fatherless home is a major, major problem,” he said in a September 2020 interview on Charlie Kirk’s podcast.
In addition to the hidden children, Walker has falsified reported “law enforcement” experience and lied about graduating from the University of Georgia. Walker famously left school early to play in the USFL.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Joaquina Kalukango won the Tony Award for best leading actress in a musical on Sunday, earning the honor for her commanding and emotional portrayal of a determined bar owner in “Paradise Square,” set in Civil War-era lower Manhattan.
The musical features the latest buzzed-about performance from Kalukango, a rising Broadway star who was also nominated at the 2021 Tony Awards for her role in “Slave Play,” but did not win.
Joaquina Kalukango in "Paradise Square." (Kevin Berne photo / HANDOUT)
“I’ve got to give thanks and praise to God,” Kalukango, 33, said in her acceptance speech on Sunday. “Thank you, God, for giving me the best parents in the world. My parents sacrificed everything for me to live my dreams.”
“Paradise Square,” a tale of fleeting harmony between African-American and Irish New Yorkers amid the horrifying racism of 19th-century America, was nominated for 10 Tony Awards.
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
Kalukango earned the production’s only trophy.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Complete list of nominees ]
Kalukango was long viewed as a favorite to land a Tony for her work; she has said she prepared for her stirring turn in the role by reading books about the pre-Civil War history of African-Americans in New York.
At a post-show news conference on Sunday night, Kalukango said the cast of “Paradise Square” has been giving its heart “full-out, every time, eight times per week — so it’s remarkable that it’s been received this well. We love it.”
“We love the story,” she said. “And we love sharing it with audiences.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

At least nothing will go to waste.
Andy Cohen, on Monday’s episode of Sirius XM’s “Jeff Lewis Live,” revealed that after welcoming son Benjamin, 3, and daughter Lucy, 5 weeks, via surrogate, he still has embryos left that maybe they can someday use.
“I have a few. ... I think I have three left?” said the “Real Housewives” executive producer, 54. “You know what I’m thinking — this is crazy — but if either of them cannot have kids, maybe in 20 years they’ll defrost their sibling and raise them. Is that a weird thought?”
Andy Cohen has two children. (Roy Rochlin/Getty Images)
Though “biological siblings,” Benjamin and Lucy were born via different surrogates, Cohen told the show.
The king of Bravo in late April took to Instagram to announce Lucy’s birth to the world.
“HERE’S LUCY!!!!! ... Her big brother can’t wait to meet her!” said the “Watch What Happens Live” host, adding in a subsequent post, “Greetings from Cloud 9 #ILoveLucy.”
Cohen in February 2019 welcomed Benjamin, who later that year was featured in a People Magazine spread in which he was dubbed the “Cutest Baby Alive.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

This page will refresh to bring you the latest news in   seconds. DISABLE REFRESH
Highland Park has formed backdrop for iconic 1980s movies, from ‘Risky Business’ to ‘Ferris Bueller’s Day Off’
Jessica Chastain, Bette Midler lead charge of women not feeling the Independence Day spirit
Bruno ‘Pop N Taco’ Falcon, dancer who worked with Michael Jackson and Ice-T, dead at 58
‘Shining’ actor Joe Turkel, a Brooklyn native, dead at 94
Jhene Aiko and Big Sean expecting their first child together
Happy Birthday Ari! Look back at Ariana Grande’s hottest moments as the pop star turns 29
Highlight from Paris Haute Couture Fashion Week
Stars at the Formula 1 Grand Prix of Great Britain
'Mr. Malcolm's List' movie premiere in NYC
51 years later: 'Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory'
Amber Heard asks for Johnny Depp verdict to be tossed, alleges juror lied about ID
LeBron James prays for Akron, as protests break out after police body cam reveals Jayland Walker was shot 60 times
Ricky Martin hit with restraining order in Puerto Rico
Tommy Morgan, harmonica player for ‘Dances with Wolves’ and hundreds of other films and TV shows, dies at 89
Travis Barker feeling ‘much better’ after life-threatening pancreatitis scare
Cynthia Erivo says LGBTQ community should be ‘commended for being brave‘
Lindsay Lohan married to financier Bader Shammas: ‘My everything’
Kristin Chenoweth shares the health issue she thought would end her career
Lily Allen slams ‘having to justify’ abortions after Roe overturned
Technoblade, Minecraft YouTuber with more than 12M subscribers, dies at 23, shares final goodbye message
Cameron Diaz’s husband Benji Madden ‘encouraged’ her to end nearly decade-long acting hiatus
Harlem’s Ray Chew bringing Black music, cultural elements to Macy’s 4th of July Fireworks show
BET Awards 2022: Top show moments
BET Awards 2022: Red carpet arrivals
Couple Goals! See how celebs spend their time with loved ones
Melissa Gilbert ‘aching’ for late ‘Little House on the Prairie’ co-star Michael Landon on anniversary of his death
Randy Bachman reunited with guitar stolen in 1977
‘Dune: Part Two’ release delayed until November 2023
Poison frontman Bret Michaels hospitalized for ‘unforeseen medical complication’ just before Nashville performance
Beyoncé reveals eye-popping artwork to promote new album ‘Renaissance’
Kelly Clarkson struggling to write new music in wake of divorce: ‘I just gotta get my crap together’
‘The Minutes’ is the latest Broadway show to continue requiring audiences to wear masks
Here are the latest movies to watch over Fourth of July weekend
Zachary Levi shares experience with suicidal thoughts, only seeing ‘doom and gloom’
Prince Charles ’delighted’ to finally meet Prince Harry, Meghan Markle’s daughter Lilibet: report
Buckingham Palace won’t release report on investigation into Meghan Markle’s alleged bullying
'Mr. Malcolm's List' movie premiere in NYC
Pride 2022: ‘Soft’ playwright Donja R. Love uses his own HIV positive diagnosis to illuminate his theatrical work
Kevin Bacon, Kyra Sedgwick revisit his ‘Footloose’ role à la TikTok trend
Jason Momoa starrer ‘See’ to end on Apple after this summer‘s third season
Marvel to introduce first gay Spider-Man in upcoming ‘Edge of Spider-Verse’
‘ER’ actress Mary Mara’s cause of death is announced
Cameron Diaz to un-retire for new movie with Jamie Foxx, has surprise chat with Tom Brady
Copyright © 2022, New York Daily News

Two months before Jenny Han’s young adult novel “The Summer I Turned Pretty” hit bookshelves in 2009, the film adaptation of “The Hunger Games” went into development — generating almost $700 million at the global box office three years later.
But Han doesn’t want to write another “Hunger Games” or “Divergent” or even “Twilight,” despite the massive success of all three.
“You didn’t often see a trilogy that was a realistic, contemporary story. Either it was dystopian or fantasy, like vampires. Really life-or-death stakes,” Han, who also wrote the bestselling trilogy “To All The Boys,” told the Daily News.
“I like to tell stories that feel both real but also ... hopeful and warmhearted.”
Han’s young adult novels, typically aimed at readers between 12 and 18, don’t have dragons or vampires. But they have the same teenage problems of love, loss and growth.
Jenny Han published “The Summer I Turned Pretty,” the first in the trilogy, in 2009. (Dana Hawley/Prime Video)
The TV adaptation of “The Summer I Turned Pretty,” premiering Friday on Prime Video, came at a good time for Han after stops and starts. Now, she gets to make her own show about teenage love and summers that exist out of time and reality.
Like “To All The Boys,” the teens of “The Summer I Turned Pretty” are consumed by their lives. Every furtive glance across the beach is the most important eye contact in the world. Every brush of shoulders at the ice cream parlor is the most electric touch in history. For the history of young adult content, those feelings have been dismissed as childish and inconsequential. YA novels, shows and movies are for silly girls.
[ Teenage love is life or death in Jenny Han’s YA series ‘The Summer I Turned Pretty’ ]
“Everything that they’re feeling is just as important and relevant as something an adult person is feeling. It’s just all in the context on the scale of experience,” she told The News.
Her “To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before” series was adapted into a movie trilogy at Netflix, starring Lana Condor. (Netflix)
“When you’re in high school, being dumped or losing your best friend really is high stakes; that’s how big your world is in that moment. As an adult, going through a divorce or being fired at work, those are the same emotions. One isn’t more relevant than the other one. It’s just about the scope of a person’s life and how much bigger things get as you get older.”
For Han, there’s no insult in her work being categorized as a beach read. She wants you to sit on a deck chair in a big comfy T-shirt with a pizza and sink into her fictional world. There doesn’t need to be a vampire who sparkles in the sun and creeps through your bedroom window at night. There doesn’t need to be a death match in which teens kill or get killed.
Han said should people ask why one girl’s life justifies three books, she’d answer: “We should value those stories. We should value one girl’s life at a moment in time where she’s just growing up.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Stephen Colbert swears his staffers weren’t trying to stage an insurrection.
On Thursday, a group of “Late Show” employees were arrested at the Capitol while filming a segment about the Jan. 6 committee hearings, starring Triumph the Insult Comic Dog. Both Democratic and Republican members of Congress had agreed to film and the crew spent Wednesday and Thursday shooting. But on the last night of production, the staffers were detained by Capitol police.
“Which actually, isn’t that surprising,” Colbert said during his opening monologue Monday night. “The Capitol Police are much more cautious than they were, say, 18 months ago, and for a very good reason. If you don’t know what that reason is, I know what news network you watch.”
Stephen Colbert on the set of "The Late Show with Stephen Colbert" in New York.  (Scott Kowalchyk / AP)
The crew members, who were just “doing their job,” remained “very professional” and “very calm,” Colbert said, and were “detained, processed, and released.”
“A very unpleasant experience for my staff, a lot of paper for the Capitol Police, but a very simple story,” he said.
Then, Tucker Carlson and other Fox News hosts got involved and started spinning wild tales about the “aggressive” staffers and a Colbert-led “conspiracy.”
“First of all, what?” Colbert said Monday.
“Second of all, huh? Third of all, they weren’t in the Capitol building. Fourth of all, and I’m shocked I have to explain the difference, but an insurrection involves disrupting the lawful actions of Congress and howling for the blood of elected leaders, all to prevent the peaceful transfer of power. This was first-degree puppetry. This was hijinks with intent to goof. Misappropriation of an old ‘Conan’ bit.”
The House select committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021 attack on the Capitol holds a hearing at the Capitol in Washington, Thursday, June 16, 2022.  (J. Scott Applewhite/AP)
Despite the preposterous propositions, Colbert said he wasn’t particularly surprised.
“It’s predictable why these TV talkers are talking like this. They want to talk about something other than the January 6 hearings, the actual seditionist insurrection that led to the deaths of multiple people and the injury of over 140 police officers,” he said.
“But drawing any equivalency between a rioter storming the Capitol to prevent the counting of electoral ballots and a cigar chomping toy dog is a shameful and grotesque insult to the memory of everyone who died and obscenely trivializes the service and the courage the Capitol police showed on that terrible day. But who knows? Maybe there was a vast conspiracy to overthrow the government of the U.S. with a rubber Rottweiler.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The relationship rumors about Johnny Depp and his lawyer Camille Vasquez were out of order, the litigator says.
Vasquez, who became a celebrity of sorts during the weeks-long Fairfax County, Va., trial in which her client and his ex-wife Amber Heard sued one another for defamation, says that the rumors she and Depp were anything more than lawyer and client are “disappointing.”
“I guess it comes with the territory of being a woman just doing her job,” Vasquez, who says she’s “very happy” with her boyfriend, told People in an interview out Thursday. “It’s also an unethical charge being made. It’s sexist. ... It’s disappointing, but at the same time it kind of comes with the territory.”
Johnny Depp's attorney Camille Vasquez (EVELYN HOCKSTEIN/POOL/AFP via Getty Images)
“It’s disappointing that certain outlets kind of ran with it or said that my interactions with Johnny — who is a friend and I’ve known and represented for four-and-a-half years now — that my interactions in any way were inappropriate or unprofessional,” the lawyer, who was made partner at Brown Rudnick law firm after the trial, continued. “That’s disappointing to hear.”
Johnny Depp and his attorney Camille Vasquez during a break in the Depp vs Heard defamation trial at the Fairfax County Circuit Court in Fairfax, Virginia, on May 19, 2022. (SHAWN THEW/POOL/AFP via Getty Images)
Vasquez noted that her rapport with the former “Pirates of the Caribbean” star, 58, is just an example of how she conducts herself on the job.
“I care very deeply about my clients, and we have obviously become close. But when I say we, I mean the entire team, and of course that includes Johnny,” she said. “And, I’m Cuban and Colombian. I’m tactile. What do you want me to say? I hug everyone. And I’m not ashamed about that.”
Noting that “my work is my love,” Vasquez went on to say, “When I love, I love really deeply.”
Vasquez said that Depp “deserved” her efforts to “provide any bit of comfort” during the trial, adding he “was fighting for his life and it broke my heart to see him ... listen to the most horrific allegations being made against him.”
Depp was suing the “Aquaman” actress, 36, for $50 million over her 2018 Washington Post op-ed, in which she referred to herself as “a public figure representing domestic abuse,” which he said cost him his career and reputation. Heard filed a $100 million countersuit due to a lawyer for her ex dismissing her claims as a hoax.
Depp won the trial last week, with the jury saying he should get $10 million in compensatory damages and $5 million in punitive damages, lowered by the judge to a total of $10.35 million due to Virginia’s $350,000 cap on punitive damages. Heard received $2 million in damages.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A parolee charged with attempted murder for grabbing and hurling a woman onto the subway tracks in the Bronx told cops he didn’t mean to do it, prosecutors revealed in court filings Wednesday.
“I didn’t mean to push her onto the tracks. I was drinking. That’s me in the video,” Theodore Ellis, 30, told cops, admitting he shoved the 52-year-old victim at the Jackson Ave.-Westchester Ave. station Sunday afternoon.
The victim was hospitalized with a broken collarbone, a dislocated shoulder and bruise to her head, according to the complaint.
The push was caught on surveillance video released by cops Monday.
Theodore Ellis is taken by transit police, from NYPD Transit District 12 headquarters on Morris Park Ave. on Tuesday. (Sam Costanza/for New York Daily News)
A police source told the Daily News that Ellis and the victim had previously argued, but that the suspect couldn’t remember what made him angry “and didn’t realize his own strength when he pushed her.”
Ellis was arrested at the subway station after a station agent recognized his picture on a wanted flyer as someone who often sold MetroCard swipes there.
A man was caught on video shoving a woman onto the train tracks in an unprovoked attack at a Bronx subway station, cops said Monday. (New York Daily News Handout)
Ellis was released to parole in January after being sentenced to three to six years behind bars for attempted arson in 2016, public records show.
He’s charged with attempted murder, assault, attempted assault and reckless endangerment.
He was ordered held on $150,000 cash bail or $400,000 bond, and is due back in Bronx Criminal Court Friday.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

In the two years documentary filmmakers shadowed former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords, the most jarring moment for them was in the kitchen of her Tucson, Ariz., home.
As cameras were rolling, she and her husband, Sen. Mark Kelly, nonchalantly opened the freezer. Kelly grabbed a plastic container and revealed it holds the piece of Giffords’ skull that had to be removed after she was shot.
“This stays in here next to the empanadas and the sliced mango,” Kelly said.
Giffords’ response was “Sera, sera,” referencing the song “Que sera, sera” or “What will be, will be.”
Gabby Giffords, center, the subject of the documentary film "Gabby Giffords Won't Back Down," poses with the film's co-directors Julie Cohen, left, and Betsy West, Tuesday, June 21, 2022, at the Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills, Calif. (Chris Pizzello/Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP)
The scene from the film, “Gabby Giffords Won’t Back Down,” in theaters July 15, is emblematic of Giffords’ openness to reflect on but not languish in the 2011 shooting that changed her life. That desire is what led her to allow cameras into her life for two years — all as a pandemic was progressing.
“For me it has been really important to move ahead, to not look back,” Giffords told The Associated Press while in Los Angeles to promote the film. “I hope others are inspired to keep moving forward no matter what.”
From the filmmakers behind Academy Award-nominated Ruth Bader Ginsburg documentary “RBG,” “Gabby Giffords Won’t Back Down” is partly an intimate look at Giffords’ recovery after the January 2011 shooting that left six people dead and 13 others wounded outside a Tucson supermarket. But the movie is also an insider view of how she and Kelly navigated gun control campaigns and later a Senate campaign. The movie could not be any timelier with gun reform being debated in government, schools and the U.S. Supreme Court.
“It’s just a fascinating story about how Gabby came back from an injury that so many people just don’t even survive,” said Betsy West, a co-director. “After meeting Gabby on Zoom, we saw just what a great communicator she is. And we had a sense that we might have a lot of fun despite the very difficult subject of gun violence.”
At the same time, they wanted to strike the right balance of how much to look back at the shooting.
“We certainly didn’t want to shy away from January 8. Obviously, that’s something that changed her life,” said Julie Cohen, the film’s other director. “But Gabby is defined ultimately by everything that she’s achieved before and after that. We wanted it to show that achievement.”
The film also doesn’t avoid discussing Jared Lee Loughner, the gunman in the Tucson shooting. Interviews with law enforcement, journalists and a video made by Loughner lay out how he was able to buy a semiautomatic weapon despite a history of mental illness. He was sentenced in 2012 to life in federal prison without parole.
Gabby Giffords, center, the subject of the documentary film "Gabby Giffords Won't Back Down," poses with the film's co-directors Julie Cohen, left, and Betsy West, Tuesday, June 21, 2022, at the Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills, Calif. (Chris Pizzello/Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP)
“We did not want to dwell on the shooter but we also wanted to explain what had happened,” West said. “Gabby and Mark did not shy away from going to the sentencing hearing to make a very impassioned plea for life imprisonment. That was a very important part of the film.”
Recent mass shootings including the deaths of 19 schoolchildren and two teachers in Uvalde, Texas, and 10 supermarket shoppers — all Black — in Buffalo, New York, have put gun violence back at the forefront. The U.S. Supreme Court on Thursday struck down a New York gun permitting law. The case involves a state law that makes it difficult for people to get a permit to carry a gun outside the home. The justices said that requirement violates the Second Amendment right to “keep and bear arms.”
Also on Thursday, the U.S. Senate easily passed a bipartisan gun violence bill. Weeks of closed-door talks resulted in an incremental but landmark package in response to mass shootings. The House will vote Friday.
Much like after Uvalde, the documentary recaps how gun control debates reached a fever pitch after 26 children and two teachers were shot to death by a gunman at a Newtown, Connecticut, school. Giffords and other advocates, including some Newtown parents, were called “props” by National Rifle Association officials. Having spent time with Giffords and others impacted by gun violence, the film’s directors say their voices are central to the discourse.
“To say that somehow Gabby shouldn’t be speaking about gun violence because she’s experienced violence? It just doesn’t make any sense,” Cohen said.
A crucial element of the documentary came from videos Kelly had of Giffords in the Tucson hospital and at a rehab facility in Houston. These included then-President Barack Obama — who is interviewed in the film — and Michelle Obama’s visit to an unconscious Giffords’ bedside. They also include the first few months of speech therapy.
The bullet penetrated the left hemisphere of Giffords’ brain that services language ability, causing her to suffer from aphasia. You see in old videos Giffords sob out of frustration as she struggles to read and get stuck on saying “chicken.”
Giffords said watching those videos can make her sad, but she is determined to be upbeat.
“I’m getting better. I’m getting (better) slowly but I’m getting (better) surely,” Giffords said.
Giffords is the third movie West and Cohen have produced on a female icon. Last year, they released “Julia,” a documentary on the influence of TV chef and author Julia Child. “RBG” was a critical and commercial hit when it came out four years ago. The filmmakers say while Giffords and Supreme Court Justice Ginsburg, who died in 2020 at age 87, are very different personalities, they think viewers will see a lot of similarities. They both have toughness, persistence, optimism and are at the heart of “feminist love stories.”
Giffords often has to remind people that she still has a voice even if speaking doesn’t come easily — whether it’s on gun safety or other issues. She said she genuinely feels the climate is different now but people have to be patient because change is “slow,” and Washington, D.C., is “really slow.”
She plans to refocus on making tougher federal background checks a reality through her Gun Owners for Safety coalition. The bill the Senate approved would only strengthen background checks for buyers age 18 to 20.
If there’s one message she wants viewers to take from the documentary, it’s “fight, fight, fight every day,” Giffords said.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Back to the Future: The Musical
A Hollywood classic — and a DeLorean — are headed for Broadway.
“Back to the Future,” the West End hit musical based on the 1985 smash movie starring Michael J. Fox and Christopher Lloyd, will debut in 2023 on Broadway, producers announced Wednesday.
“Synchronize Your Watches — The Future’s coming to Broadway in 2023!!!” said a tweet from the producers, including a clip of actors Olly Dobson, playing the role of Marty McFly, and Tony Award winner Roger Bart as Emmett “Doc” Brown in the time-traveling DeLorean.
Synchronize Your Watches — The Future's coming to Broadway in 2023!!!Sign up to be the first to buy tickets! https://t.co/ZvFEjJ72wR pic.twitter.com/ZGr90KC6sN
“Back to the Future: The Musical” opened at London’s Adelphi Theatre last fall, featuring music and lyrics from two-time Emmy Award winner Alan Silvestri and six-time Grammy Award winner Glen Ballard.
Original “Back to the Future” writer Bob Gale wrote the book for the John Rando-helmed production, which won the 2022 Olivier Award for best new musical.
No details on casting, which Broadway theater or the specific opening date were made available.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The makers of “Ms. Marvel” can feel the power of their new superhero series.
Muslim directors Adil El Arbi and Bilall Fallah can’t wait for audiences to experience Marvel Studios’ first project centering on a Muslim superhero, introducing the character Kamala Khan as a Pakistani-American teenager from Jersey City who obtains cosmic abilities.
“It reminds me of my sister, my nieces, (Adil’s) wife, our aunties,” Fallah told the Daily News. “Now they have somebody that they can look up to that resembles them. I hope that it will inspire a lot of girls in the world, but at the same time, it’s also a very universal story and I think it’s going to touch everybody, no matter the race, gender or religion.”
Debuting Wednesday on Disney+, the six-part “Ms. Marvel” stars newcomer Iman Vellani as Kamala, who idolizes the powerful Captain Marvel but never imagines she could one day become a superhero herself.
That all changes when Kamala acquires superpowers from a magical bangle,  beginning a whirlwind journey as she tries to understand her newfound strength.
Iman Vellani as Ms. Marvel/Kamala Khan in "Ms. Marvel."  (Courtesy of Marvel Studios)
“It’s an origin story, so we just follow this teenage girl who is between two worlds, between her American culture and Pakistani-Islamic culture,” Fallah said.
“At school, she’s trying to be cool but she’s clumsy and she doesn’t know who she wants to be. It’s like an identity crisis. Then all of a sudden, she gets this power, and now she’s between the superhero world and being a normal human being.”
“Ms. Marvel” marks the latest high-profile project for El Arbi and Fallah, who are of Moroccan heritage. The filmmaking duo previously directed the 2020 action-comedy “Bad Boys for Life,” and have the DC Comics movie “Batgirl” starring Leslie Grace due out later this year.
El Arbi, 33, and Fallah, 36, directed the premiere episode and the finale of “Ms. Marvel” and also served as executive producers on the series.
“When we were editing ‘Bad Boys for Life,’ we were talking to each other and saying, ‘What’s the next step?’ And the next step had to be Marvel, because that’s the biz so you’ve got to be part of the (Marvel Cinematic Universe),” El Arbi told The News. “We were joking around and saying, ‘But if we are going to do a Marvel show, it’s going to have to be a Muslim character, right?’ Not knowing that (one) existed and they were planning to do that.”
“We were also surprised by how authentic and how much they really went deep into that Muslim aspect and the subject matter,” El Arbi said. “It felt also just very relatable and realistic to us.”
[ Benedict Cumberbatch and Elizabeth Olsen reveal how ‘Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness’ changes Marvel ]
Directors Adil El Arbi and Bilall Fallah with executive producer Sana Amanat (left to right) on the set of "Ms. Marvel." (Daniel McFadden/Daniel McFadden)
Kamala first appeared in the Marvel comics in 2013, and became the company’s first Muslim character to lead her own comic book the following year.
El Arbi and Fallah aimed to capture the essence of the comics by mixing animation into the live-action “Ms. Marvel” episodes.
“The comics were a great base and a great source material to be inspired by,” El Arbi said. “We also had Sana Amanat, who was co-creator of the comics, to be there as a producer, so we had a really great guidance in that aspect.
“At the same time, we loved the vibrancy and the colors, on a visual level, of the comics. We loved (the 2018 movie) ‘Into the Spider-Verse,’ so we were always saying it would be cool to have a live-action version of that, and that’s how we came up with the idea of coming up with those animation sequences to really get inside the head, the fantasy moments, of Kamala Khan.”
The “Ms. Marvel” series is only the beginning for the title superhero. The Kamala character next appears in the 2023 movie “The Marvels,” which also stars franchise veterans Brie Larson and Teyonah Parris.
“She’s so young. There’s such a big future for her,” Fallah said. “I hope it will be like Peter Parker from Queens. That’s the bar, that she has this long, long future ahead of her.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

IF THE CHEMISTRY ISN'T ON FIRE, THE MOVIE FAILS | “A huge part [of good romantic comedies] is casting and chemistry,” Ross said. “You have to believe that they would find each other attractive, that they would interact with each other in the way that they’re actually doing. That’s why I personally think that the best rom-coms tend to involve good character actors who might not have been leads in other kinds of films.” (svetikd/E+ via Getty Images)
First of all, don’t bash the rom-com
FIRST OF ALL, DON'T BASH THE ROM-COM | “This is a genre that has been largely dismissed in popular culture even though it’s fairly popular at the box office,” Ross said. “People love to bash on rom-coms and I think it’s because of two reasons: They are often associated with women — and anything like that is shoved to the side and categorized as not serious — and because comedy is not seen as a skillful art form when it’s actually incredibly difficult to do.” (PeopleImages/E+ via Getty Images)
It begins with the characters
IT BEGINS WITH THE CHARACTERS | “One of the things that distinguishes a rom-com is that it focuses deeply on character development,” Ross said. “It’s almost less about what is happening in the plot and [more about] what is developing between the characters. It tends to be really important in terms of who you cast because of that reason.” (valentinrussanov/E+ via Getty Images)
Like most films, romantic comedies have a formula
LIKE MOST FILMS, ROMANTIC COMEDIES HAVE A FORMULA | “There’s a meet-cute, a courtship phase, issues between the two people and a resolution,” Schreiber said. (Henrik Sorensen/DigitalVision via Getty Images)
But the best romantic comedies surprise viewers
BUT THE BEST ROMANTIC COMEDIES SURPRISE VIEWERS | “The sign of a really good rom-com, especially now since people are really familiar with the formula, is an injection of some originality into it,” Schreiber said. “There also has to be a great script. It has to be well written. And the characters have to have some depth. They need to have characteristics that you rely on. There’s something about rom-coms where you want to be simultaneously satisfied. You know what’s going to be there, but you also want to be surprised. Being able to do both of those things well makes those movies stand out.” (chee gin tan/E+ via Getty Images)
Authenticity is an overlooked but key component
AUTHENTICITY IS AN OVERLOOKED BUT KEY COMPONENT | “When the characters are authentic and, though they may come from different worlds, there is something there that they genuinely connect with, I think that’s the key,” Myers said. “It’s all about the characters and how well they’re drafted, connected and how they become a couple” (franckreporter/E+ via Getty Images)
The dialogue can (and should) take your breath away
THE DIALOGUE CAN (AND SHOULD) TAKE YOUR BREATH AWAY | “You have to have people that can hopefully do really good dialogue with each other because how they speak to each other and how they treat each other is how you really end up learning about them,” Ross said. (10'000 Hours/DigitalVision via Getty Images)
If the chemistry isn’t on fire, the movie fails
IF THE CHEMISTRY ISN'T ON FIRE, THE MOVIE FAILS | “A huge part [of good romantic comedies] is casting and chemistry,” Ross said. “You have to believe that they would find each other attractive, that they would interact with each other in the way that they’re actually doing. That’s why I personally think that the best rom-coms tend to involve good character actors who might not have been leads in other kinds of films.” (svetikd/E+ via Getty Images)
Relatable and aspirational? It’s a great rom-com
RELATABLE AND ASPIRATIONAL? IT'S A GREAT ROM-COM | “Rom-coms are supposed to be relatable and aspirational,” Schreiber said. “[The characters] are living upper-middle-class lives. The decor, food, wine and location are very glamorous. When it becomes intertwined with romantic love, it’s also stuffed with romantic beauty. But for these movies to work, you have to have characters that are written in a way where they have relationships with a silly best friend or a bossy co-worker. They’re stereotypical in some ways, but also relatable. It has to be written in a way where people can see themselves in these characters. If they’re too far removed, it’s not appealing. So the characters have to be both specific to the scenario, but also general. They have to be able to appeal more than to the demographic that’s being represented.” (DaniloAndjus/E+ via Getty Images)
Romantic comedies are best when they evolve with the viewer
ROMANTIC COMEDIES ARE BEST WHEN THEY EVOLVE WITH THE VIEWER | “One thing about rom-coms that has changed is that we’re not just seeing films with heterosexual couples,” Schreiber said. “Rom-coms also were predominantly white, but we’re seeing a lot more diversity. It’s not as much as we should be seeing, but, hopefully, we’ll see more diversity coming soon, especially with LGBTQ romances. As long as there is originality being used in these films in some ways, diversity is involved, and there is variation in the formula, it will stay for a while.” (10'000 Hours/DigitalVision via Getty Images)
As long as love exists, so do romantic comedies
AS LONG AS LOVE EXISTS, SO DO ROMANTIC COMEDIES | “As long as people need escapism and believe in love and the possibility of people falling in love, they will always have these types of stories,” Myers said. “Filmmakers just need to be mindful of characters and lean into the relationship to guarantee that these two people belong together.” (Kevin Kozicki/Image Source via Getty Images)
MOVIES THAT NAIL IT | Ross, Schreiber and Myer agree on one thing: certain romantic comedies perfectly exhibit what people love most about the genre. “When Harry Met Sally,” “Sleepless in Seattle,” “It Happened One Nigh,” and “The Philadelphia Story” were all listed as favorites. Effortless dialogue, beautiful characters, and a story that is credible and aspirational help the films stand out from the rest. But inclusive romantic comedies rarely receive the love they deserve. According to Ross, Schreiber and Myers, when you need love, here are a few romantic comedies worth adding to your list. (Joe Scarnici/Getty Images)
'LOVE AND BASKETBALL' | Released in 2000, “Love and Basketball” follows Quincy and Monica — two characters who sometimes love basketball more than they love each other. As they grow from childhood friends to lovers to professional athletes, they must navigate family, friends and what love really means. “Love and Basketball” is available to stream on Hulu. (Getty Images)
'SOMETHING'S GOTTA GIVE' | Starring household names like Diane Keaton, Jack Nicholson, Keanu Reeves and Frances McDormand, "Something's Gotta Give" is about the possibility of love at any age. Pretty much everything is discussed in this film — from divorce to dating someone years younger — but glamour and humor are two of the main stars. “Something’s Gotta Give” is available to stream on Hulu. (Sean Gallup/Getty Images)
'SOMETHING NEW' | Led by a Black female protagonist, "Something New" stars Sanaa Lathan as a woman navigating the complexities of interracial dating and what it does or doesn't mean to have a "dream" relationship. Released in 2006, "Something New" is available to stream on Peacock. (Vince Bucci/Getty Images)
'BRIDESMAIDS' | Starring Saturday Night Live dynamic duo Kristen Wiig and Maya Rudolph, "Bridesmaids" is a film that, according to Myers, proved audiences were ready and willing to pay to see an R-rated comedy. "Bridesmaids" follows Annie as she tries to be the perfect maid of honor for her best friend. Along the way, chaos ensues. "Bridesmaids" is available to rent on Amazon Prime and YouTube. (Michael Buckner/Getty Images)
'YESTERDAY' | What if one of the most popular musical acts in history disappeared from the world of pop culture and you were the only one who remembered they existed? What would you do with that knowledge? "Yesterday” answers that question in a light-hearted, comedic fashion. “Yesterday” is available to stream on Hulu. (Theo Wargo/Getty Images for Tribeca Film Festival)
'LOVE JONES' | Set in Chicago, "Love Jones" is about a chance meeting between two artists — a photographer and a writer — and the powerful connection they share. "Love Jones" is visual poetry with dynamic acting, memorable lines and music you'll need to add to your playlist. Most importantly, it flawlessly captures the magic of Black love. “Love Jones” is available on HBO Max. (Earl Gibson III/Getty Images for BET)
'LOVE, SIMON' | Fans of teen romantic comedies with a compelling cast will love "Love, Simon." Available to stream on Hulu, "Love, Simon" follows 17-year-old Simon as he struggles to reveal his sexuality to his family and friends. After falling in love with an anonymous classmate that he meets online, Simon tries his best to find out who is secretly the boy of his dreams. (Paras Griffin/Getty Images for 20th Century Fox)
'HITCH' | From a secret agent who fights aliens to the last man on earth, Will Smith has played his fair share of characters. But "Hitch" is the first time Smith stars as a "date doctor." A nerd who struck out on love in his teen years, Alex — played by Smith — is now a smooth-talking coach who helps clients find the woman of their dreams. That’s until a gossip columnist finally shows Alex his views on love might be wrong after all. "Hitch" is available to stream on Hulu. (ALESSANDRO ABBONIZIO/AFP via Getty Images)
'THE HALF OF IT' | “Great rom-coms that disappeared are back with a vengeance on Netflix," Ross said, and "The Half of It" is the perfect example. Set in the halls of high school, the film follows whip-smart teen Ellie Chu. Chu agrees to write a love letter for a student hoping to match with the girl of his dreams, but the line between scriber and lover quickly blurs. "The Half of It" is available to stream on Netflix. (Amy Sussman/Getty Images)
'CRAZY RICH ASIANS' | "Crazy Rich Asians" is a film you'll love to love. After traveling with her boyfriend to Singapore for his friend's wedding, Rachel Chu discovers that not only is her boyfriend rich, but he's also one of Singapore's most eligible bachelors. "Crazy Rich Asians" perfectly captures the lavish lifestyle we dream of having, but it also touches on real relationship problems, like dealing with in-laws. “Crazy Rich Asians” is available to stream on HBO Max. (Frazer Harrison/Getty Images)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Attending the BET Awards was an easy decision for Jussie Smollett.
The actor wasn’t hesitant about going to Sunday’s ceremony in Los Angeles in a rare public appearance since being found guilty on five counts of disorderly conduct last year, he told “Extra” on the event’s red carpet.
“I made the commitment to myself to go where the love is,” Smollett said. “If you see me on a carpet, I made a choice to be there and I made the choice to be there with my people with love and respect. Just know I am happy to be here and I am happy to be here with mines.”
Smollett, 40, is accused of lying to police about being attacked in Chicago in 2019 by two men whom he claims hurled racial and homophobic slurs at him, poured a chemical substance on him and placed a rope around his neck.
Jussie Smollett (Aaron J Thornton/Getty Images for BET)
[ Jussie Smollett makes rare public appearance at BET Awards  ]
He was found guilty of the disorderly conduct charges in December, and sentenced in March to 150 days in county jail. He was released on a $150,000 bond less than a week later as he appeals the conviction.
Smollett, who rose to fame on the Fox music-industry drama series, has repeatedly maintained his innocence.
He told “Extra” host Rachel Lindsay that he’s set to direct his second film in November. Without giving names, he said the movie has “one of the most iconic actresses of our time starring in it with me.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The shooting of drill rapper Avanti Frowner, 27, aka Vontae, is shot and killed during a robbery at a Bronx pharmacy. (New York Daily News Exclusive)
Police on Saturday released images of the five muggers wanted for killing Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at a Bronx pharmacy.
Victim Avanti Frowner, 27, who raps under the Vontae stage name, was in New York City to scout out locations for a music video set to be filmed later in the month when he was killed at the Amazing Community Pharmacy on E. Tremont Ave. near Arthur Ave. in Tremont at about 1:40 p.m. Thursday, police said.
Shooting victim and Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae.  (YouTube)
Vontae and a friend from California traveling with him were buying over-the-counter eye drops at the pharmacy when two of the five suspects approached, wanting to know if he wanted to buy some pot, police sources said.
The rapper declined, but the two weed sellers and three others demanded his property and his gold chain, which carried his signature nameplate, cops said.
Surveillance footage obtained by the Daily News shows Vontae and a man wearing a white T-shirt and white do-rag struggling inside the pharmacy as a terrified employee crouches behind the counter.
As an attacker forcefully pulls Vontae to the ground, three other suspects storm the store and pile on top of him while drug store employees run down a staircase into the basement, the video shows.
The employee crouched behind the counter and moves to the back of the store while one of the men hit Vontae over the head with a long umbrella.
Images of the murder of Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at  the Amazing Community Pharmacy on E. Tremont Ave. near Arthur Ave. in the Bronx on Thursday, June 9, 2022.
The do-rag-wearing assailant fumbled with a gun before he shot the drill rapper several times.
As Vontae laid on the floor of the pharmacy bleeding, he fired another shot into his chest before he took off with the massive “Moneygang Vontae” nameplate from his neck, cops said.
EMS rushed Vontae to St. Barnabas Hospital, where he died.
The NYPD released these pictures of the suspects in the killing of Los Angeles drill rapper Moneygang Vontae at a Bronx pharmacy.  (NYPD / DCPI)
He and his friend had arrived in the city Thursday morning, checked into a hotel near the pharmacy and left, but only his companion returned, telling the front desk clerk Vontae had been killed.
It was not immediately clear if the muggers knew who Vontae was, even though Moneygang Vontae posted photos of himself wearing the nameplate in the Bronx shortly before the shooting.
So far, the robbery and the killing appeared to be a crime of opportunity, a police source said.
NYPD officers investigate the shooting of rapper Moneygang Vontae, at the Amazing Pharmacy in the Bronx. (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
The drill rap music genre continues to capture police attention. Rappers belittle and call out rival gang members in their hit songs, fueling gun violence across the city, police say.
Cops released the images of the muggers in the hopes that someone recognizes them.
Anyone with information regarding their whereabouts is urged to call NYPD Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS. All calls will be kept confidential.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Sherri Shepherd is ready to bring something different to the table with her upcoming talk show.
The Emmy Award-winning funnywoman’s new daytime talk show, “Sherri,” will be syndicated in 97% of the nation, producers Lionsgate’s Debmar-Mercury announced Tuesday.
Set to debut Sept. 12 out of New York City’s Chelsea Studios, the weekday chatfest will be mostly carried on Fox TV stations across the country.
“September 12th can’t get here fast enough,” Shepherd said in a statement. “Hosting my own talk show is a dream come true and I’m so excited to take viewers on this joyous journey.”
Sherri Shepherd promises to deliver ‘truly fun and fresh, entertainment escapism’ on new talk show.
The former co-host of ABC’s long-running daytime staple “The View” experienced a career boost when her solo guest-hosting stints on the recently canceled “Wendy Williams” show turned into ratings gold.
Shepherd is looking forward to the new gig and its contribution to the daytime landscape.
“My new show will be something truly fun and fresh, a daily hour of entertainment escapism with plenty of laughter, fun and flirtiness as I give my take on pop culture,” the 55-year-old Chicago native shared.
Shepherd and her close friend and producing partner Jawn Murray will serve as an executive producers of the new program.
Fernita Wynn, whose credits include “To Tell The Truth,” “The Sharon Osbourne Show” and “Jenny Jones,” has been announced as a co-executive producer, alongside “Wendy Williams Show” holdovers Suzanne Bass and Joelle Dawson Calia on Tuesday.
David Perler, former producer of “The Ellen DeGeneres Show” and “The Rosie O’Donnell Show,” will serve as showrunner.
“Sherri is a great fit for the daytime audience because she relates to people in such a natural way,” the Emmy Award winner said. “Having worn so many hats over the years between her career, motherhood, her fitness journey and other accomplishments, Sherri brings a mix of fun, laughter and valuable, authentic advice to viewers.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

“Surely,” says Martin McDonagh, “when you go home after killing 400 people, something must remain.”
The British playwright and screenwriter isn’t talking about a murderous criminal, but the ramrod-straight men who did the bidding of the British state, hanging convicted criminals all the way up until the abolishment of capital punishment in 1964.
These professional executioners are the subject of the play “Hangmen,” which is up for five Tony Awards on Sunday, including a competitive Best Play nomination for McDonagh (his chief rival is “The Lehman Trilogy,” another U.K. import).
Alfie Allen, left, and David Threlfall in 'Hangmen.' (Joan Marcus)
Also nominated are the leading actor David Threlfall, who plays hangman Harry Wade, the featured Alfie Allen who plays one of McDonagh’s signature mysterious strangers and the designers Anna Fleischle and Joshua Carr, whose vivid work includes a jaw-dropping depiction of the relative normalcy of a northern British pub with the horrifying contrast of the hanging cell, replete with a last drop to hell.
The Anglo-Irish McDonagh is no stranger to Broadway or to Tony nominations: his previous plays include “The Beauty Queen of Leenane,” “The Lonesome West,” “The Pillowman” and “A Behanding in Spokane.” Over his career, he’s seen dramatic shifts in Broadway playwriting, mostly trends he has stubbornly resisted.
“I wanted to debate capitol punishment,” he said from London, “but not in some obviously didactic way. Basically, the play is a comedy thriller with a heavy subject matter that is debated and discussed.
“There are a lot of didactic plays out there now where every single person in the theater already agrees with the point of view. I’ve always preferred to strike both sides of the argument and not have all the sympathetic characters in the play be me, or reflect my views. Otherwise, nothing on the stage ever is unexpected. And I always get bored if there are no surprises on stage.”
Martin McDonagh attends the opening night of "Hangmen" on Broadway at Golden Theatre on April 21, 2022 in New York City.  (Jason Mendez/Getty Images)
Boredom hardly is a likely emotion at “Hangmen,” a tense and terse drama filled with dark twists and oblique digressions. It’s about a whole lot of things, not least the price paid by functionaries carrying out the state’s unsavory business. McDonagh always has been interested in devils, including the ones that wear wigs and carry gavels.
And close readers of his works also know he is interested in the price paid by storytellers, too.
“Hangmen” nearly was hung out to dry forever by COVID-19, a fate McDonagh says he would have survived but that would have been a “crushing blow for the kids in the cast who saw this as their big chance.”
The cast of 'Hangmen' on Broadway. (Joan Marcus)
But the production finally opened and made it to Tony night.
“There has been a creepy sense of déjà vu about the whole thing,” McDonagh says of the start-and-stop progression, lasting across two very abnormal seasons.
No wonder he and his “Hangmen” felt so at home.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A new movement is taking centerstage on and off Broadway — and just in time for Pride Month.
Stage productions with Black and gay narratives are no longer the understudies on the New York theater scene.
These include the Tony-nominated hit musical “A Strange Loop” and baseball-themed play “Take Me Out,” the 2022 Pulitzer Prize-winning “Fat Ham,” the insightful Off-Broadway dramas “soft” and “what the end will be,” as well as the Theater Row adaptation of “B-Boy Blues.”
“A Strange Loop” is nominated for 11 awards, including best musical, original score, book of a musical and orchestrations, while “Take Me Out” garnered four nods, including best revival of a play.
Cultural critic Emil Wilbekin, the founder of Native Son, a New York City-based nonprofit created to inspire and empower Black gay and queer men, calls the spate of shows “a new revolution.”
“What’s so powerful about this Black queer movement on Broadway and Off-Broadway is that the stories are diverse, thoughtful and authentic,” he told the Daily News. “These plays tell the tales of Black men who struggle with living at the intersection of their Blackness and their queerness. The characters are soul-searching and struggling with the complexities of their multifaceted identity — shame, stigma and society’s lack of acceptance.”
“The beauty of this Black queer theater revolution is that it creates representation of Black gay and queer men as human beings with full lives, emotional depth and stories that touch your soul,” Wilbekin said. “These characters are no longer marginalized, sidekicks or jokes. They are leading men with transformational experiences.”
The sea change has caught the attention of non-governmental media monitoring organization GLAAD.
“The outstanding success of Broadway shows like ‘A Strange Loop’ demonstrate that audiences respond emphatically to storytelling that centers on the Black queer experience, and that Black LGBTQ theatre-makers deserve space and agency on Broadway, Off-Broadway, and beyond,” Anthony Allen Ramos, GLAAD’s vice president of communications & talent, told The News.
“Now that the trend of championing Black LGBTQ excellence is taking off, the only work that remains is to keep it going so that it becomes a staple.”
Jesse Williams in "Take Me Out." (Joan Marcus)
Take Me Out Helen Hayes Theater
The pandemic-delayed revival of Richard Greenberg’s baseball-themed drama already had a lot going for it with the announcement that three popular TV actors — “Grey’s Anatomy” heartthrob Jesse Williams, “Suits” star Patrick J. Adams and Jesse Tyler Ferguson of “Modern Family” — would star. Add to that scenes with full frontal nudity, and the show became a hit. The thought-provoking story deals with the fallout after a biracial sports superstar comes out as gay. Through June 11
The cast of "Fat Ham." (Ambe J Williams)
Fat Ham The Public Theater
The 2022 Pulitzer Prize winner for drama is a raucous and irreverent twist on Shakespeare’s classic tragedy “Hamlet,” co-produced by the National Black Theatre. Marcel Spears of CBS’s “The Neighborhood” stars as Juicy, a plus-sized, queer University of Phoenix alum who is conflicted about avenging the death of his late father in this James Ijames-written romp, also starring Billy Eugene Jones, Adrianna Mitchell, Nikki Crawford, Benja Kay Thomas, Calvin Leon Smith and Chris Herbie Holland. Through July 3
Biko Eisen-Martin, Dario Vazquez, Dharon Jones, Essence Lotus, Ed Ventura, and Travis Raeburn in MCC Theater's 2022 Production of soft by Donja R. Love - Photo by Daniel J. Vasquez (Daniel J. Vasquez)
Donja R. Love’s latest play explores the passion and pain of a newly hired teacher at an all-male disciplinary boarding school program for at-risk inner city youth. In the Whitney White-directed stunner, Biko Eisen-Martin fights demons of his own after one of his most promising students unexpectedly dies by suicide. Newcomers Essence Lotus, Shakur Tolliver, Dharon Jones, Travis Raeburn, Dario Vazquez and Ed Ventura star. During the show’s limited run, the theater hosted nights for Black and queer theater fans. Through June 26
Gerald Caesar (left) and Ryan Jamaal Swain in "...what the end will be." (Joan Marcus)
... what the end will be Roundabout at Laura Pels Theatre
In Mansa Ra’s touching new comedy, the familial dynamics of three generations of gay Black men come to a head when the teenager (Gerald Caesar) comes out to his closeted father (Emerson Brooks) and the recently widowed grandfather (Keith Randolph Smith) — stricken with stage 4 bone cancer — moves in with them and decides to take his mortality into his own hands. Through July 10
Damone Williams & Stephon Guidry in "B Boy Blues." (James Earl Hardy)
Best-selling author James Earl Hardy’s 1990s tale of a 27-year-old music journalist and the banjee boy bike messenger he falls in love with takes on a new life for a new generation to embrace. The threadbare production is helmed by Christopher Burris and stars Ashton Harris, Bry’Nt, Damone Williams, Jermaine Montell, Kenè Chelo Ortiz, Reginald L. Barnes, Stephfon Guidry and Tieisha Thomas. Through June 25
"A Strange Loop" (Marc J. Franklin)
A Strange Loop Lyceum Theatre
Marketed as a “big, Black, queer-ass American musical,” Michael R. Jackson’s Pulitzer Prize-winning musical comedy focuses on a Black gay writer who works as a Broadway theater usher while traversing the ups and downs of dating and working in New York. Starring L Morgan Lee, the first openly transgender actress to be nominated for a Tony Award for her supporting performance, and newcomer Jaquel Spivey, who received a Tony nod for best performance by an actor in a leading role in a musical, “A Strange Loop” is the most nominated show this season with 11 Tony nods. Also stars Antwayn Hopper, John-Michael Lyles, James Jackson, Jr., John-Andrew Morrison and Jason Veasey. Currently playing
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Q. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services denied a green card petition my husband filed for me. The agency denied the petition because my husband has a conviction for having intercourse with a minor, age 16. What are our options?
A. Your husband can either file a new petition or file a motion with USCIS to reopen and reconsider the petition denial. If he is a permanent resident, a motion is best since it keeps your place in line for a green card. If he is a U.S. citizen, I suggest filing a new petition. The spouse of a citizen need not wait in a quota line and filing a new petition sometimes yields faster results.
Under the Adam Walsh Act, USCIS can deny a family green card petition filed by permanent residents and U.S. citizens convicted of crimes against minors.  (HANDOUT)
Under the Adam Walsh Act, USCIS can deny a family green card petition filed by permanent residents and U.S. citizens convicted of crimes against minors. The purpose of the Adam Walsh Act is to protect family members like you. So, where the citizen or permanent resident poses no risk to the person trying to get the green card, USCIS can approve the petition despite the petitioner’s conviction.
Given the nature of your husband’s crime, if you have no children in your household, you have a chance of winning your case. He will want to present evidence that your husband has completed any court required rehabilitation program and evidence of his present good character.
Q. If my wife and I file separate tax returns will immigration deny my green card application? My wife is a U.S. citizen and she is petitioning for permanent residence for me. We are living together, so the papers show the same address.
A. You and your wife may file separate tax returns without impacting your right to get a green card if you file (married filing separately) and your returns both have the same home address. The returns are good proof that yours is a bona fide or (real) marriage.
A married couple living together may lawfully file separate returns as married filing separately. Sometimes a couple pays less taxes that way. A problem arises when married people living together file separately as “head of household.” A married couple may file as head of household only if they are living apart.
Allan Wernick is an attorney and director of the City University of New York’s Citizenship Now! project. Email questions and comments to questions@allanwernick.com. Follow him on Twitter: @awernick.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The “Black Widow” of Las Vegas, once regarded as one of Nevada’s most notorious killers, has had her 2001 murder conviction overturned.
Margaret Rudin was arrested and sentenced in 1999 to serve two life sentences for the slaying of her millionaire husband, Ron Rudin. The 78-year-old was later released on parole in January 2020, but ultimately spent 19 years behind bars before a judge quashed her conviction over the weekend.
In this file photo, Margaret Rudin, second from left, is escorted out of Florence McClure Women's Correctional Center by prison staff on Jan. 10, 2020, in North Las Vegas. (Benjamin Hager/AP)
Rudin’s attorney, M. Greg Mullanax, told KLAS on Tuesday that the lawyer who previously represented Rudin during her 2001 trial, the late Michael Amador, was “objectively unreasonable.”
“For example, not interviewing witnesses, not knowing all the facts,” said Mullanax. “He gave a rambling opening statement that really didn’t pertain to her cause. He talked a lot about himself.”
In a 68-page ruling, the Nevada Supreme Court agreed with the attorney’s claims, concluding that, if not “for Amador’s unprofessional errors, her trial would have been different.” They now believe his incompetence was intentional and that he “lied to the court because he had book and movie contracts regarding the Rudin case.”
In this undated photo provided by the Nevada Department of Corrections shows Las Vegas socialite Margaret Rudin.  (AP)
Ron Rudin, a prominent 64-year-old real estate developer, vanished in December 1994 — sparking an investigation that eventually claimed headlines nationwide. His estimated net worth at the time was somewhere between $8 million and $11 million, according to the news station.
Fishermen discovered his skull and charred remains about a month later along the shoreline of a Colorado River reservoir, located about 45 miles outside of Las Vegas. He’d been shot in the head while he slept and then placed in the trunk of car, which carried him to the body of water where he was ultimately found.
Prosecutors with the Clark County District Attorney’s Office now have 30 days to file a motion to appeal the court’s ruling or request a new trial, according to KTNV. If the state opts to recharge Rudin, who has long maintained her innocence, jury selection would have to begin within the next four months.
“Margaret has served her complete sentence in prison, and the further prosecution of Margaret Rudin accomplishes nothing,” said Mullanax. “Margaret will be 79 years old in a couple of weeks and would like to live her remaining years in peace.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

This page will refresh to bring you the latest news in   seconds. DISABLE REFRESH
Harlem’s Ray Chew bringing Black music, cultural elements to Macy’s 4th of July Fireworks show
Six TV shows you missed to start binging over the July 4th long weekend
Chris Pratt is out for vengeance in military thriller ‘The Terminal List’
PRIDE 2022: Kim Cattrall to star as cosmetics mogul in Netflix’s queer-themed ‘Glamorous’ drama series
‘Who is Ghislaine Maxwell?’ docuseries attempts to explain Jeffrey Epstein’s partner in crime
Mishael Morgan is 1st Black lead winner at Daytime Emmys
Jussie Smollett opens up about regrets, public ridicule and Taraji P. Henson in first post-prison interview
Amber Heard doesn’t ‘blame’ jury for siding with ex-husband Johnny Depp in defamation trial: ‘He’s a fantastic actor’
Summer 2022 TV Preview: What to watch, try and avoid
Caitlyn Jenner weighs in on the men her daughters are dating, reveals own dating status
Netflix renews ‘Heartstopper,’ massively successful queer teen love story, for 2 more seasons
Copyright © 2022, New York Daily News

This page will refresh to bring you the latest news in   seconds. DISABLE REFRESH
Highland Park has formed backdrop for iconic 1980s movies, from ‘Risky Business’ to ‘Ferris Bueller’s Day Off’
Jessica Chastain, Bette Midler lead charge of women not feeling the Independence Day spirit
Bruno ‘Pop N Taco’ Falcon, dancer who worked with Michael Jackson and Ice-T, dead at 58
‘Shining’ actor Joe Turkel, a Brooklyn native, dead at 94
Jhene Aiko and Big Sean expecting their first child together
Happy Birthday Ari! Look back at Ariana Grande’s hottest moments as the pop star turns 29
Highlight from Paris Haute Couture Fashion Week
Stars at the Formula 1 Grand Prix of Great Britain
'Mr. Malcolm's List' movie premiere in NYC
51 years later: 'Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory'
Amber Heard asks for Johnny Depp verdict to be tossed, alleges juror lied about ID
LeBron James prays for Akron, as protests break out after police body cam reveals Jayland Walker was shot 60 times
Ricky Martin hit with restraining order in Puerto Rico
Tommy Morgan, harmonica player for ‘Dances with Wolves’ and hundreds of other films and TV shows, dies at 89
Travis Barker feeling ‘much better’ after life-threatening pancreatitis scare
Cynthia Erivo says LGBTQ community should be ‘commended for being brave‘
Lindsay Lohan married to financier Bader Shammas: ‘My everything’
Kristin Chenoweth shares the health issue she thought would end her career
Lily Allen slams ‘having to justify’ abortions after Roe overturned
Technoblade, Minecraft YouTuber with more than 12M subscribers, dies at 23, shares final goodbye message
Cameron Diaz’s husband Benji Madden ‘encouraged’ her to end nearly decade-long acting hiatus
Harlem’s Ray Chew bringing Black music, cultural elements to Macy’s 4th of July Fireworks show
BET Awards 2022: Top show moments
BET Awards 2022: Red carpet arrivals
Couple Goals! See how celebs spend their time with loved ones
Melissa Gilbert ‘aching’ for late ‘Little House on the Prairie’ co-star Michael Landon on anniversary of his death
Randy Bachman reunited with guitar stolen in 1977
‘Dune: Part Two’ release delayed until November 2023
Poison frontman Bret Michaels hospitalized for ‘unforeseen medical complication’ just before Nashville performance
Beyoncé reveals eye-popping artwork to promote new album ‘Renaissance’
Kelly Clarkson struggling to write new music in wake of divorce: ‘I just gotta get my crap together’
‘The Minutes’ is the latest Broadway show to continue requiring audiences to wear masks
Here are the latest movies to watch over Fourth of July weekend
Zachary Levi shares experience with suicidal thoughts, only seeing ‘doom and gloom’
Prince Charles ’delighted’ to finally meet Prince Harry, Meghan Markle’s daughter Lilibet: report
Buckingham Palace won’t release report on investigation into Meghan Markle’s alleged bullying
'Mr. Malcolm's List' movie premiere in NYC
Pride 2022: ‘Soft’ playwright Donja R. Love uses his own HIV positive diagnosis to illuminate his theatrical work
Kevin Bacon, Kyra Sedgwick revisit his ‘Footloose’ role à la TikTok trend
Jason Momoa starrer ‘See’ to end on Apple after this summer‘s third season
Marvel to introduce first gay Spider-Man in upcoming ‘Edge of Spider-Verse’
‘ER’ actress Mary Mara’s cause of death is announced
Cameron Diaz to un-retire for new movie with Jamie Foxx, has surprise chat with Tom Brady
Copyright © 2022, New York Daily News

This page will refresh to bring you the latest news in   seconds. DISABLE REFRESH
Highland Park has formed backdrop for iconic 1980s movies, from ‘Risky Business’ to ‘Ferris Bueller’s Day Off’
Jessica Chastain, Bette Midler lead charge of women not feeling the Independence Day spirit
Bruno ‘Pop N Taco’ Falcon, dancer who worked with Michael Jackson and Ice-T, dead at 58
‘Shining’ actor Joe Turkel, a Brooklyn native, dead at 94
Jhene Aiko and Big Sean expecting their first child together
Happy Birthday Ari! Look back at Ariana Grande’s hottest moments as the pop star turns 29
Highlight from Paris Haute Couture Fashion Week
Stars at the Formula 1 Grand Prix of Great Britain
'Mr. Malcolm's List' movie premiere in NYC
51 years later: 'Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory'
Amber Heard asks for Johnny Depp verdict to be tossed, alleges juror lied about ID
LeBron James prays for Akron, as protests break out after police body cam reveals Jayland Walker was shot 60 times
Ricky Martin hit with restraining order in Puerto Rico
Tommy Morgan, harmonica player for ‘Dances with Wolves’ and hundreds of other films and TV shows, dies at 89
Travis Barker feeling ‘much better’ after life-threatening pancreatitis scare
Cynthia Erivo says LGBTQ community should be ‘commended for being brave‘
Lindsay Lohan married to financier Bader Shammas: ‘My everything’
Kristin Chenoweth shares the health issue she thought would end her career
Lily Allen slams ‘having to justify’ abortions after Roe overturned
Technoblade, Minecraft YouTuber with more than 12M subscribers, dies at 23, shares final goodbye message
Cameron Diaz’s husband Benji Madden ‘encouraged’ her to end nearly decade-long acting hiatus
Harlem’s Ray Chew bringing Black music, cultural elements to Macy’s 4th of July Fireworks show
BET Awards 2022: Top show moments
BET Awards 2022: Red carpet arrivals
Couple Goals! See how celebs spend their time with loved ones
Melissa Gilbert ‘aching’ for late ‘Little House on the Prairie’ co-star Michael Landon on anniversary of his death
Randy Bachman reunited with guitar stolen in 1977
‘Dune: Part Two’ release delayed until November 2023
Poison frontman Bret Michaels hospitalized for ‘unforeseen medical complication’ just before Nashville performance
Beyoncé reveals eye-popping artwork to promote new album ‘Renaissance’
Kelly Clarkson struggling to write new music in wake of divorce: ‘I just gotta get my crap together’
‘The Minutes’ is the latest Broadway show to continue requiring audiences to wear masks
Here are the latest movies to watch over Fourth of July weekend
Zachary Levi shares experience with suicidal thoughts, only seeing ‘doom and gloom’
Prince Charles ’delighted’ to finally meet Prince Harry, Meghan Markle’s daughter Lilibet: report
Buckingham Palace won’t release report on investigation into Meghan Markle’s alleged bullying
'Mr. Malcolm's List' movie premiere in NYC
Pride 2022: ‘Soft’ playwright Donja R. Love uses his own HIV positive diagnosis to illuminate his theatrical work
Kevin Bacon, Kyra Sedgwick revisit his ‘Footloose’ role à la TikTok trend
Jason Momoa starrer ‘See’ to end on Apple after this summer‘s third season
Marvel to introduce first gay Spider-Man in upcoming ‘Edge of Spider-Verse’
‘ER’ actress Mary Mara’s cause of death is announced
Cameron Diaz to un-retire for new movie with Jamie Foxx, has surprise chat with Tom Brady
Copyright © 2022, New York Daily News

On a residential block in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, a nondescript eatery has become all the rage by putting an inventive twist on a New York staple.
The Black-owned Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. attracts celebrities and regular crowds alike thanks to its unusual pizza toppings: oxtail, jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles and black truffle alfredo shrimp. The white and red pies sell from $21 to $100.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren, pictured here.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
Opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren, a former high-end sneaker “concierge,” the shop has over 100,000 followers across social media platforms including Instagram, Facebook, TikTok and Twitter, and has catered to such celebs as model Chanel Iman, hip hoppers Pharrell Williams, Lil Yachty, The Lox and Jim Jones, as well as pro football stars Victor Cruz and Sterling Shepard.
The VH1 reality show “Black Ink Crew” has scheduled a taping at the venue this week.
But McIaren particularly enjoys keeping his local clientele fed and happy.
“I’m here for the community, and this community don’t have nothing like it,” Mclaren told the Daily News. “All these kids just running into the Chinese restaurant, which is kind of what I grew up on ... We don’t get to try new things. We don’t get to expand our taste buds. So you got to think about these people that’s in Bed-Stuy. Ninety percent of my customers didn’t even know what a truffle was. I want to change that.”
The Black-owned eatery offers unusual toppings: Jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles, fried salmon diavlo, black truffle alfredo shrimp.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
On an average day, 100 pies are sold, and on weekends, cars are double-parked from one end of the street to the other. About 90% of his customers are New Yorkers mostly from Brooklyn, but he recalled a group of Brazilians coming in every day one recent week and trying different slices.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn, New York, was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren.  (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
A native of East Flatbush, Mclaren runs the shop with his wife, Ashlee. He learned the restaurant business working at a local pizzeria in his teens and then toiling for national chains such as IHOP, TGI Fridays, Friendly’s, Red Lobster and even Brooklyn favorite Junior’s.
Mclaren then launched a successful sneaker resale business that flourished on social media, attracting clientele like British Formula One superstar Lewis Hamiltonand music stars Rihanna, Cardi B and Offset. But when the business started to fade, a friend approached him to open a pizza shop.
“If I put my name on it, we got to use the best of the best ingredients and we’ve got to come up with something different because we’re in New York City and we’re off the beaten path,” he said. ”So I started thinking outside the box.”
He first hit pay dirt making 20 pizza pies loaded with lobster and shrimp and selling them for $100 each. He sold out in four hours.
Cuts & Slices on Howard Ave. between Halsey and Hancock Sts. in Brooklyn, New York, was opened in 2018 by Randy Mclaren. The Black-owned eatery offers unusual toppings: Jerk chicken, jerk shrimp, chicken and waffles, fried salmon diavlo, black truffle alfredo shrimp. The white and red pies sell from $21 to $100. (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
The oxtail pizza soon became a menu favorite. “It took about two or three times to get it where I thought it would be perfect,” he shared. It takes two staffers up to two hours to debone 30 to 40 pounds of the juicy meat daily, he said.
While his social media savvy has helped grow his business, Mclaren credits his customers for being willing to try something that’s “new and different.”
Cuts & Slices offers unusual toppings: The Tulum pie, inspired by a recent vacation to the exclusive Mexican resort destination, was designed by Randy Mclaren's wife Ashlee.  It's topped with ground beef, jalapenos, fried ripe sweet plantains and Mexican cheese. (Karu F. Daniels/New York Daily News)
“I think it’s due to the fact that it’s something so unique. No one else actually has oxtail pizza, or has actually put lobster, shrimp and black truffle alfredo on pizza.”
“It’s something different that draws people from all over the country,” he said. “And once they try it the first time and pretty much blows their mind, they fall in love with the pizza. And they keep coming back and tell all of their friends about it.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

24 milkshakes with more calories than an entire meal | (bhofack2 / Getty Images)
24 milkshakes with more calories than an entire meal
24 milkshakes with more calories than an entire meal | (bhofack2 / Getty Images)
1. Jamocha Handcrafted Shake (large)
1. Jamocha Handcrafted Shake | Chain: Arby's - Calories: 1,060 (Courtesy of Arby's)
2. Vanilla Handcrafted Shake (large)
2. Vanilla Handcrafted Shake | Chain: Arby's - Calories: 900 (Courtesy of Arby's)
3. OREO Cookies n' Cream Milkshake (large)
3. OREO Cookies n' Cream Milkshake | Chain: Baskin-Robbins - Calories: 1,440 (Courtesy of Baskin-Robbins)
4. Chocolate Chip Cookie Dough Milkshake (large)
4. Chocolate Chip Cookie Dough Milkshake | Chain: Baskin-Robbins - Calories: 1,520 (Courtesy of Baskin-Robbins)
5. Chocolate Oreo Cookie Shake
5. Chocolate Oreo Cookie Shake | Chain: Burger King - Calories: 740 (Anthony92931 / Wikimedia Commons)
6. Oreo Milkshake | Chain: Cheesecake Factory - Calories: 1,630 (Courtesy of Cheesecake Factory)
7. Chocolate Milkshake | Chain: Cheesecake Factory - Calories: 1,260 (Courtesy of The Cheesecake Factory)
8. Vanilla Milkshake | Chain: Cheesecake Factory - Calories: 1,210 (LPETTET / iStock Unreleased via Getty Images)
9. Reese's Chocolate Peanut Butter Dream (large)
9. Reese's Chocolate Peanut Butter Dream | Chain: Cold Stone Creamery - Calories: 1,610 (Courtesy of Cold Stone Creamery)
10. Cake Batter 'n Shake (large)
10. Cake Batter 'n Shake | Chain: Cold Stone Creamery - Calories: 1,300 (Courtesy of Cold Stone Creamery)
11. Milk and OREO Cookies (large)
11. Milk and OREO Cookies | Chain: Cold Stone Creamery - Calories: 1,280 (Courtesy of Cold Stone Creamery)
12. Peanut Butter Shake (large)
12. Peanut Butter Shake | Chain: Dairy Queen - Calories: 1,250 (Courtesy of Dairy Queen)
13. Hot Fudge Shake (large)
13. Hot Fudge Shake | Chain: Dairy Queen - Calories: 990 (Courtesy of Dairy Queen)
14. Caramel Shake | Chain: Dairy Queen - Calories: 980 (Courtesy of Dairy Queen)
15. Oreo Shake with Whipped Topping (large)
15. Oreo Shake with Whipped Topping | Chain: Jack in the Box - Calories: 1,170 (Courtesy of Jack in the Box)
16. Chocolate Shake with Whipped Topping (large)
16. Chocolate Shake with Whipped Topping | Chain: Jack in the Box - Calories: 1,150 (Courtesy of Jack in the Box)
17. Strawberry Shake with Whipped Topping
17. Strawberry Shake with Whipped Topping | Chain: Jack in the Box - Calories: 1,120 (Courtesy of Jack in the Box)
18. Loaded Chocolate Cookies & Cream Shake
18. Loaded Chocolate Cookies & Cream Shake | Chain: Shake Shack - Calories: 1,160 (Courtesy of Shake Shack)
19. Black and White Shake
19. Black and White Shake | Chain: Shake Shack - Calories: 770 (jeepersmedia / Flickr)
20. Oreo and Reese’s Peanut Butter Master Shake (large)
20. Oreo and Reese’s Peanut Butter Master Shake | Chain: Sonic Drive-In - Calories: 1,720 (Courtesy of Sonic Drive-In)
21. Reese’s Peanut Butter Classic Shake (large)
21. Reese’s Peanut Butter Classic Shake | Chain: Sonic Drive-In - Calories: 1,490 (Courtesy of Sonic Drive-In)
22. Cheesecake Master Shake (large)
22. Cheesecake Master Shake | Chain: Sonic Drive-In - Calories: 1,230 (Courtesy of Sonic Drive-In)
23. Nutella | Chain: Steak 'n Shake - Calories: 820 (elizabeth_albert / Flickr)
24. Reese's Chocolate PB (regular)
24. Reese's Chocolate PB (regular) | Chain: Steak 'n Shake - Calories: 980 (Courtesy of Steak 'n Shake)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Two actors working on the upcoming Netflix series “The Chosen One” were killed and six other people were injured when the van they were riding crashed in Mexico on Thursday.
The Baja California Department of Culture released the name of the two actors, Raymundo Garduño Cruz and Juan Francisco González Aguilar. The six others who were hurt are believed to be cast and crew members. They are said to be in stable condition.
The van reportedly ran off the road and then flipped. The crash happened in a desert area near the city of Mulegé on the Baja California Sur peninsula, according to local media reports.
A source close to the production told Variety that the group was going from the city of Santa Rosalía to the local airport.
The series is based on the comic book series “American Jesus” by writer Mark Millar and artist Peter Gross. It features a 12-year-old boy who learns he is the returned Jesus Christ, destined to save humankind, according to a Netflix description.
Filming on the show, which had previously been titled “American Jesus,” reportedly started in Mexico in April.
Redrum, the company running the filming, has temporarily paused production, Deadline reported on Saturday.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The umps at the Tony Awards have made their call: “Take Me Out” was a home run.
The buzzy take on Richard Greenberg’s story about the chaos that ensues when a star Major League Baseball player comes out as gay won the Tony for best play revival on Sunday.
Jesse Williams, center, and cast during a performance of the Broadway revival of the baseball-themed "Take Me Out," in New York. (Joan Marcus/AP)
The well-reviewed production received some unwanted attention this spring after a theatergoer managed to film one of the play’s stars, Jesse Williams, naked during a performance, and posted the video online.
The award on Sunday brought attention on the fast-paced play back into fair territory.
“Take Me Out” beat out a packed field of contenders in the best play revival category that included “American Buffalo,” “For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf,” “How I Learned to Drive” and “Trouble in Mind.”
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
The original Broadway production of “Take Me Out” crossed home with the best play honor at the 2003 Tony Awards. The revival closed Saturday.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Winners and losers ]
The revival was boosted by an oh-so-cool performance from Williams as Darren Lemming, the ball club’s star, a side-splitting turn from Jesse Tyler Ferguson as the outfielder’s business manager and an intense outing from Michael Oberholtzer as the team’s homophobic flamethrowing closer.
All three earned Tony nominations in the best featured actor in a play category, and Ferguson won.
“If you’re going to lose, lose to Jesse Tyler Ferguson,” Oberholtzer cracked to reporters on Sunday night.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Brad Johnson, the actor best known for playing the Marlboro Man in cigarette ads, died earlier this year. He was 62.
Johnson died from COVID-19 complications on Feb. 18, but his death wasn’t widely reported until this week.
“Brad was a true renaissance man,” his family wrote in an online obituary. “He was not only interested in all life had to offer, but was gifted in it as well.”
In addition to his time as the Marlboro Man, Johnson was an actor in the 1989 Steven Spielberg film “Always” and had a recurring role on “Melrose Place.”
Born Oct. 24, 1959, in Tucson, Ariz., Johnson was a rodeo man from a young age. He started his professional career in 1984, and his rugged good looks led to his discovery by a talent scout.
His first role, fittingly, was on an episode of “Dallas” in 1986. He’d go on to appear in several other shows, including “Soldier of Fortune, Inc.” and “CSI: Crime Scene Investigation.”
Johnson also had a five-episode run on “Melrose Place.”
Brad Johnson in "Always". (Sherman, John/John Sherman/Amblin)
In addition to his small-screen work, Johnson appeared in “Always,” “Rough Riders” and all three “Left Behind” films on the big screen.
Johnson met his wife of 35 years, Laurie, on a rodeo trip in Dallas. He is survived by her and their eight children.
“As much as he loved cowboying and the outdoors, Brad loved nothing more than his family,” his obituary read. “He put them before himself in every way and they know that they could not have been blessed with a better husband and father.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

This week’s box office is all shook up.
“Top Gun: Maverick” is back on top — but being hound-dogged by the new “Elvis” movie.
The Tom Cruise-led action sequel and the Baz Luhrmann-directed “Elvis” biopic tied for the No. 1 spot at the domestic box office over the weekend, both making an estimated $30.5 million.
Another strong weekend for “Top Gun: Maverick” pushed the film past $1 billion globally, giving Cruise his first movie ever to reach that threshold.
“Top Gun: Maverick” has made $521 million in North America through its first five weekends in theaters. This is the third box-office win for “Maverick,” which is the highest-grossing movie of 2022.
The film comes nearly four decades after the original “Top Gun” and centers on Cruise’s Maverick training a new generation of Navy pilots.
“Elvis” also hit a high note with international audiences, adding an additional $20 million overseas during its first weekend in theaters.
Austin Butler in "Elvis." (Warner Bros. Pictures)
The film stars Austin Butler as Elvis Presley and depicts the King of Rock and Roll’s ascent to superstardom, as well as the struggles he faced throughout his life. Tom Hanks plays the musician’s controversial manager, Col. Tom Parker, while Olivia DeJonge portrays the singer’s wife, Priscilla Presley.
“Elvis” is the first film directed by Luhrmann since “The Great Gatsby,” which came out in 2013.
[ ‘Elvis’ director Baz Luhrmann says film humanizes the icon, shares how Elvis Presley’s family reacted to it  ]
Finishing third at the domestic box office over the weekend was “Jurassic World Dominion,” which added $26.4 million. The dinosaur epic won the previous two weekend box offices, and has now made $302 million in North America and $746 million worldwide.
Tom Cruise in "Top Gun: Maverick."  (Scott Garfield/Paramount Pictures)
Directed by Colin Trevorrow, “Dominion” is the third and final film in the “Jurassic World” trilogy, and the sixth film in the “Jurassic” film franchise. The movie reunited original “Jurassic Park” stars Sam Neill, Laura Dern and Jeff Goldblum for their first movie together since 1993′s original “Jurassic Park.”
Rounding out the North American box office’s top five were the newly released horror movie “The Black Phone” starring Ethan Hawke, which made $23.4 million to finish fourth, and the “Toy Story” spinoff “Lightyear” led by Chris Evans, which added $17.7 million to come in fifth.
The July movie slate promises more box-office fireworks, with the animated prequel “Minions: The Rise of Gru” due out this Friday, before Marvel’s much-anticipated “Thor: Love and Thunder” strikes into theaters July 8.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

An MTA bus driver was arrested after a three-week probe for callously fleeing the scene of a Staten Island crash where a 69-year-old pedestrian was killed, police said Wednesday.
Darrell Sweet, 52, was charged Tuesday with driving away following the fatal incident — and later driving past the scene as investigators began their probe into the felony case, according to police. He was released without bail following his arraignment in Staten Island Criminal Court.
Investigators at first were unsure if Sweet realized he had struck somebody, but court documents charge he knew what happened.
“I should have stopped,” he acknowledged to cops, while the court papers noted Sweet “did drive away from the scene without stopping or reporting the incident.”
The driver, a 15-year MTA veteran, was removed from duty without pay pending a predisciplinary suspension, officials said.
“What happened was tragic,” said Frank Annicaro, the MTA’s head of buses. “We cooperated fully with the NYPD investigation and will have no further comment as the justice system does its work.”
Sweet, behind the wheel of a SIM10 bus heading east on Forest Hill Road, turned left onto Platinum Ave. and struck Patrick Varriale, who was crossing the intersection, about 4:35 a.m. on May 13, police said.
Varriale, who lived a quarter mile away, died at the scene as Sweet drove off, authorities said. The driver did not report to police or his supervisors what had happened, though cops quickly learned of his involvement and took him in for questioning that day.
Front-facing cameras on the bus were functioning and were turned over to police, MTA sources said.
Varriale, survived by his wife, son and two grandchildren, was a longtime employee of the American Federation of Musicians at their offices in Midtown.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A dispute over a dog that erupted into gunfire left a couple dead, an infant orphaned and a third person critically injured in Hartford.
Christina Dang, 27, and Chase Eugene Garrett, 39, were killed in the Sunday night shooting in a driveway at around 9 p.m., The Hartford Courant reported. A woman in her 20s was in critical condition, Hartford Mayor Luke Bronin said at a press conference. All three lived at the residence, as did the baby, who has now been placed with child services.
“This is a personal neighbor dispute over a dog that escalated into violence and into a shooting,” Hartford Police Chief Jason Thody said at Monday’s briefing. “This is another example of a very personal dispute that escalated into violence unnecessarily. I can’t say it enough: We have to find better ways to resolve our conflicts.”
He stressed the importance of finding nonviolent ways to work things out, de-escalate fraught situations, and “have some patience,” he said. “These are tragic situations, and it’s very frustrating for the officers because these are difficult to forget and difficult to prevent.”
Police said that there was no previous history between the neighbors. Thody said police had identified a person of interest and recovered a vehicle that may have been driven away from the scene.
“Is heartbreaking to think that two people have lost their lives and a third person remains in critical condition because of a minor personal dispute that escalated into violence,” Bronin said. “This is the continuation of a very, very distressing trend that we are seeing, not just in Hartford but also around the state and around the country. Which is, is very personal disputes — minor personal disputes — escalating with incredible speed into violence. And the presence of guns then turns those disputes fatal.”
So far this year there have been 20 homicides in the City of Hartford. In comparison, there were 19 homicides in the city during all of 2021. To date this year there have been 59 nonfatal shootings in the city, compared to 65 by this time last year, Hartford Police Lieutenant Aaron Boisvert said, according to The Courant. At its current pace, Hartford will exceed its 2012 total of 23 homicides by the end of July, The Courant said.
“It is just devastating to think about the lives lost and the lives changed, including this very young child’s life changed forever because a minor dispute about a dog turned into a tragic shooting,” Bronin said.
Relatives of Dang told WVIT-TV that the couple had moved to Hartford to raise their child – who police said was 6 months old and family members said was 4 months – and to be closer to Garrett’s family.
“Christina was my baby sister,” sister Julie Dang told the station from her home in Kentucky. “She was a beautiful soul full of life. She was a mother to a 4-month-old, Chosen, and she lost her life over a senseless argument.”
The dog had been placed with a neighbor, The Courant noted. Before Sunday police had never received a complaint about the canine.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The continuing journey of Haiti-born restaurateur Chef Wesly Jean Simon and Zanmi NYC — his Brooklyn restaurant — is both inspiring and appetizing.
Through his Prospect Lefferts Gardens fine dining establishment Zanmi NYC (Zanmi translates to “friend” in Haitian Creole), Jean Simon has been creating loyal patrons since February 2020.
Chef Wesly Jean Simon, owner of Zanmi NYC in Brooklyn. (Zanmi NYC)
Since opening, Zanmi NYC — at 1206 Nostrand Ave. — has been doing well, which Jean Simon attributes to “hard work and good luck.” The restaurant is just two blocks north of Brooklyn’s vibrant Little Haiti neighborhood.
A veteran of the New York area’s competitive cuisine scene, the seasoned chef has developed a menu of appetizers entrees, and brunch items — from Balsamic Kreyol Scallops, and Crab Cakes to Grilled Octopus, Lambi (conch) Boukkanen, and a tasty Voodoo Pasta.
Grilled octopus over red skinned potatoes in Kreyol sauce, and voodoo pasta are favorites on the Zanmi NYC menu. (Zanmi NYC)
Zanmi NYC — which toughed out the shutdowns and health restrictions of the coronavirus pandemic in the city — also plans to resume its live Haitian music performances in the future.
One of the chef’s aids for economic survival was the formation of the Haitian Business Coalition, which helps area businesses through the economic hardships of the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond. Jean Simon was instrumental in founding the organization.
On Zanmi NYC’s website, you can buy homemade Haitian “epis” marinade (left) to bring a taste of island's cuisine to your meals, or purchase items from the signature Zanmi collection.
“The business coalition is still going and we’re going to stay strong,” Jean Simon said. “We share a lot of ideas, and we share what we want to do in the community.” He noted that the organization intends to meet with city officials to address the needs of local business owners.
Zanmi NYC can be reached at contact@zanminyc.com, (718) 676-1047, or by visiting zanminyc.com.
Jamaica-born businessman Vincent HoSang of Caribbean Food Delights, and Royal Caribbean Bakery, is among the 11 dads being honored in the Bronx Sunday with the “Esteemed Father’s Award,” presented by the Street Hype newspaper.
Street Hype newspaper’s “Esteemed Father’s Award” celebrates dads on Father's Day. (HANDOUT)
The event will be held at The Dumpling Cove, at 1530 E. 222nd St., starting at 5 p.m. The affair will be live streamed on Twitter @streethypenewpaper and @patrickmaitland. Call (718) 753-9469 or (914) 663-4973 for information.
It’s been almost 90 years, but the Antigua and Barbuda Progressive Society is finally getting its props from the city on Wednesday, when a block in Harlem is co-named for the organization’s founder.
The street naming — to Bishop James P. Roberts Sr. Way — will take place from noon to 3 p.m. on W. 122 St. (between Malcolm X Blvd. and Mt. Morris Park West), the block where the 87-year-old organization is headquartered.
Flag of Antigua and Barbuda flies outside the W. 122nd St. headquarters of the Antigua and Barbuda Progressive Association in Harlem.
After arriving in Harlem from Antigua, Roberts, along with fellow Antiguans, founded Antigua Progressive Society in 1934. The bylaws of the organization were changed to include the sister island of Barbuda, when the New York-based Barbuda Benevolent Society dissolved.
Still active, the Antigua and Barbuda Progressive Society holds monthly meetings, hosts workshops and aids the less fortunate in New York and the Caribbean.
Visit abpsociety.org for more information.
Caribbean immigrant Jan Matzeliger — inventor of the automatic shoe lasting machine, which revolutionized shoe making — is one of the daily “Caribbean Immigrant” features on the News Americas Now website.
Pioneering Episcopal priest Joseph Sandiford Atwell (left), automatic shoe lasting machine inventor Jan Matzeliger (center), and Chicago founder Jean Baptiste Point du Sable are among the immigrants featured by News Americas Now.
Successful newcomers to America, such as pioneering Episcopal priest Joseph Sandiford Atwell and city of Chicago founder Jean Baptiste Point du Sable are among the highlighted immigrants. The month’s features are available at newsamericasnow.com
June’s celebration of national Caribbean American Heritage Month will dip into July with the “Great Minds are Made in the Caribbean” event on July 1, presented by the American Foundation for the University of the West Indies.
The session of “Consuls General in Conversation About the Contribution of the Caribbean to the USA” will be held at the rooftop lounge of BKLYN Commons, at 495 Flatbush Ave., from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m.
The American Foundation for the University of the West Indies' "Caribbean American Heritage Celebration" includes the “Great Minds are Made in the Caribbean” event on July 1.
RSVP by Friday to mwallace@afuwi.org or call (212) 759-9345.
Caribbeat now appears every other week. To submit items for Caribbeat, send email to caribbeatnewyork@gmail.com.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Paradise can be found close to home.
Fire Island, a narrow, 32-mile barrier island off the southern coast of Long Island, features two communities that have long served as a queer utopia and a safe haven for members of the LGBTQ community.
A sweeping new book, “Fire Island: A Century in the Life of an American Paradise,” by British writer Jack Parlett pays tribute to the queer side of the popular vacation destination by chronicling its history through the eyes of famous writers who frequented the island.
Garden decorations in Fire Island Pines, June 2016 (Daniel Handal)
“I was just completely captivated by it,” Parlett, 30, told the Daily News, about his first visit to the island’s LGBTQ-centric hamlets of Cherry Grove and Fire Island Pines in the summer of 2017.
With its stunning beaches, legendary parties and rich cultural history, Fire Island is celebrated in Parlett’s deeply researched book as a magical place known for the campy silliness of a boat full of drag queens “invading” the harbor every July 4, or the hedonistic sexual culture in the Fire Island Pines that’s still “alive and well,” Parlett writes, or the weekly underwear parties in Cherry Grove.
But it is also a place queer people can call home, strengthen links to their chosen family and come together as a community to fight the devastation caused by the AIDS epidemic.
It’s also a summer paradise that has also been criticized for historically being more accessible to a privileged few, as Parlett points out.
James Baldwin, a frequent visitor to Cherry Grove throughout the 1950s and ‘60s, noted with caution that he was coming into a “mostly white, middle-class queer world,” Parlett writes. Six decades later, after his first visit to the Pines, Parlett wondered whether or how he could fit into the “scene.” He could feel himself “becoming more neurotic about my eating and exercise habits” and even bleached his hair “to replicate the kind of sun-kissed svelteness I’d seen gracing the early-morning dance floor.”
Red Party in Fire Island Pines, Labor Day Weekend 2018. (Daniel Handal)
Parlett, a literary scholar who focuses on queer studies and teaches American literature at the University of Oxford, lived in New York while doing research for his Ph.D. about poets and gay cruising.
Having a reputation as being a gay village since the mid-20th century, Fire Island has deep ties with some of the most important names in art and literature, including Walt Whitman, Patricia Highsmith, Oscar Wilde, James Baldwin, Janet Flanner and American poet Frank O’Hara, who died at age 40 after he was hit by a dune buggy in Fire Island Pines in 1966.
“I’ve been reading these poets, and suddenly seeing for myself the place that so many of them have been and spent time — after that I just kind of couldn’t stop thinking about this place,” Parlett said.
Shortly after that visit, Parlett decided to work on a book that expanded beyond the literary world and turned into a love letter to the community’s history, cultural significance, HIV/AIDS activism and the role it played in the queer liberation movement. .
Jack Parlett (Alex Krook/Alex Krook)
Parlett set out to “trace the footsteps of particular writers on the island ... who burst onto the scene in the 1970s” to see what those stories could teach us about those moments.
“What it was like to be there, but also what it was like to be queer in New York, what it was like to experience community or exclusion in these different historical eras,” he said.
“I see the book not just as a celebration, but something that is trying to engage with the more complicated aspects of Fire Island as a space as well.
Memorial Day Weekend 2013, Fire Island Pines (Daniel Handal)
For decades, the mystique of a sun-soaked gay Xanadu just two hours east of New York City has been exacerbated fueled by its prominence in popular culture.
There was the Kelly Ripa-produced reality show called “Fire Island” that aired on Logo in 2017; the Tony Award-winning play “The Inheritance” that ran on Broadway in 2019; and the rom-com starring Kim Booster and “Saturday Night Live” star Bowen Yang, also named “Fire Island,” that premiered on Hulu this month.
July 4th weekend at Sip-n-Twirl 2019, Fire Island Pines. (Daniel Handal)
“I didn’t set out to write an authoritative history, because I think loads of people who have different experiences of Fire Island will have different claims upon it as a space and different claims upon its history,” Parlett said. “For me, [the book] feels like a response to Fire Island as a place, [and] what we can learn from it.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A Los Angeles drill rapper was gunned down Thursday night in the Bronx for his gold chain, which carried his signature nameplate — Moneygang Vontae — police sources said.
Avanti Frowner, 27, who raps under the Vontae stage name, was in New York City to film a music video later in the month when a pack of thieves tracked him to the Amazing Community Pharmacy on E. Tremont Ave. near Arthur Ave. in Tremont at about 1:40 p.m. Thursday, police sources said.
Vontae stepped outside to buy pot from the suspects, who followed him into the pharmacy and held him up, sparking a struggle, law enforcement sources said.
Surveillance footage obtained by the Daily News shows Vontae and a man wearing a white T-shirt and white do-rag  struggling inside the pharmacy as a terrified employee crouched behind the counter.
As the man forcefully pulled Vontae to the ground, three other suspects stormed the store and piled on top of him while drug store employees ran down a staircase into the basement.
The employee crouched behind the counter moved to the back of the store while one of the men hit Vontae over the head with a long umbrella.
The do-rag-wearing man fumbled with a gun before he shot the drill rapper several times.
As Vontae laid on the floor of the pharmacy bleeding, he fired another shot into his chest before he took off with the massive “Moneygang Vontae” nameplate from his neck, cops said.
“There were about three shots, and I saw the guys running away from the pharmacy,” a witness told The News Thursday. “They robbed him. One of them had his chain.”
“One of the guys had a gun and he put it in the pocket of his shorts as they ran away,” said the witness, who wished not to be named.
EMS rushed Vontae to St. Barnabas Hospital, where he died.
Vontae was staying at a hotel on Webster Ave. near the pharmacy. A friend from California accompanied him on his trip.
NYPD officers investigate the fatal shooting of Moneygang Vontae at Amazing Pharmacy, on  E. Tremont Ave. in the Bronx on June 9. (Barry Williams/for New York Daily News)
“Yesterday they came in the morning and they left and they did not come,” said the hotel’s front desk clerk, Vick Sid. “They never came back.”
Sid said Vontae’s friend returned to the hotel at 7 p.m. the day of the shooting and told him, “My friend was killed.”
“I said, ‘What happened?’ He asked me to check the YouTube. He told me he was killed in the pharmacy,” Sid recalled.
A short time before his death, the drill rapper posted photos of himself outside a Bronx bodega, the massive nameplate dangling from his neck.
“I Got Use To Counting So Much Money I Got Paper Cuts‼️” he wrote in an Instagram post.
Fans mourned his loss on social media.
“I really hope all this s--- a dream gang,” one commented.
The drill rap music genre continues to capture police attention. Rappers belittle and call out rival gang members in their hit songs, fueling gun violence across the city, police say.
Last week, New York City-based drill rapper Gino Mondana was arrested for allegedly shooting a man in the leg following an April fender-bender in the Bronx.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The son of “General Hospital” stars Jack and Kristina Wagner was found dead in Los Angeles Monday.
Harrison Wagner, 27, was found in a parking lot just before 5:15 a.m. local time, according to the Los Angeles Medical Examiner’s Office, the Daily News confirmed Wednesday.
A cause of death was not listed and a spokesperson for the medical examiner’s office confirmed to The News that the medical examiner “is requesting more investigation into the death” after the completion of the autopsy.
The Los Angeles Police Department did not immediately return a request for comment from The News.
“General Hospital” stars Jack and Kristina Wagner with their son, Harrison Wagner. (Instagram)
Jack and Kristina Wagner, who co-starred on the ABC soap opera, married in 1993 and had two sons together, Harrison and Peter, before divorcing in 2006. Jack, who also starred on “Melrose Place,” has a daughter, Kerry, from a previous relationship.
Just weeks before Harrison’s death, Kristina shared a family photo with her two sons on the steps of their family ranch.
“The prickly beauty of the high desert and a landscape surrounded by national forests always reminded us that there is peace when you are willing to look for it,” she wrote on Instagram. “Oh Ranch, it’s time to part. We’ll miss you so much with our heartwarming memories. We know that there are many opportunities for joy ahead.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

In 1995, Menzel auditioned for her first Broadway show and landed the part in "Rent." Menzel was nominated for her first Tony Award for playing Maureen Johnson in the popular musical. After "Rent," Menzel went on to release her first solo album while still continuing her stage career. In 2003, Menzel landed one of the biggest roles of her life in the Broadway classic "Wicked" along with Kristin Chenoweth. (Handout, Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP Photo)
Before Sarah Jessica Parker hit television screens across the county as Carrie Bradshaw in "Sex and the City," she was making a name for herself on the stage. Her first role on Broadway was in William Archibald's "The Innocents" as a child. In 1977, Parker was cast in the Broadway musical "Annie" (pictured left) first as a small role until she succeed two more actresses to play Annie starting in 1979. After playing Annie for a year, Parker moved on to television acting where she would rise to prominence. (Denise Truscello/Getty Images)
At the age of 12, actress Anna Kendrick was cast in her first prominent acting role as Dinah in the Broadway musical "High Society" in 1998. Her role in the musical lead to a Tony Award nomination, making her the third youngest Tony Award nominee. Kendrick is pictured at her first Tony Award red carpet in the bottom left photo. From there, Kendrick went on to appear in numerous other stage productions including "A Little Night Music" and "Camp." (Ron Galella/WireImage, Joel Ryan/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Lea Michele got her start on Broadway at the young age of 8. In 1995, Michele went to her first audition for Les Miserables where she sang the song "Angel of Music" from the musical "The Phantom of the Opera" since it was the only one she knew at the time. Although Michele had originally gone to support a friend, she ended up landing the part herself as Young Cosette in the 1995 play. She then moved to Toronto, Ontario to perform in the Canadian production of "Ragtime" (pictured left). After taking off time to concentrate on school, Michele returned to Broadway during her senior year of high school in "Fiddler on the Roof." (Catherine Ashmore, Matt Sayles/Invision/AP Photo)
While still in high school, John Travolta landed a role in the touring company of the musical "Grease" as well as on Broadway in "Over Here!" His Broadway debut made way for his acting career as he soon after moved to Los Angeles to join show business. By 1977, Travolta was cast in the movie version of "Grease" in lead role Danny Zuko. (AP Photo, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Kristen Bell took an interest in theater at a young age participating in her school's drama club and music clubs. Bell went on to NYU's Tisch School of the Arts where she ended up leaving a few credits shy of graduating to take a roll in the Broadway musical "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" (pictured left). A few years later, Bell starred in "The Crucible" before moving to California to pursue a successful career in television acting. (Joan Marcus, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Julie Andrews got her start in theater while still living in London with her parents. In 1954, on the eve of her 19th birthday, Andrews made her debut performance on Broadway portraying Polly Browne in "The Boy Friend" (pictured left backstage). Upon the ending of the musical, Andrews was immediately cast in "My Fair Lady" on Broadway. It was also around the same time that Andrews made her first appearance on television in the tv-film "High Tor." (Bob Wands/AP Photo, Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Kristen Chenoweth appeared in numerous stage performances throughout high school and into college before making her Broadway debut. Chenoweth traveled to New York City to help a friend move when she auditioned and landed her first role as Arabella Rittenhouse in the musical "Animal Crackers." From there, Chenoweth appeared in a number of regional theatre productions before starring as Hyacinth in the Roundabout Theater Company production of "Scapin" (pictured bottom left). (Handout, Charles Sykes/Invision/AP Photo)
While in high school, actress Diane Keaton participated in her school's singing and drama clubs where she performed various plays. Upon graduating and moving to Manhattan, Keaton became an understudy to Sheila in the original Broadway production of "Hair" (pictured bottom row, middle in left photo). After being in "Hair" for months, Keaton moved on to Woody Allen's production of "Play It Again, Sam" where she would be nominated for her first Tony Award. (Keystone Features/Getty Images, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
Although actor Hugh Jackman always had an interest in theatre growing up, he didn't land a role on stage until 1996 when he played Gaston in a local production of "Beauty and the Beast" and later in "Sunset Boulevard." In 1998, Jackman became well known when he played Curly in the Royal National Theatre's acclaimed production of "Oklahoma!" in London (pictured left). (Handout, Charles Sykes/Invision/AP Photo)
Actress Meryl Streep appeared in various school plays throughout high school and college before getting noticed by people both on campus and off. She appeared in more than a dozen stage productions while at the Yale School of Drama, so many that she got sick from being overworked. After graduating, Streep moved to New York City where she was cast in "Trelawny of the Wells" at the Public Theater. Streep appeared in 5 more roles before starring in the musical "Happy End" on Broadway where she won an Obie Award for her performance. (Suzanne Vlamis/AP Photo, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
In 1996 at the age of 25, Diggs played landlord Benny in the Tony Award winning production "Rent" (right). After "Rent" came to an end, Diggs appeared as Mr. Black in the off-Broadway production of "The Wild Party." At the same time, Diggs also played The Bandleader in the 2002 version of the long-running Broadway revival of "Chicago." (Handout, Evan Agostini/Invision/AP Photo)
At the young age of 6, Nick Jonas was discovered in a barber shop and was referred to a professional show business manager. A year later, Jonas was cast in his first Broadway play as Tiny Tim and young Scrooge in "A Christmas Carol." In the years that followed, Jonas starred as Little Jake in "Annie Get Your Gun" in 2001, Chip in "Beauty and the Beast" in 2002 and Gavroche in "Les Miserables" in 2003. (Carlos Larios/Invision/AP Photo, NicholasJBroadway via YouTube)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Multiple people shot into a crowd in downtown Philadelphia just before midnight Saturday, killing at least three people and wounding 11 more, according to police.
Police believe the shooting was the result of a fight between two men.
“There were hundreds of individuals just enjoying South Street, as they do every single weekend, when the shooting broke out,” Inspector D.F. Pace said at a press conference early Sunday.
Philadelphia Police investigators work the scene of a fatal overnight shooting on South St. (Michael Perez/AP)
Police reported “several active shooters,” one of whom was shot at by officers. The man dropped his weapon and fled the scene. It’s unclear if he was hit.
Fourteen people were shot during the commotion, including a 22-year-old man, a 34-year-old man and a 27-year-old woman who died.
Police believe the 34-year-old man may have gotten into a fight with one of the shooting suspects, Philadelphia Police Commissioner Danielle Outlaw said during a press conference Sunday.
At least two other men reportedly fired their own guns in the area, according to Outlaw.
Eleven others, ranging from 17 to 69, were rushed to local hospitals. Many are believed to have been innocent bystanders.
“Yesterday was a dark day for Philadelphia. And while many of us were out enjoying the beautiful day in the city, horrendous and unthinkable acts happened in a very popular local and tourists’ hangout,” Outlaw said at a press conference.
A person walks past the scene of a fatal overnight shooting on South Street in Philadelphia, Sunday, June 5, 2022.  (Michael Perez/AP)
The victims have not been identified but American Federation of Teachers Pennsylvania, a union representing more than 36,000 educators and paraprofessionals, said Sunday that one of the men killed was Kris Minners, a second-grade resident adviser  at Girard College.
“Yet another victim of senseless gun violence,” the union said in a statement. “The loss of Kris reminds us that gun violence can and will touch everyone in our nation as long as our elected officials allow it to continue. Mass shootings are a daily occurrence in only one wealthy, peacetime country on Earth. Petty disagreements turn deadly even for innocent bystanders. It doesn’t have to be this way.”
Two semiautomatic handguns were recovered from the scene, Pace said. One of them had an extended magazine.
“The events that transpired last evening on South Street are beyond devastating. Once again, we see lives lost and people injured in yet another horrendous, brazen and despicable act of gun violence,” Philadelphia Mayor Jim Kenney said in a statement Sunday.
“Our city and country have experienced a steep rise in gun violence over the past few years. We’ve spent these years grappling with this epidemic — doing everything not only to stop it but to try to understand why the violence continues — it’s senseless, needless and deeply troubling.”
He also stressed the “uphill battle” for gun control, including the “availability and ease of access to firearms.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Mr. Saturday Night had a great Sunday night at the Tony Awards.
Billy Crystal, who is starring on Broadway in a stage adaptation of the 1992 movie “Mr. Saturday Night,” danced his way into the audience as he regaled Radio City Music Hall with a Yiddish scat sing-along.
We’re going to stick around the #TonyAwards for more Yiddish scat performed by @MrSatNightBway's @BillyCrystal! pic.twitter.com/LuqEsY9C9i
On his trip into the theater’s front rows, Crystal, 74, thrust his microphone in front of Samuel L. Jackson and Lin-Manuel Miranda, who burst out laughing.
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
Both Jackson and Miranda joined the song.
And Crystal trended on Twitter.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Super Bowl champion Tony Siragusa, who went on to be a popular NFL broadcaster, is dead at 55.
The Kenilworth, N.J., native died suddenly Wednesday, according to a statement from Baltimore Ravens owner Steve Bisciotti posted to the team’s Twitter feed.
“Goose,” as he was known around the league, spent nearly the second half of his 12 year NFL career in Baltimore after playing seven season with the Indianapolis Colts. He also served 12 years as a sideline analyst for Fox Network.
This is a tremendously sad day for the Baltimore Ravens. pic.twitter.com/dbXDb5Ns76
“He was a special person and clearly one of the most popular players in Ravens history,” Bisciotti wrote.
The 6-foot-3 defensive tackled weighed in at 340 pounds, which helped solidify a Ravens defense that topped the Giants 34-7 in Super Bowl XXXV after the 2000 season.
FILE - Tony Siragusa, defensive tackle for the Super Bowl-champion Baltimore Ravens, holds the Vince Lombardi trophy as he rides with his wife, Kathy, in a parade in his hometown of Kenilworth, N.J. on March 4, 2001.  (JEFF ZELEVANSKY/AP)
“There was no one like Goose,” Brian Billick, who coached that team, said in statement. “We would not have won the Super Bowl without him.”
Former Pro Bowl defensive back Rod Woodson played behind Siragusa on that 2001 Super Bowl team. He remembered Goose as being “always the life of the party.”
The cause of Siragusa’s Wednesday morning death has not been reported. Numerous outlets reported that he died is his sleep.
Siragusa played collegiately at the University of Pittsburgh, but a knee injury caused him to go undrafted coming out of school. He signed as a free agent with the Indianapolis Colts, recording career highs in tackles (88) and sacks (5) in 1994.
He then moved on to Baltimore, where he spent his final five seasons.
Siragusa was a hit as a sideline analyst for Fox from 2003-15. He also dabbled in acting, appearing as a Russian mobster in the 2002 Film “25th Hour” and playing Frankie Cortese in four episode of “The Sopranos.”
From 2007-16, he hosted the do-it-yourself show “Man Caves” on DIY Network.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The Lehman Trilogy (Julieta Cervantes)
The Tony Awards are coming. So who’s going to win?
We’ll have to wait until  Sunday to find out, but I pulled out my opinionated crystal ball, nonetheless. And so here’s a look at the likely winners in some major categories.
Will Win: “A Strange Loop.” Should win: “Girl From the North Country.”
This image released by Polk & Co. shows, from left, James Jackson, Jr., L. Morgan Lee, Antwayn Hopper, John-Andrew Morrison, Jaquel Spivey, Jason Veasey and John-Michael Lyles during a performance of "A Strange Loop."  (Marc J. Franklin/AP)
This year’s best musical category is unusual: the two best musicals of the year are both niche attractions. But “Six,” the feminist pop parody involving the six wives of Henry VIII is too slight a show to merit the Tony Award, the brilliance of its conceptual idea notwithstanding. “Paradise Square” is an honorable entry but bedeviled by multiple writers and conceptual reboots. “Mr. Saturday Night” is great fun but, structurally speaking, doesn’t function as a full-blown musical. And for all its visual and musical prowess, “M.J. The Musical” lacks a sufficiently courageous book. “A Strange Loop,” a deeply personal and brilliantly creative look inside the head and heart of a Black gay man, will be the insider’s choice and has the right politics for most Tony voters. But the show lacks multiple entry points and is sexually explicit enough to knock out a good portion of the Broadway and touring audience. “Girl From the North Country” is a melancholic musical, for sure, but revelatory when it comes to the world of jukebox shows. Intense, haunting, beautiful and existentially wise, it’s the best musical of the season.
Will win: “Caroline, or Change.” Should win: “Caroline, or Change.”
This image released by Polk & Co. shows Caissie Levy, left, and Sharon D. Clarke during a performance of Roundabout Theatre Company's "Caroline, or Change."  (Joan Marcus/AP)
All three of this year’s nominees had their flaws, flowing in part from the current Broadway fear of embracing moral complexity. “The Music Man” lacked confidence, at least at the beginning of the run, and “Company” (for all of its pizzazz) struggled with a less than empathetic central character. Even “Caroline, or Change” stacked the deck when it came to its main conflict, which was very different from the first time around in 2003. But it’s still a masterfully penned piece from Tony Kushner and Jeanine Tesori, and this revival was filled with great performances and is worthy of a Tony.
Will win: “The Lehman Trilogy.” Should win: “The Lehman Trilogy”
Adam Godley, Simon Russell Beale, and Adrian Lester in The Lehman Trilogy
This was a superb season for new plays. The two British imports, “Lehman” and Martin McDonagh’s crackling “Hangmen” both deserve a Tony and there also is much to admire in Lynn Nottage’s “Clyde’s,” a piece that seemed to be set in a restaurant but that subtly takes down Broadway without the bosses realizing. “Lehman,” though, was a stunning evening of theater revealing these things above all: Kids rarely do what their parents want. And all of our success is both finite and unearned. This was the most intellectually invigorating show on Broadway all season.
Will win: “For Colored Girls...” Should win: “How I Learned to Drive.”
“American Buffalo” was entertaining but missed much of the pain and vulnerability in David Mamet’s script. The revival of Ntozake Shange’s “Colored Girls” was alive, but it didn’t fully trust the power of that incredible piece of poetry. “Trouble in Mind” was a missed opportunity and lacked truth. “Take Me Out” was a successful, commercially viable show and great fun. But “How I Learned to Drive” was incredible in how it seemed to stop time in its tracks, offering a vista of intergenerational pain, coursing now through two different centuries. Paula Vogel’s play made for the best revival of the year.
Will win: Michael R. Jackson, “A Strange Loop.” Should win: Conor McPherson, “Girl from the North Country.”
Todd Almond performs with the cast in "Girl From the North Country" in New York.  (Matthew Murphy/AP)
With all due respect to Jackson, who wrote a rich and profoundly personal book, McPherson’s work on “Girl from the North Country” made for one of the best books to a jukebox musical in the history of the genre. He freed the Bob Dylan-inspired show from any and all biographical strictures, found a perfect metaphoric landscape and succeeded in spectacular fashion in honoring the great American composer.
Will win: Michael R. Jackson, “A Strange Loop,” Should win: Jason Howland, “Paradise Square”
Kudos to Jackson again for a compelling song suite of the most moving dimension but Howland’s multifarious work on “Paradise Square” was remarkable, especially given the need to deal with an every-changing cast of book-writers. His extensive score — rich, diverse, haunting — will likely be overlooked but history will be kind.
[ The Great White Way is still too white, Black Broadway stars and advocates say ]
Will win: Sam Mendes, “The Lehman Trilogy” Should win: Sam Mendes, “The Lehman Trilogy”
Mendes, who will manage to fight off Les Waters’ superb direction of “Dana H,” fully deserves a Tony for this masterful, invigorating staging. Without him, the play would have been a dry lesson in economics. With him, it roared.
Will win: Stephen Brackett, “A Strange Loop” Should win: Conor McPherson, “Girl From the North Country”
Brackett’s superb casting and his thrilling, empathetic staging is crucial to the success of “Strange Loop.” But McPherson’s work on “Girl” is even better.
Will win: Christopher Wheeldon, “MJ” Should win: Christopher Wheeldon, “MJ”
Wheeldon somehow managed to craft a piece that felt entirely in the Michael Jackson vocabulary while also remaining entirely original. Given all the existing works of Jackson-fueled choreography, this was a singular achievement. No Tony more deserved this year than the one that should be etched with Wheeldon’s name.
In 1995, Menzel auditioned for her first Broadway show and landed the part in "Rent." Menzel was nominated for her first Tony Award for playing Maureen Johnson in the popular musical. After "Rent," Menzel went on to release her first solo album while still continuing her stage career. In 2003, Menzel landed one of the biggest roles of her life in the Broadway classic "Wicked" along with Kristin Chenoweth. (Handout, Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP Photo)
Will win: Simon Russell Beale, “The Lehman Trilogy” Should win: Ruben Santiago-Hudson, “Lackawanna Blues”
If you judge acting by what it costs the actor to produce the performance, Santiago-Hudson’s work in “Lackawanna Blues” was the best of the year: rich, warm and filled with the knowledge that comes only from time, pain and experience. Beale offered up a tour-de-force performance by one of the English speaking theater’s giants. But Santiago-Hudson haunts me still.
[ The 2022 Tony Awards: A complete list of nominees ]
Will win: Deirdre O’Connell, “Dana H.” Should win: Mary-Louise Parker, “How I Learned to Drive”
Judging between this pair of performances is one of the toughest Tony tasks this year; they both deserve the award. O’Connell’s technical precision in her lip-synched work was breathtaking but then Parker was not only just as riveting, she somehow embodied her own history in this very role. Parker deserves to win.
Will win: Jaquel Spivey, “A Strange Loop” Should win: Myles Frost, “M.J.”
Spivey is excellent in “A Strange Loop” and truthful in all the ways that matter. But Frost’s work in “M.J.” not only represented a massive challenge overcome but it anchored a show that revolves around him. He is thrilling.
Will win: Sharon D. Clarke, “Caroline, or Change.” Should win: Joaquina Kalukango, “Paradise Square”
“Paradise Square,” a powerful, serious musical that overcame enormous COVID-19 stresses, deserves a Tony. And its biggest asset is Kalukango’s stunning performance, filled with musical riches, dignity, love and fortitude.
May she get what she so richly deserves. May we all!
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A suspected gang member has been arrested in connection with a fatal gun battle outside a Queens recording studio, police said Monday.
Alutheimeen Imaduddeen, 21, was charged Saturday with attempted murder, attempted assault, criminal possession of a weapon and reckless endangerment.
Tyda Darden, also 21, was killed in the shootout outside the Rockwell Studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. on June 6.
Both Imaduddeen and Darden were members of the Structure gang and lived a half mile apart in Bedford-Stuyvesant, according to cops. Imaduddeen is not accused of firing the fatal shot.
The victim was shot in the head outside the studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. on June 6. He died at the scene. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
Video recovered by cops shows the gunman whose bullet killed Darden exiting a parked white BMW and firing toward two men exiting the studio. Those two men, one of them Imaduddeen, fired back, according to court papers.
Darden was hit in the head, collapsed in a pool of blood inside the front door and died at the scene, police said.
The initial gunman, who killed Darden, was seen heading back to the BMW, dropping a gun in the car and running into the Halsey St. L train station. He has not been arrested.
Police at the scene recovered ballistics from three different guns, a .38-caliber, a .25-caliber and a 9-mm.
“It’s not surprising what happened. ... Ever since that studio opened there’s always been something happening,” a longtime neighbor said at the time. “They come, they park everywhere, in front of the pump, the crosswalk.”
The studio is in a building that houses multiple businesses, including at least one other studio.
The victim was shot in the head outside the studio on Wyckoff Ave. near Schaefer St. in Ridgewood about 1:25 a.m. on June 6. He died at the scene. (Theodore Parisienne/for New York Daily News)
Darden, who was expecting a child with his girlfriend, had a 2020 gun arrest that was pending at the time of his murder, police said.
The suspect has a May 2021 gun arrest that was later sealed, police sources said.
Imaduddeen was arrested in Bedford-Stuyvesant last Thursday after police identified him as a person of interest in the Queens shootout. He was allegedly in possession of liquid codeine and 64 oxycodone pills.
He was charged with drug possession with intent to sell and released without bail.
But Imaduddeen was ordered held on $50,000 bail when he was arraigned in Queens Criminal Court on the attempted murder charge Sunday.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A model presents a creation during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring/Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week in Paris, France on June 23, 2022. (JULIEN DE ROSA/AFP via Getty Images)
A model presents a creation during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring/Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week in Paris, France on June 23, 2022. (JULIEN DE ROSA/AFP via Getty Images)
A model presents a creation during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring/Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week in Paris, France on June 23, 2022. (JULIEN DE ROSA/AFP via Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model, bag detail, walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A band walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France. (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France. (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model, bag detail, walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
A model, bag detail, walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France.  (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
The design team walks the runway during the Louis Vuitton Menswear Spring Summer 2023 show as part of Paris Fashion Week on June 23, 2022 in Paris, France. (Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images)
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

An off-duty NYPD officer died by suicide in his Long Island home, police said Sunday.
Suffolk County Police homicide squad detectives announced they were investigating the death in West Bay Shore, where the body of the city cop was found about 3:30 p.m. on Saturday.
An off-duty NYPD officer died by suicide in his Long Island home, police said Saturday. (Handout)
The officer’s name was not publicly released by late Saturday. He’s described as an 18-year NYPD veteran assigned to the city’s highway collision investigation squad.
The last NYPD death by suicide was in May, when Officer Sean Armstead fatally shot a young man he suspected was having an affair with his wife, then turned the gun on himself in upstate Orange County.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A heroic off-duty FDNY city firefighter had two career days in one week.
Firefighter Stefon Douglas, wearing a T-shirt and shorts while wielding a garden hose, rescued a trapped child from a burning Brooklyn building after arriving home from his shift Sunday night. And he found his way through the black smoke and flames wearing a breathing apparatus left in his car trunk from an appearance just days earlier at an FDNY career day event.
FDNY Firefighter Stefon Douglas of #Engine276  (FDNY)
“I just remembered I had it in the trunk,” the 33-year-old firefighter told the Daily News. “It’s just how the stars aligned. It’s just crazy how it all worked out ... I thought, ‘Man, I just saved a girl.’ It’s unreal. This kind of thing happens in movies.”
The six-year FDNY vet, who lives down the block on Kings Highway from the two-story fire scene, had just parked his car after a shift at Engine Co. 276 when he noticed the smoke around 6 p.m.
The front of the residence was too hot to go inside when Douglas tried to enter, so he ran around the back and commandeered a garden hose from a man trying in vain to extinguish the blaze.
Douglas, wearing the breathing equipment, stretched the hose inside the first floor of the two-story residence, knocking out pockets of fire by putting his thumb over the nozzle to get more water pressure. As he maneuvered along the first floor hallway wall, everything felt hot to the touch, said Douglas.
And then Douglas recalled hearing soft sounds coming from inside the house.
He followed the whimpering through the smoke, using his left hand to stay close to the wall, and came to the bathroom door.
“She had her feet between the tub and the toilet,” recounted Douglas. “A little girl, maybe three or four years old. She didn’t say a word to me, and she was still crying and whimpering when I brought her out.
Firefighters respond to a fire at 4545 Kings Highway in Brooklyn on Sunday, June 5, 2022. (Gardiner Anderson/for New York Daily News)
“I’m still in shock. I came out sweating.”
The little girl and her mother — who was brought out of the burning house by other firefighters — were taken to Staten Island University Hospital North, while one firefighter was taken to SUNY Downstate University Hospital.
The mom died early Tuesday, an FDNY source said. Her name was not immediately released.
The fire was declared under control at 6:37 p.m.
Douglas remained astounded by the circumstances of the rescue. He typically works a 24-hour tour, but instead worked only a day shift last Sunday and was instead at the scene. If he’d made it home five minutes earlier, Douglas would have never seen the smoke and run toward the flames.
“I can’t believe we did this,” he said. “But this is just what we do. This is what we do.”
Douglas has a busy schedule ahead, too: He’s scheduled for two more upcoming career days.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Years after retiring from the Yankees, Derek Jeter wanted to take a big swing.
The Hall of Fame shortstop explained why he decided to reflect on his famously private MLB career through a new ESPN documentary series, “The Captain,” after the first episode premiered Sunday night at the Tribeca Festival.
“It started right around the Hall of Fame,” Jeter, who is in the baseball hall’s 2020 class, said onstage during a talk at the BMCC Tribeca Performing Arts Center.
“I thought, ‘I want to capture this. I want to capture it so I can have it in the future, share it with my girls when they get older, because they probably won’t believe most of my career,’” the father of three daughters continued. “It just turned into a bigger project.”
Directed by Randy Wilkins, the seven-part documentary explores Jeter’s 20 seasons with the Yankees and the challenges he faced along the way.
The first episode showcases Jeter’s youth, the day he was drafted by the Yankees in 1992, and how he overcame his early struggles in the minor leagues to make it to the majors.
Derek Jeter (center) with director Randy Wilkins (left) and producer Spike Lee for "The Captain." (ESPN FILMS)
Jeter, who became the Yankees’ team captain in 2003, says he sat down for about 30 hours of interviews for the documentary, allowing him to look back on his career in ways he previously hadn’t.
“One thing that I’ve always had a real tough time during my career [was] I never had a chance to reflect on anything I’ve done, because it’s always, ‘What’s next?’ It could be a character flaw, but I think it’s probably the reason why I’m here,” Jeter, 47, said.
The first episode also covers Jeter’s experience growing up in a biracial family in Kalamazoo, Mich.
“I’m a little biased, but I think I have the best parents in the world,” Jeter, dressed in a tan suit for Sunday’s talk, said. “They’re here today. My sister as well. We were very close growing up, and we were close because we went through some things. You grow closer any time you have to deal with some adversity, but family is what shapes who you are as a person.”
[ SEE IT: Taylor Swift discusses film she directed, gives surprise performance at Tribeca Festival ]
Oscar-winning filmmaker Spike Lee, who executive produced the series, said at Sunday’s event that Jeter originally asked him to direct the series, but he was already working on another project. Lee recommended his longtime collaborator Wilkins, whom he’d taught at the NYU graduate film school.
Wilkins conducted 90 interviews for “The Captain,” including with Jeter’s family and former teammates such as Andy Pettitte, Mariano Rivera, Jorge Posada, Bernie Williams and Alex Rodriguez.
“I feel proud that Derek opened up to me, that he was vulnerable with me, that he was vulnerable with the world,” Wilkins said at Sunday’s event.
Jeter won five championships with the Yankees, including in 2000 when he was the World Series MVP. His 3,465 hits are the most in team history, and the sixth most ever in the MLB. His No. 2 was retired by the team in 2017.
Jeter’s former manager Joe Torre and longtime teammate CC Sabathia were among the audience members at Sunday’s event, where many Yankees fans wearing Jeter T-shirts or pinstriped No. 2 jerseys also packed the auditorium.
The crowd even broke into a “DER-EK JET-ER” chant after he took the stage.
Jeter became the CEO of the Miami Marlins in 2017 and had an ownership stake in the team until parting ways with the organization in February. He said there have been “very few days” he had to root against the Yankees in his life, mentioning that the Marlins clinched a playoff spot in 2020 at Yankee Stadium.
“I’ve never outwardly rooted against the New York Yankees,” Jeter said. “And I’m happy to know I’ll never have to root against them again.”
“The Captain” is ESPN’s latest documentary series covering a big-name athlete, with others including 2020′s Michael Jordan-focused “The Last Dance,” and “The Man in the Arena” about Tom Brady, which premiered last year.
The first episode of “The Captain” premieres July 18 on ESPN and the ESPN+ streaming service, with subsequent installments set to release every Thursday.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Some organizers of Juneteenth celebrations around the city admit they’ve been learning about the origins of the commemoration, but are eager to bring New Yorkers up to speed on the nation’s newest federal holiday.
President Biden signed a bill last year designating Juneteenth a federal holiday, and its second official celebration will be marked nationwide on Monday. But many events are sticking to the actual date and will roll out Sunday.
A man holds an African-American flag during a demonstration in Chicago on June 19, 2020, to mark Juneteenth. (Nam Y. Huh/AP)
“I didn’t know anything about it at first,” Brooklyn organizer Athenia Rodney, who presides over the Juneteenth NY Festival — now in its 13th year commemorating an event long omitted from history textbooks — told the Daily News.
“And this is the point where I always talk about how education of certain things is not being taught in school. So my best friend, she’s very ethnic in her approach to things and her family always celebrated Black holidays, and they were my initiation into learning and understanding about it.”
The holiday commemorates June 19, 1865, when Union troops arrived in Galveston, Texas, to let people know the Civil War was over and that slavery was abolished two years earlier by the Emancipation Proclamation.
From left to right: Robert Randolph, Athenia Rodney, James Monroe Iglehart, and Gennean Scott. All are involved in Juneteenth events.
A recent study found that 53% of middle and high school students don’t discuss Juneteenth in their schools. The survey, by homework app Brainly.com, polled 1,015 students nationwide.
James Monroe Iglehart, the Tony Award-winning star of Broadway’s “Aladdin” and “Hamilton,” confesses he also didn’t know much about Juneteenth, which Texas has recognized as a state holiday since 1990.
“I was one of those people who had heard about it when I was a kid and didn’t really get it [when] your mom was talking about it,” the 47-year-old told The News. “And it wasn’t really until my nephew, who is going to be 21 this year and a college kid, and I were talking about it and talking about being Black at this time.”
[ Walmart's Juneteenth ice cream leaves a bad aftertaste ]
“It was like three years ago that I really understood what it meant and how I understood that it was a definite Independence Day for our people, for folks in certain regions, not knowing that they were free,” he added.
On Sunday, Iglehart will take a break from touring with Lin-Manuel Miranda’s Tony Award winning “Freestyle Love Supreme” improv hip hop troupe to host the second annual “Broadway Celebrates Juneteenth” concert in Times Square.
Presented by The Broadway League’s Black to Broadway Initiative, the 90-minute event will feature performances from cast members from shows on The Great White Way including “Funny Girl,” and “Paradise Square,” alongside a special appearance by Tony Award-winning “MJ” star Myles Frost.
The festivities will also honor Broadway and TV veterans Leslie Uggams and Ben Vereen with the first Juneteenth Legacy Awards.
“I think that the way that we honor our ancestors is to pay homage to them and to look at where we’ve come from and to look at what freedom is,” Broadway League’s  Gennean Scott said. “Not only that, but to celebrate where we are right now, but not to rest on our laurels because we have to continue to do this work to build a solid foundation for the future of Broadway.”
Four-time Grammy-nominated guitarist Robert Randolph is behind the second annual Juneteenth Unityfest, which will include three events for Sunday: a block party at Under the K Bridge Park featuring DJ Spinna, Josh Milan, Soul Summit Music, and Descendants of Sound at 3 p.m.; a concert at the Lena Horne Bandshell at Prospect Park, and; a late-night after party at Brooklyn Bowl.
Randolph introduced the event last year as an extension of his foundation as a way to bring together different voices to celebrate the holiday.
Like so many others, the Irvington, N.J., native admitted to not being as well versed in Juneteenth in the past.
“I would say we learned about it because of my family and the church, we would kind of recognize the story…but l I just really learned about it in the last couple of years, to be honest with you,” he said.
“It’s constantly evolving. We’re constantly learning about each other. We’re constantly, especially as Black people learning about our culture. And to be honest with you, since I’ve been planning the Juneteenth thing, I’ve learned more about who we are, where we come from, and how many different connections we have.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The LGBTQ community is finally coming out — of the shadows of COVID.
After two years of virtual celebrations, fully-masked demonstrations, socially-distanced commemorations and full-on cancellations, LGBTQ Pride month is here again.
While the pandemic is far from over, a combination of vaccinations, booster shots and CDC-approved antiviral drugs all point to a Pride month, where your biggest fear is what you are missing out on.
So, fear not. Here’s a little guide to get you started.
Famous LGBTQ artists at Livingston Public Library
Art educator and painter Suzanne Altman explores the lives, works, and impact of some of the world’s best-known openly LGBTQ artists in this presentation about how they have used their art as a tool for social and political change. Expect to hear about Keith Haring, David Hockney, Catherine Opie, John Singer Sargent, and Diane Arbus — and also about those who were less open about their sexuality, including Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci. Free, no registration required. 7 p.m. 10 Robert H Harp Dr, Livingston, NJ
Pride Night at Payette Brewery in Boise, Idaho
Official Pride celebrations in Idaho’s capital city won’t start until September, but that didn’t stop the Boise Gay Men’s Chorus and the Boise Women’s Chorus to mark Pride Month with a Taproom Takeover at Payette Brewery. The choruses, whose mission is to open hearts and minds through music, are organizing the event to highlight positive community LGBTQ awareness. Music lovers of all ages are invited. Payette Brewery will donate 50% of beer sales to the groups. 6-10 p.m. 733 S. Pioneer St Boise, Idaho.
PrideFest at Abington Free Library
LGBTQ kids, teens, their families and friends are invited to celebrate Pride Month at a celebration with crafts, music, food, giveaways, a story corner, as well as a meet-and-greet with local authors Eric Bell (”Alan Cole is Not a Coward”) and Charles A. Busch, whose debut book, ”Every Variable of Us,” was named by Vogue Teen as one of “25 Books by Black Authors We Can’t Wait to Read in 2022.″ Free, no registration required. 6 - 7:30 p.m. Raindate: June 21. 1030 Old York Road, Abington, Pa.
Kids, teens, and their families are invited to join us for PrideFest!  Crafts, music, food, giveaways, community organizations, story corner and more!  Meet local LGBTQ+ authors Charles Bush and Eric Bell, and purchase their books! pic.twitter.com/ukeA8KeF0J
Celebrate Pride: Stonewall & Greenwich Village LGBT History Tour
Honor history and celebrate Pride by walking along the same path explored by previous generations who fought for the rights of the LGBTQ community of yesterday and today. Ken Lustbader and Jay Shockley, co-directors of the NYC LGBT Historic Sites Project, are guiding history buffs and Pride enthusiasts through a tour of sites associated with the early LGBTQ activism and history, which influenced culture, politics, and behavior in the U.S. 6 p.m. Christopher St. at W. Fourth St., Manhattan
Celia Gooding, left, and Laila Kelly pose for a picture in front of the Stonewall Inn before the Queer Liberation March in New York, Sunday, June 30, 2019. (Seth Wenig/AP)
“The Women’s House of Detention: A Queer History of a Forgotten Prison” Eric Marcus in conversation with author Hugh Ryan at Housing Works Bookstore
The incredible story about a little-known prison in Greenwich Village that housed tens of thousands of queer women, trans men and gender-nonconforming people between 1929 and 1974, most of them incarcerated for being improperly feminine, is the subject of a new book by award-winning author and historian Hugh Ryan. “The Women’s House of Detention” has been hailed by critics as a “vital contribution to LGBTQ history” that is “compelling from start to finish.” Ryan sits down with fellow LGBTQ history extraordinaire Eric Marcus, founder and host of the “Making Gay History” podcast, for a conversation about his latest work. 1 p.m. 126 Crosby St., Manhattan
“Edie Windsor: Champion for Marriage Equality” at the New-York Historical Society
The legacy of one of the greatest warriors in the fight for LGBTQ history in the U.S. is being highlighted by New York City’s oldest museum. Edith (Edie) Windsor, who died in 2017 at the age of 88, was the lead plaintiff in the 2013 Sumpre Court case that overturned Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act, a landmark victory that forced the federal government to recognize same-sex marriages. “Edie Windsor was a trailblazer in every sense of the word,” Louise Mirrer, the museum’s president and CEO told the Daily News. “We’re commemorating Pride Month with this special installation featuring the suit she wore to the Supreme Court in 2013 as she advocated for marriage equality, and we’re honored these items will be joining the New-York Historical Society’s collection,” she added. Runs through Oct. 9. 170 Central Park West, Manhattan.
Edith Windsor attends the New York City Gay Pride 2017 march on June 25, 2017  in New York City. (Dimitrios Kambouris/Getty Images)
Naima Green: “A Sequence for Squeezing” at Baxter St at the Camera Club of New York
A new exhibition by the artist and photographer Naima Green, in which she explores play and pleasure while focusing on the experiences of Black, Brown, and queer individuals, opens at Baxter St at the Camera Club of New York, an artist-run organization and one of the city’s oldest art nonprofit spaces. “A Sequence for Squeezing” is centered around two sequences of photographs in which the artist turns her camera toward solitary moments of pleasure and relief — an expansion of themes Green visited in previous works, such as the sensuality of enjoying food, and the exploration of water as a site for pleasure and freedom. Opening reception: 6 - 8 p.m. Runs through July 23. 126 Baxter St., Manhattan.
Our Night Out Wilmington: Pride Month celebration
Our Night Out is a social group for members of the LGBTQ community in Willmington, Del., that meets on the third Thursday of the month. Naturally, that means that Our Night Outters are celebrating Pride this week. The event will be held at Constitution Yards, a pet-friendly seasonal beer garden, so participants are free to bring their four-legged friends along. “So grab your friends, come out in your most colorful outfits, grab a few drinks, play a few games, and stay a while,” organizers said. “We’re hoping for a big crowd for Pride month.” Free. 6-9 p.m. 308 Justison St., Willmington, Del.
Saint Paul Seniors Pride in the Park
East Side Elders, a nonprofit that helps senior citizens in St. Paul, Minn., live independently in their own homes is celebrating its first Pride Party. All LGBTQ seniors, their families and caregivers are invited for a night at the Phalen Picnic Pavilion. The event will include dinner, a dance party, a variety show and more. A limited number of rides are available. Call (651) 808-1901 to RSVP. Free, 5-8 p.m. 1600 Phalen Drive, St. Paul, Minn.
Save the date for our Pride Party on June 16th! Dinner, Dance Party, and a Variety Show for LGBTQ+ seniors, friends, and caregivers. Join us at the Phalen Pavilion from 5pm to 8pm June 16th! pic.twitter.com/r4n9xjxjFI
Ladyland Festival at Avant Gardner
Ladyland is a Coachella-esque outdoor queer music festival produced by NYC clubland powerhouse Ladyfag — or the “reigning queen of nightlife,” according to Vogue. This colorful celebration of unity and diversity is seen by many as a kick-off to Pride weekend festivities in New York City. This year, the impressive lineup of talent, headlined by superstar DJ Honey Dijon, includes Tinashe, Sevdaliza and “RuPaul’s Drag Race” royalty Vanessa Vanjie. 140 Stewart Ave., Brooklyn
Movies Under the Stars: “Pride”
Fire up that popcorn machine, pick up some rainbow cookies and head to Greenwich Village for a special showing of the award-winning 2014 film “Pride.” Based on a true story, this feel-good gem features a group of LGBTQ activists who raise money to help families affected by the 1984 miner’s strike in the U.K. Free, movie begins at dusk, James J Walker Park at Hudson St., Manhattan.
Drag Queen Story Hour Milwaukee: Swimming with Pride 2022
The always-fabulous drag queens of the Milwaukee, Wisc., branch of Drag Queen Story Hour are taking their charisma, uniqueness, nerve and talent to the pool. According to organizers, the event will feature “local merfolk” reading stories to children and their families. The first 50 children receive a free pool pass, so they can jump in the water after the reading. 2 p.m. 1301 W. Hampton Ave.
Da Bronx Pride Week Festival
“RuPaul’s Drag Race” superstar and Bronx native Kandy Muse and Karen Mercedez, from the Netflix Series “The Circle,” are hosting the borough’s biggest Pride celebration. Hosted by Destination Tomorrow, New York’s only Black trans-led LGBTQ center, this all-day event will feature a march, rally, family entertainment, as well as performances by Seduction, the House of Miyake-Mugler, ballroom icon Sinia Alaia, and more. Free, noon-6 p.m, Westchester Ave., between Brook Ave. and Bergen Ave.
LGBTQ Saves Youth Pride Picnic at Trinity Park, Fort Worth, Texas
This free, annual event in North Texas offers a safe space for LGBTQ youth and their families to meet new friends, participate in fun activities, score cool goodie bags, and simply be who they are. Hamburgers and hotdogs will be provided to all participants free of charge. 10 a.m.-2 p.m. Individual sponsors and volunteers needed. 2401 University Dr., Fort Worth
Organizers for this year’s festivities are expecting more than 60,000 Pride enthusiasts from the city and beyond to celebrate LGBTQ life, culture and community. The traditional street festival will feature artists performing in 3 stages, drag shows, DJs, giveaways, over 150 vendors of arts/crafts, food and drinks, and even a pet parade. Performers include “RuPaul’s Drag Race All Stars” winner Alaska Thunderf--k, “Pose” star Dyllón Burnside and Chicago-born rapper CupcakKe. Suggested donation $15. Saturday and Sunday, rain or shine, from 11 a.m. - 10 p.m. Northalsted on Halsted Street from Addison to Grace St, Chicago, Ill.
Confetti flies as people gather at Chicago's Grant Park during the Pride in the Park festival, Saturday, June 26, 2021. (Shafkat Anowar/AP)
New York City’s most colorful riders are going hybrid for their annual Pride Ride this year. Participants of the OutCycling Pride Ride 2022 will have several options to show their Pride in person — from an easy-breezy 30-mile ride to an intimidating century (100 miles) — as well as by riding their own routes from anywhere in the world. A portion of the proceeds will go toward OutCycling’s Fearless Flyers, a program designed to teach cycling and leadership skills to LGBTQ youth. Visit outcycling.org for information.
Black of Center: Juneteenth Block Festival
For one of its first in-person Pride events since 2019, The Center, is hosting a festival to celebrate Juneteenth, focusing on Black LGBTQ artists, storytellers, businesses and vendors. Doors are open to all for an afternoon of music performances, games, storytelling, art-making workshops, community discussions, and more. Free, noon-5 p.m, 208 W. 13th St., Manhattan
Check back next week for Week 4.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Myles Frost, the 22-year-old Broadway newcomer who has thrilled audiences by transforming into Michael Jackson in “MJ,” received the Tony Award for best leading actor in a musical on Sunday.
Winning for his sheepish but fleet-footed portrayal of the King of Pop, Frost topped showbusiness veterans like Billy Crystal (”Mr. Saturday Night”) and Hugh Jackman (”The Music Man”) to capture the prestigious honor.
Myles Frost accepts the award for best leading actor in a musical for "MJ" at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
Frost’s Broadway debut beat out Jaquel Spivey’s inspired performance in “A Strange Loop,” too.
“Mom, I made it,” Frost said, wearing shades and a shimmering black suit, during his acceptance speech. “I am so honored and so blessed and so grateful.”
“I really gotta pee right now, so I’ll keep it quick,” he added.
Addressing his mom, he said, “You have taught me and showed me what a strong Black woman is and what it means to raise a strong Black man.”
Myles Frost and The cast of "MJ" perform at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
Frost has said he had researched for the role by diving into Jackson’s creative process.
[ Tony Awards 2022: Winners and losers ]
“Creating my version of it was the fun part,” Frost told the Daily News last month after he was nominated. “It’s the part where we get to do trial and error and see how I can represent Myles while also representing Michael Jackson. That’s the beauty of acting.”
Host Ariana DeBose performs at the 75th annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 12, 2022, at Radio City Music Hall in New York.  (Charles Sykes/Charles Sykes/Invision/AP)
Though critics docked it for its sanitized depiction of its subject matter, “MJ” has proved a box office success since it arrived at the Neil Simon Theatre in December, lifted by Frost’s frenetic performance.
“I take every show as like it’s my first show, because to somebody in the audience it is their first show seeing me,” Frost said last month. “I feel like I have to give them a better performance than I gave yesterday.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The LGBTQ community is finally coming out — of the shadows of COVID.
After two years of virtual celebrations, fully-masked demonstrations, socially-distanced commemorations and full-on cancellations, LGBTQ Pride month is here again.
While the pandemic is far from over, a combination of vaccinations, booster shots and CDC-approved antiviral drugs all point to a Pride month, where your biggest fear is what you are missing out on.
So, fear not. Here’s a little guide to get you started.
Parade participants celebrate New York City Pride on June 27, 2021, in New York City. (John Lamparski/Getty Images)
Ladyland Festival at Avant Gardner, Brooklyn
Ladyland is a Coachella-esque outdoor queer music festival produced by NYC clubland powerhouse Ladyfag — or the “reigning queen of nightlife,” according to Vogue. This colorful celebration of unity and diversity is seen by many as a kick-off to Pride weekend festivities in New York City. This year, the impressive lineup of talent, headlined by superstar DJ Honey Dijon, includes Tinashe, Sevdaliza and “RuPaul’s Drag Race” royalty Vanessa Vanjie. Prices start at $53.51, doors open at 8 p.m, 140 Stewart Ave., Brooklyn
Movies Under the Stars: “Pride” in New York City
Fire up that popcorn machine, pick up some rainbow cookies and head to Greenwich Village for a special showing of the award-winning 2014 film “Pride.” Based on a true story, this feel-good gem features a group of LGBTQ activists who raise money to help families affected by the 1984 miner’s strike in the U.K. Free, movie begins at dusk, James J Walker Park at Hudson St., Manhattan.
Drag Queen Story Hour Milwaukee: Swimming with Pride 2022
The always-fabulous drag queens of the Milwaukee, Wisc., branch of Drag Queen Story Hour are taking their charisma, uniqueness, nerve and talent to the pool. According to organizers, the event will feature “local merfolk” reading stories to children and their families. The first 50 children receive a free pool pass, so they can jump in the water after the reading. Free, 2 p.m. 1301 W. Hampton Ave.
Da Bronx Pride Week Festival, the Bronx, N.Y.
“RuPaul’s Drag Race” superstar and Bronx native Kandy Muse and Karen Mercedez, from the Netflix Series “The Circle,” are hosting the borough’s biggest Pride celebration. Hosted by Destination Tomorrow, New York’s only Black trans-led LGBTQ center, this all-day event will feature a march, rally, family entertainment, as well as performances by Seduction, the House of Miyake-Mugler, ballroom icon Sinia Alaia and more. Free, noon-6 p.m., Westchester Ave., between Brook Ave. and Bergen Ave.
LGBTQ Saves Youth Pride Picnic at Trinity Park, Fort Worth, Texas
This free, annual event in North Texas offers a safe space for LGBTQ youth and their families to meet new friends, participate in fun activities, score cool goodie bags, and simply be who they are. Hamburgers and hotdogs will be provided to all participants free of charge. Individual sponsors and volunteers needed. Free, registration required, 10 a.m.-2 p.m. 2401 University Drive, Fort Worth
Organizers for this year’s festivities are expecting more than 60,000 Pride enthusiasts from the city and beyond to celebrate LGBTQ life, culture and community. The traditional street festival will feature artists performing on three stages, drag shows, DJs, giveaways, over 150 vendors of arts/crafts, food and drinks and even a pet parade. Performers include “RuPaul’s Drag Race All Stars” winner Alaska Thunderf--k, “Pose” star Dyllón Burnside and Chicago-born rapper CupcakKe. Suggested donation $15. Saturday and Sunday, rain or shine, from 11 a.m.-10 p.m. Northalsted on Halsted St. from Addison to Grace St., Chicago, Ill.
Confetti flies as people gather at Chicago's Grant Park during the Pride in the Park festival, Saturday, June 26, 2021. (Shafkat Anowar/AP)
OutCycling Pride Ride, New York City
New York City’s most colorful riders are going hybrid for their annual Pride Ride this year. Participants of the OutCycling Pride Ride 2022 will have several options to show their Pride in person — from an easy-breezy 30-mile ride to an intimidating century (100 miles) — as well as by riding their own routes from anywhere in the world. A portion of the proceeds will go toward OutCycling’s Fearless Flyers, a program designed to teach cycling and leadership skills to LGBTQ youth. Visit outcycling.org for information.
Black of Center: Juneteenth Block Festival, New York City
For one of its first in-person Pride events since 2019, The Center is hosting a festival to celebrate Juneteenth, focusing on Black LGBTQ artists, storytellers, businesses and vendors. Doors are open to all for an afternoon of music performances, games, storytelling, art-making workshops, community discussions, and more. Free, noon-5 p.m, 208 W. 13th St., Manhattan
“Sing Out! A Broadway Musical Revue” at the Rose Theater at Jazz at Lincoln Center, New York City
Pride gets the Broadway treatment, via Texas. The Austin Artists Project, a nonprofit that focuses on advancing racial, gender, and sexuality-based equality in the arts, is bringing “Sing Out!” to Lincoln Center to shine a light on underrepresented voices in the LGBTQ community. The show will feature Broadway classics, both old and new, performed by artists with wins or nominations to Grammys, Tonys and GLAAD Awards, all of whom identify as LGBTQ. Young trans activist Kai Shapley, who has been a powerful voice for trans rights since the age of 6, is slated to open the show. Tickets start at $25, 8 p.m. at the Rose Theater. 10 Columbus Circle, Manhattan
Pride Family Picnic, Collingswood, N.J.
The Collingswood Public Library and the Borough of Collingswood, a community that takes pride in its diversity, are joining forces to celebrate the LGBTQ community with an evening of music, fun and creativity for residents of all ages. The event will feature Pride flag-painting, a crafts table, teen poetry open mic, a Drag Queen Story Hour led by Brittany Lynn of Drag Queen Mafia, as well as Pride picnic blanket decorating contest. Participants will be able to connect with local advocacy groups including PFLAG and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. Free, 5-8 p.m. Lawn at the Scottish Rite at 315 White Horse Pike, Collingswood
Garden Party at Pier 84, New York City
A beloved Pride tradition is back. After a three-year hiatus, New York City’s LGBTQ community center, the Center, is bringing back its Garden Party to the non-virtual world. One of New York City’s longest-running Pride events, the festive fund-raiser will feature an open bar, delicious food, special guests, as well as A-list entertainment. Performers include Grammy winner Paula Cole, Grammy-nominated singer Sophie B. Hawkins, “RuPaul’s Drag Race” star Gigi Goode and the fierce members of the Haus of Tisci from the second season of HBO Max’s “Legendary.” Tickets start at $85, 6-9 p.m. 12th Ave. at 44th St., Manhattan
This year, Garden Party will feature plenty of fun and entertainment from 6-9 p.m. at Pier 84. Take a look at what to expect that night and get ready to come together and celebrate like never before.Get tickets today: https://t.co/hrBpKBhRsN
Criminal Queerness Festival at the David Rubenstein Atrium at Lincoln Center, New York City
National Queer Theater, the official theater partner of NYC Pride, is back for its fourth annual event. The Criminal Queerness Festival celebrates love, resistance and resilience through art by bringing to the New York stage works by queer artists who risk censorship, imprisonment and violence simply for sharing their truth. This year the three-night festival will highlight the work of three East-African writers, and it will kick off with a staged reading of “Courage Rebirth,” the story of a gay 21-year-old Somali woman displaced by political unrest, written by LGBTQ rights advocate Muleme Steven. Free, 7:30 p.m. 61 W. 62nd St., Manhattan.
Drag Queen Story Hour with Citrine, in Silver Spring, Md.
Drag Queen Story Hour is exactly what it sounds like: Fabulous drag queens reading stories and offering kids of all ages the freedom to be who they are — one book at a time. This free event is part of Silver Spring’s Pride in the Plaza’s week-long celebration of Montgomery County’s diverse LGBTQ community, and it’s a collaboration between the Montgomery County chapter of the Drag Queen Story Hour and the Montgomery County Public Libraries. Free, registration required. 11 a.m. 900 Wayne Ave. Silver Spring, Md.
A Tribute to Paradise Garage and Larry Levan with Victor Rosado at Lincoln Center, New York City
The dance floor has always been a safe space for members of the LGBTQ community — from the Saint, to the Palladium, Danceteria, and the Roxy. This Pride, Lincoln Center is paying homage to one of the masterminds behind the culture-shaping Paradise Garage, a SoHo nightclub that shut down in 1987. The music of the late Larry Levan, the club’s longtime DJ, will be remembered by his devotee, DJ Victor Rosado, in a loving tribute to his legacy. Free, 4 p.m., 10 Lincoln Center Plaza, Manhattan.
Fusion Pride Party, New York City Anti-Violence Project’s annual celebration at the Jane Ballroom, New York City
The New York City Anti-Violence Project, the largest anti-LGBTQ violence organization in the country, was formed in 1980 by community activists in Chelsea in response to a series of brutal attacks against gay men. Today, more than 40 years later, cases of violence against members of the LGBTQ community, especially trans women of color, are still on the rise, making the organization’s job more important than ever. Fusion, the first in-person Pride event since 2019, will feature dancing, drinking and socializing — as well as donations for a good cause. $50, 6-9 p.m. 113 Jane St., Manhattan.
Writing and Living through AIDS at the New York Public Library, New York City
For the past four decades, GMHC, the world’s first HIV/AIDS organization, has worked with fierce determination, passionate activism and generation-defining action to end the epidemic that has killed more than 36 million people around the world. To mark the organization’s 40th anniversary, author and critic Bill Goldstein will moderate a cross-generation panel of writers — including Torrey Peters, author of last year’s groundbreaking and massively successful novel “Detransition, Baby” and Garth Greenwell, the award-winning author of “What Belongs to You” — to reflect on its ongoing legacy in their lives and work. The event will also be live-streamed. 6:30-7:30 p.m. Free, registration required. 42nd St. at Fifth Ave., third floor, Manhattan.
Bath and Body Rooftop Pool Party at The Williamsburg Hotel, Brooklyn
Nightlife goddess Amanda Lepore hosts the third annual pre-Pride pool party extravaganza in Brooklyn. This year, the wet’n’wild fun will feature appearances by “RuPaul’s Drag Race” season 14 fan favorite and lip-sync assassin Jorgeous, a drag performance by Beaujangless, an in-pool performance by Team New York Aquatics and a flash mob performance by viral sensation Bob’s Dance Shop. Music by DJs Horrorchata, Erez and Timo Weilland. Part of the proceeds will benefit the National Black Trans Advocacy Coalition. Tickets start at $30, 6 p.m.-3 a.m. 96 Wythe Ave., Brooklyn.
Check back next week for Week 5.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

It’s a happy Father’s Day for some of the entertainment world’s biggest stars — and their dads.
Justin Timberlake, Rachel Zegler and Derek Jeter were among the celebrities who shared sweet Father’s Day messages on Sunday.
Jeter posted a series of photos of his father, Charles, on his Instagram story, and also shared a photo of himself wearing a sweatshirt that reads, “You Don’t Scare Me. I Have Three Daughters.”
“Best gift of the day and so true,” the former Yankees captain and father-of-three captioned his post. “Happy Fathers Day!”
Timberlake, meanwhile, posted an Instagram photo showing his two kids sitting at a piano.
“My two favorite melodies,” the pop star wrote. “Happy Father’s Day to all the Dad’s out there!!!”
Justin Bieber shared a throwback photo with his dad, Jeremy, and wrote, “Love you pops! Happy Father’s Day! So much to look forward to. Best is still ahead of us! Honored to be your son.”
And the “West Side Story” star Zegler posted a short video featuring her father, Craig, to her Instagram story, along with the caption, “happy father’s day to the only man who will spontaneously sing evita with me.”
Justin Timberlake with son Silas at the Omega European Masters in Switzerland in 2019.  (Stefan Matzke / sampics/GC Images)
Billy Joel’s family shared several photos of the Piano Man with his 6-year-old daughter, Della Rose, and 4-year-old daughter, Remy Anne.
“The best dads are always ready to ride!” reads the post on Joel’s Instagram page. “Happy Fathers Day to our #1 and too many Uncles to count! Love, your very grateful girl gang.”
“Fast & Furious” actress Jordana Brewster wrote about how her father continues to support her.
“Thank you for giving me the solid jumping off point I need every ten years or so: because your work is never done,” Brewster captioned an Instagram slide show. “You never panic in a crisis, you handle everything with your wonderful wry wit (I hope I get points for my alliteration).”
And Kris Jenner shared a collage of images celebrating her famous family, including Kanye West, Caitlyn Jenner, Travis Scott, Tristan Thompson, Scott Disick and Rob Kardashian.
“Happy Father’s Day to all of the amazing fathers in our lives!!! she captioned the Instagram post. “Thank you for loving our little ones the way you do. They are so lucky to have you as their daddies.
“To my son, Rob… you are the most amazing daddy and seeing the bond you have with Dream brings me more joy than you’ll ever know. You were born to be a daddy. I love you! Happy Father’s Day and I hope everyone has a beautiful day surrounded by so much love.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Sam Hunt can’t bottle up his glee.
The “Bottle It Up” singer, 37, and wife Hannah Lee Fowler are now the happy parents of a baby girl just weeks after calling off their would-be divorce, Entertainment Tonight reports.
Hunt — who married Fowler in 2017 — was headlining the Star’s For Second Harvest charity concert in Nashville Tuesday when he told fans all about daughter Lucy Lu, the couple’s first child.
Sam Hunt and Hannah Lee Fowler (Jason Kempin/Getty Images)
“I recently had a baby girl named Lucy Lu,” said Hunt, earning applause.
While the “Body Like a Back Road” singer admitted that the music industry “has sort of hardened my heart,” he said baby Lucy “melted that all away overnight a couple of weeks ago.”
Hunt added that he’s “been filled with a lot of gratitude these past couple of weeks and I just want to say up here on The Ryman stage how grateful I am to have been a part of country music for the last 10 years.”
Fowler, who has been with Hunt since 2008, in February filed for divorce due to what her filing, as reported by TMZ, described as “inappropriate marital conduct” on the part of her husband, accusing him of “such cruel and inhuman treatment or conduct toward the spouse as renders cohabitation unsafe or improper.”
In April, Fowler requested a judge cancel the divorce proceedings.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Four women, eating peaceably at a barbecue restaurant in China’s northern Hebei province, were attacked by a group of men after one of the women spurned an advance.
Nine men have been arrested in the attack, though it took widespread outrage thanks to surveillance footage that was posted on the Chinese social media site Weibo, The Associated Press reported.
The footage shows the women chatting and noshing at a table laden with food, when one of the men approaches the table and places his hand on one of their backs.
She turns him down several times, but he apparently deemed it not the correct answer, since he started slapping her in a frenzy. She defended herself, and that fight sparked a brawl. More guys piled into the restaurant and attacked all four women, shoving them, kicking them and throwing a chair.
Then these charmers dragged the woman who had initially stood up for herself outside and continued beating her. Few intervened, and one who did, a woman, was flung onto the restaurant steps and hit her head, The Wall Street Journal reported.
The person who had released the videos refused to tell The Associated Press how they got the footage. On Sunday, the portion of the assault from inside the restaurant had been viewed more than 68 million times, and the assault on the street had been deleted.
The direct views did not include re-postings, The Wall Street Journal pointed out, noting also that one of the hashtags related to the incident was viewed nearly 2.8 billion times as people checked for updates and posted more than 2 million comments.
The incident happened in the wee hours of Friday morning, and the suspected perpetrators were arrested on Saturday.
The women were eating at a stretch of all night eateries known as “Barbecue Street,” a favorite hangout among young people, The Wall Street Journal said. People are only just beginning to emerge from lockdown.
Tangshan police said Friday that two of the women had been hospitalized in stable condition with non-life-threatening injuries, and two others had sustained minor injuries.
The incident sparked widespread discussions and public anger throughout China over the questionable lack of safety, as well as systemic violence against women in China, CNN reported.
The criminal investigation has been transferred to Langfang, another Hebei city, Langfang police said late Saturday, according to CNN – a move reserved for sensitive or important cases, or those involving gangs.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Trying to understand the man the governors of New York and New Jersey want to be CEO of the bistate Gateway Development Commission, overseeing the overblown $35 billion Gateway boondoggle concocted by Amtrak and being funded mostly by the states, we poked around on Kris Kolluri.
For the past four years, Kolluri has led Cooper’s Ferry Partnership, a nonprofit helping New Jersey’s poorest city, Camden, right across the Delaware River from Philly.
Kris Kolluri answers questions from the Senate Judiciary Committee, Monday, Feb. 27, 2006, at the New Jersey Statehouse in Trenton. (MEL EVANS/AP)
The publicly available 990 IRS forms show that Kolluri makes $400,000 a year from a charity with an $8 million income. And according to the N.J. attorney general’s Division of Consumer Affairs online database of nonprofits, it was “Non-Compliant,” meaning that “the organization has not met all of the registration requirements of the Charitable Registration and Investigation Act for one or more fiscal years.”
The AG’s office confirmed this, even as the nonprofit told us that they were fully up to date. The next day, the charity was “Compliant” and the AG’s spokeswoman said that she would get answers on how it changed overnight. We never heard back from her and were told that she had retired. Eventually, the AG’s office informed us that the Cooper’s Ferry employer identification number was improperly redacted, resulting in the “Non-Compliant” listing. Once the number was provided, the status became “Compliant.”
In 2014, Cooper’s Ferry was not being compliant with South Jersey Democratic boss George Norcross, who gets his way in Camden. As documented by WNYC and ProPublica and also by the Philadelphia Inquirer and Politico, he wanted a waterfront parcel held by Cooper’s Ferry; they resisted. Norcross then applied pressure and Cooper’s Ferry surrendered the property. The chair of Cooper’s Ferry, John Sheridan, and his wife Joyce were murdered later that year. Their son tells WNYC that the land deal is part of the mystery.
Cooper’s Ferry, renamed Camden Community Partnership last year, is now 100% with Norcross, including Kolluri, and recently moved into a Norcross building. Last week, Acting AG Matt Platkin opened a probe into the Sheridan case. And Kolluri, pushed by Norcross, is heading for Gateway.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The boys will be back in town again.
Amazon Prime Video’s hit superhero series “The Boys” has been renewed for a fourth season, just one week after dropping its third, the streamer announced in a release Friday, citing “record growth.”
“Over the first three days of its third season, the worldwide audience for ‘The Boys’ has grown by +17% from Season 2, and +234% from Season 1″ spanning a comparable post-launch period, the company noted.
Karl Urban is seen in "The Boys." (Amazon Studios)
The show, based on Garth Ennis and Darick Robertson’s comic of the same name, explores a world in which superheroes on par with invincible celebrities abuse their otherworldly abilities.
“The Boys” first hit the streamer, which Variety noted has since also seen an increase in growth at large, in 2019. The second season dropped in fall 2020.
“From our first conversation with [showrunner] Eric Kripke and the creative team about Season Three of ‘The Boys,’ we knew the show was continuing to get even bolder — an impressive feat considering the wild success of the Emmy-nominated second season,” said Vernon Sanders, head of global television, Amazon Studios.
“We’re thrilled to continue Butcher and the Boys’ fight against Homelander and the Seven, as well as comment on the insane world we’re living in. Also, this is the first time in history that exploding genitalia has led to further success,” said Kripke in a nod to the season three premiere.
Season two earned the show five Emmy nominations, including outstanding drama series and outstanding writing for a drama series (”What I Know”).
Those with a keen eye on the goings-on of the show, which centers on TK, may not be shocked — star Karl Urban said nearly three months ago that he was “shooting ‘The Boys’ through the end of the year” at Variety’s SXSW Studio, according to the outlet.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Amber Heard is putting the past behind her for the moment.
The “Aquaman” star, 36, is “doing okay” after a Fairfax County, Va., jury ruled that she defamed ex-husband Johnny Depp in a 2018 Washington Post op-ed, but needs to focus her energies elsewhere, a source told People in this week’s issue.
“She feels drained and exhausted after the trial,” the insider told the outlet, adding Heard “is trying her best to have a positive outlook.”
Amber Heard is said to be trying to stay positive after the verdict. (JIM WATSON/POOL/AFP via Getty Images)
Heard, 36, was sued by the “Pirates of the Caribbean” alum, 59, for $50 million in relation to the op-ed, in which she identified herself as a “public figure representing domestic abuse.” She countersued for $100 million over claims by Depp’s former lawyer that the allegations were a “hoax.”
The former couple’s allegations against one another — not just of defamation but verbal, emotional and physical abuse — were aired for the world in a six-week trial.
The jury on June 1 awarded Depp $15 million in compensatory and punitive damages, an amount lowered by the judge to $10.35 million. Heard was awarded $2 million in compensatory damages.
Though Heard’s legal team has vowed to appeal the verdict, the source told People she wants to put her mental energy elsewhere for now, like being “happy to spend every day with her baby girl,” referring to 14-month-old daughter Oonagh Paige.
“Amber is still disappointed about the jury’s verdict,” said the source. “She is still weighing her legal options, but right now, she needs some breathing room to just enjoy the summer.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Rapper Roddy Ricch was arrested in Queens for gun possession just hours before he was set to take the stage at Governor’s Ball—only to see the charges dismissed the next day.
Ricch, 23, whose real name is Rodrick Moore, and two other men were in a black 2020 Cadillac passing through a checkpoint in Citi Field, where the music festival was being held, about 6:30 p.m. Saturday when police stopped them and found a loaded firearm, NYPD officials said.
They found a Canik 9 mm handgun with nine bullets loaded into its high-capacity magazine under a passenger seat, officials said.
Ricch, of Los Angeles, Carlos Collins, 57, of New Jersey, and Michael Figueroa, 46, of Brooklyn were all charged with criminal possession of a weapon.
Figueroa was arraigned on the charges in Queens Criminal Court Sunday.
Ricch and Collins’ cases, however, were never docketed. A clerk at the courthouse Sunday said their charges were dismissed. The Queens District Attorney’s office did not immediately respond to request for comment.
Roddy Ricch cancels his performance at Governors Ball 2022 at Citi Field on June 11, 2022 in New York. (Astrida Valigorsky/Getty Images)
Figueroa was riding in the front passenger seat of the Cadillac, according to the criminal complaint against him. “I am not ready to get out yet,” he told a security guard who asked him to exit the vehicle, according to the complaint. He then allegedly pulled the gun out of his waistband and hid it beneath the floor mat.
RIcch’s arrest forced the “25 million” rapper’s set at the Governor’s Ball to be canceled.
Halsey was the top act Saturday night for the three-day festival that  began Friday with a show headlined by Kid Cudi. Ricch was listed third on the bill Saturday among 20 performers.
Ricch, a Grammy-winning Atlantic Records artist, broke through in 2018 with the single “Die Young,” which so far has racked up more than 130 million views on YouTube.
Brandon Hudson and Savannah Hudson of Between Friends perform during the 2022 Governors Ball Music Festival at Citi Field on June 10, 2022 in New York City.  (Taylor Hill/Getty Images for Governors Ball)
He released his second studio album, “LIVE LIFE FAST” in December, a followup to his 2019 double-platinum debut album, “Please Excuse Me for Being Antisocial,” which spurred the smash song “The Box.”
Ricch performed with Post Malone on “Saturday Night Live” in May, four months after Ricch had to drop out of an appearance as musical guest on the show due to COVID exposure.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Johnny Depp is sinking his fangs into music — and bringing some star power along for the ride.
Weeks after his explosive defamation trial with ex-wife Amber Heard, the “Pirates of the Caribbean” star is going on tour next year with his supergroup Hollywood Vampires, the band announced Wednesday on Instagram.
“The Hollywood Vampires are BACK!! We’re coming to Germany and Luxembourg Summer 2023,” the band — which includes Depp, Alice Cooper, Aerosmith guitarist Joe Perry and Alice Cooper guitarist Tommy Henriksen — captioned a poster of their tour dates.
Musician Alice Cooper (R) and Actor/Musician Johnny Depp of the Hollywood Vampires perform onstage at Hessentags-Arena during the 56th Hessentag on May 29, 2016 in Herborn, Germany.  (Andreas Rentz/Getty Images)
The foursome is slated to perform in Germany at the end of June 2023.
(L-R) Singer Alice Cooper, musician Joe Perry and actor/musician Johnny Depp of Hollywood Vampires attend The 58th GRAMMY Awards at Staples Center on February 15, 2016 in Los Angeles, California.  (Larry Busacca/Getty Images)
Hollywood Vampires have two studio albums, with guest appearances by Paul McCartney and Dave Grohl.
The announcement comes just weeks after the verdicts were issued in Depp and  Heard’s defamation trial, which took place in Virginia.
Depp, 59, sued the “Aquaman” actress, 36, for $50 million for defamation in relation to the 2018 Washington Post op-ed in which she identified herself as “a public figure representing domestic abuse.” Depp said the piece was clearly a nod to the abuse allegations she’d leveled against him, despite never being explicitly named in the piece. Heard countersued Depp for $100 million due to his former lawyer dubbing her accusations a “hoax.”
On June 1, the jury reached a long-awaited verdict in the trial, awarding Depp $15 million in compensatory and punitive damages, which was reduced to a little over $10 million, while Heard was awarded $2 million in compensatory damages.
Heard last week elaborated on her position in a two-part interview with the “Today” show.
“To my dying day, I will stand by every word of my testimony,” she told Savannah Guthrie.
The interview also featured as the centerpiece for last Friday’s airing of “Dateline.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Johnny Sibilly isn’t interested in giving the “ABCs of what it means to be queer.”
Sibilly and fellow “Queer as Folk” cast members agree: If you don’t know what something means, Google it.
Russell T. Davies’ original series, which premiered in 1999, followed three gay men in Manchester, England. A year later, Showtime premiered its own version, set in Pittsburgh and expanding its umbrella to cover more versions of queer. On Thursday, the latest iteration hits Peacock, pegged as a “reimagining” of the 1999 series, this time in New Orleans and an even bigger world: a pregnant lesbian couple, a trans woman, drag queens and more gorgeous gay men than you can count.
This version of “Queer as Folk” takes no time to explain who it is or why it’s here. This is just its world.
“It’s important to make queer things for queer people. Sometimes the first draft of queer stuff is like, ‘OK we’re going to explain our existence to you, it’s OK, Baby, come on in, the water’s warm,’ ” Ryan O’Connell, who stars as Julian, a nerd with cerebral palsy who still lives at home with his mother, (Kim Cattrall), and also serves as a writer and co-executive producer, told the Daily News.
“This is like, ‘Well, we don’t care if you’re comfortable or not; this is our lives.’ ”
Devin Way stars in “Queer as Folk.” (Peacock/Alyssa Moran/Peacock)
“Queer as Folk” isn’t shy about its sexuality. In fact, it revels in it. Every position, version and style. One person, two people, more. Straight, gay. Abled and not.
“In so much queer TV and film, queer characters are sanctified and made to be these really palatable versions of what queerness is,” Fin Argus, who plays Mingus, a high school student trying to find his place, told The News.
[ Why showrunner Stephen Dunn started ‘Queer as Folk’ with a Pulse-like shooting ]
“It’s important to see characters that can be messy and are human and maybe don’t like each other but can still be part of the same community,” Argus said. “Not everyone is going to get along, but there’s still this thread that keeps people connected.”
Mingus (Fin Argus) and his high school teacher Ruthie (Jesse James Keitel) find common ground outside the classroom. (Peacock/Alyssa Moran/Peacock)
Showrunner Stephen Dunn described his show as “real, raw, authentic queer stories.” Sometimes that’s a queer couple [CG and Jesse James Keitel] expecting twins and figuring out how to be parents. Sometimes that’s Mingus, experimenting as a drag queen and with his own sexuality. Sometimes that’s Brodie [Devin Way], who has dropped out of medical school and come home with no plans. Sometimes that’s a fatal shooting at Babylon, a gay nightclub. Sometimes that’s a montage of sex scenes.
“There are people who are like, ‘Oh, this is very woke,’ and I’m like, ‘Our existence is woke?’ That’s very weird to me,” Sibilly, who plays Noah, a successful lawyer with less success in his personal life, told The News.
“Especially if you go out in New Orleans, there’s such a great, diverse group of people littering the streets, the restaurants. It doesn’t feel like we’re checking boxes. We’re just showing the world how it is and how it exists.”
Keitel, the trans actress playing semireformed party girl and high school teacher Ruthie, whose partner, Shar, is pregnant, stressed the messiness of it all. These characters aren’t perfect, nor should they pretend to be.
Noah (Johnny Sibilly), right, and Julian (Ryan O’Connell), left, are coming to grips with their shifting realities. (Peacock/Peacock)
“We get to see queer people living their lives authentically and unapologetically and surrounded by their peers in a community who love and embrace them,” she told The News.
“I think people forget that queer people are normal. We’re normal people, real people with hopes and dreams and layers and strife and conflict. They mess up.”
Through the tragedy of the nightclub shooting, “Queer as Folk” finds its light. There are no explanations of Grindr. There are no straight characters to guide you into their world. It just exists.
“As queer people, we go through things in our lives that you would consider traumatic and it is in spite of all of those things what makes us special: our humor that we get out of the dark moments, our friendships, our chosen family,” Sibilly told The News.
“It’s about not what happens to you, but what you do with it that matters. It’s a very relatable queer thing to rise from the ashes.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

For the daring Harriet Quimby, the sky was the limit.
She even conquered even that.
The turn-of-the-century adventurer was an actress in San Francisco, a pioneering journalist in New York, and a record-setting aviator. She was famous, rich and celebrated.
"Fearless: Harriet Quimby, a Life Without Limits” by Don Dahler (Princeton Architectural Press)
Then it all came crashing down hideously, and she’s barely remembered today.
Don Dahler’s “Fearless: Harriet Quimby, a Life Without Limits” restores some of that fame as he introduces readers to a woman who dared.
Her beginnings were humble. Born in 1875 to William and Ursula Quimby, farmers eking out an existence near Arcadia, Mich., Harriet was remembered as “a tomboy full of verve and spunk who was prepared to try anything.” But the farm was a disaster, although Ursula picked up extra money selling her patent medicine. Still, by 1884, they were broke.
The Quimbys abandoned their farm. They would move four more times before settling in San Francisco. Then, the women took charge. Ursula put William to work, sending him on the road to peddle her elixir. And the twentyish Harriet, now a “willowy and beautiful brunette with green eyes,” started posing for painters, appearing on stage, and befriending the writers and radicals at the city’s Bohemian Club.
Finally, in 1901, her theatrical career cooling, Quimby decided to approach Will Irwin, editor of the San Francisco Call, about becoming a reporter.
“Will Irwin must have felt like his office door was blown open by El Niño winds as the tall woman, a dervish of skirts and overhung bonnet, swept in and stood before him,” Dahler writes. “She spoke quietly, with ‘a low voice and a brilliant smile.’ But Harriet Quimby had come to learn few could deny her an audience; fewer still could manage to say to no to whatever her request might be.”
Within two years, Quimby had established herself as a well-paid and popular freelancer. But she needed a broader and richer world to conquer than San Francisco. So she got on a train and headed to New York.
“The free-lance  of this particular narrative, fresh from the West, landed bag and baggage one day at the foot of Twenty-Third Street,” she wrote in an article about her early years. “There was no one in the entire city she had seen before. She had in stock a couple of years experience on a hustling Western paper, a goodly batch of letters of introduction (still unused), good health, a well-developed sense of humor, and some, but not too much, money.”
She also had a fearless determination.
Quimby eventually found a regular berth at the popular national publication, Leslie’s Illustrated Weekly. After sending for her parents – she would support them for the rest of her life – she began her career in earnest. Always ready for an adventure, Quimby jumped from beat to beat, filing news, reviews and features. She also snapped the photographs for her stories.
She did exposés, writing a story on Manhattan’s prostitution problem. “Dens of infamy masked under the guise of manicure parlors, employment bureaus, massage parlors, hair-dressing establishments, French restaurants, Greek refreshment rooms, and coffee parlors, and even fruit, candy, and cigar stores are numerous, and they are to be found in what are supposed to be the respectable streets of the city,” she wrote.
Publicity poster of Harriet with her signature plum-colored flight suit and Blériot monoplane.  (Unknown/National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution (SI 72-10099).)
She did travel pieces, reporting from three continents. Quimby wrote about the idle rich of the South of France, where “apparently every woman and girl in Nice either buys, begs or borrows a dog of some kind for no other purpose than to put a big bow on his neck and show him off on the promenade.” She wrote about people-watching in St. Thomas and praised the island’s near-naked sponge divers, “unusually splendid specimens anatomically.”
Quimby still wanted more, though. She even wrote some scripts for a young director, D.W. Griffith. Then, attending the Belmont Park Aviation Meet in 1911, for the first time she saw the era’s simple flying machines. Quimby fell in love with them and the daring pilots who took them soaring into the sky. “I believe I could do that,” she told a friend. “And I will.”
Soon, “Leslie’s” carried a very different, first-person story by its star reporter: “How a Woman Learns to Fly.” Outfitted in goggles and a custom satin flight suit, Quimby took predawn lessons in Hempstead Plains, L.I. The budding aviator explained that she had always loved going fast and had grown bored with cars.
“I couldn’t resist the desire to try the air lanes, where there are neither speed laws nor traffic policemen, and where one needn’t go all the way around Central Park to get to Times Square,” she declared. “Why shouldn’t we have some good American women air pilots?”
And on Aug. 2, 1911, Harriet Quimby earned her aviation license – only the 37th ever awarded in the United States. It made headlines, but Quimby asserted it wasn’t some grab for attention.
“I didn’t want to be the first American woman to fly just to make myself conspicuous,” she insisted. “It makes it possible for me to compete in all contests — and I’m planning to do quite a bit.”
Autographed photo of Harriet Quimby in a monoplane. (Courtesy of The Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum)
True to her word, Quimby was soon a regular at airshows, performing stunts and trying for new records. A national celebrity, she posed for ads and earned thousands for a single appearance. She flew solo across the English Channel on April 16, 1912 – the first woman to do so. (Although the sinking of the Titanic the day before naturally overrode most of her headlines.)
Knowing aviation was a dangerous business, Quimby, 37, announced she would compete just a bit longer. She had already provided a comfortable life for her parents. Once her own future was secure, she revealed, she would retire to France and write novels. However, she still had several engagements booked, including an air show in Massachusetts, where she hoped to break the world speed record.
Airplanes were still temperamental machines, so Quimby first took a test flight over Boston Harbor. She also took on a passenger, Bill Willard. The organizer of the event, he had been worried about worse-than-expected ticket sales. He had never flown before, and the trip would be an exciting first.
No one knows precisely what happened next.
Perhaps Willard, a stocky and excitable man, shifted suddenly in his seat, throwing off the plane’s delicate balance. Maybe there was a mechanical failure. But, “five thousand pairs of eyes watched as the monoplane bucked suddenly, its nose veering hard towards the earth, its tail shooting straight up.”
Willard was thrown clear of the plane and plunged toward the water. Then, even as Quimby struggled to right the craft, she, too was ejected. Both died on impact. The plane, however, glided down to the harbor, undamaged.
Harriet Quimby (Courtesy of The Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum) (National Air and Space Museum)
Her fans mourned her, yet her sexist critics couldn’t resist yet another dig. While lamenting Quimby’s “tragic demise,” the New York Sun still insisted that “the sport is not one for which women are physically qualified. They lack strength, presence of mind, and the courage to excel as aviators. It is essentially a man’s sport and pastime.”
They were half right — Quimby’s death was tragic.
But her strength, presence of mind, and courage opened the skies to everyone.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Tennessee Secretary of State Tre Hargett was arrested for driving under the influence Friday night after attending a music festival in Coffee County.
He was booked into the Coffee County Jail shortly after midnight on Saturday and released a few hours later after posting a $2,000 bail, local television station WKRN-TV reported.
“On Friday night after leaving the Bonnaroo Music Festival, I was stopped by the Tullahoma Police Department and subsequently arrested for DUI,” Hargett said in a statement released through his office Saturday morning.
“Driving Under the Influence is a serious matter, and I regret the circumstances that led to my arrest. I respect law enforcement and will trust the legal process as we move forward,” he added.
Hargett, a Republican, has served as the state’s secretary of state since 2009. He also served as a member of the Tennessee House of Representatives from 1996 to 2006.
He is expected to appear in court on July 14.
Tennessee Secretary of State Tre Hargett was arrested Friday night for driving under the influence after attending the Bonnaroo Music Festival in Coffee County. ( Coffee County Sheriff’s Depar)
The Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival is a four-day annual event held on a 700-acre farm in Manchester, Tenn. This year marks the first festival since 2019, after organizers had to cancel it in 2020 because of the COVID-19 pandemic and in 2021 due to severe weather.
Stevie Nicks, Machine Gun Kelly, Robert Plant and Alison Krauss are some of the headliners for the 2022 edition of the popular festival.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

The man in charge of the disastrous police response to the Texas school shooting was placed on administrative leave Wednesday.
Pete Arredondo, the Uvalde school district police chief, will be on leave until multiple investigations into the shooting are completed, Uvalde CISD superintendent Hal Harrell said in a press release.
Arredondo will be temporarily replaced by Mike Hernandez, Harrell said.
Pete Arredondo stands at a news conference on May 26. (Dario Lopez-Mills/AP)
Shortly after the shooting, Arredondo was sworn into the Uvalde city council. He tried to take a leave of absence from the council at a meeting Tuesday night but other members rejected it.
The Texas Senate and the federal Justice Department are among the agencies investigating the May 24 massacre at Robb Elementary School, where Salvador Ramos, 18, killed 19 children and two teachers.
Arredondo was the commander on the scene that day and told officers to wait outside two classrooms while Ramos massacred children. One of the officers under Arredondo’s command, Ruben Ruiz, tried to storm in to save his wife, Eva Mireles, but was stopped and detained.
Texas state police leader Steve McCraw ripped into Arredondo at a Texas Senate hearing on Tuesday.
“The only thing stopping a hallway of dedicated officers from entering 111 and 112 was the on-scene commander, who decided to place the lives of officers before the lives of children,” McCraw said. “The officers had weapons; the children had none. The officers had body armor; the children had none. The officers had training; the subject had none.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Interest in “Jurassic World Dominion” was far from extinct, as the epic dinosaur movie dominated the domestic box office in its debut.
“Dominion” made an estimated $143.4 million at North American cinemas in its opening weekend, leading all films while grounding a two-week win streak by “Top Gun: Maverick.”
The latest “Jurassic” sequel enjoyed the second biggest domestic opening of 2022, trailing only Marvel’s superhero sorcerer spectacular “Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness,” which conjured up $187 million during its first weekend last month.
Directed by Colin Trevorrow, “Dominion” is the third movie in the “Jurassic World” trilogy and the sixth film in the “Jurassic Park” franchise overall. “Dominion” centers on a world where dinosaurs must co-exist with humans after their island home was destroyed.
This image released by Universal Pictures shows  a scene from "Jurassic World Dominion." (Universal Pictures/Amblin Entertainment via AP) (Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment/AP Photo)
The film reunited actors Sam Neill, Laura Dern and Jeff Goldblum for their first movie together since 1993′s original “Jurassic Park.” Chris Pratt and Bryce Dallas Howard, who play the main characters in the “Jurassic World” movies, also returned for “Dominion.”
[ ‘Jurassic World Dominion’ director Colin Trevorrow says it was an ‘honor’ to reunite Sam Neill, Laura Dern and Jeff Goldblum ]
“Jurassic World Dominion” has a 30% approval rating among critics included on the Rotten Tomatoes reviews website, but audiences saw it much more favorably with a 79% positive score.
The sequel’s numbers trail the first weekends of the franchise’s previous two films, as “Jurassic World” opened with $208 million in North America in 2015, and “Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom” debuted with $148 million in 2018.
“Top Gun: Maverick,” which soared into theaters late last month, continues to fly high, adding another $50 million in its third weekend to finish second at the box office.
The action-thriller — a long-awaited sequel to 1986′s classic “Top Gun” — has now made more than $393 million domestically and is closing in on “Doctor Strange” as the highest-grossing movie of 2022.
Tom Cruise returned to his role as the hotshot Navy pilot Maverick in the new “Top Gun.”
More high-profile movies are on the horizon, with the “Toy Story” spinoff “Lightyear” about the space ranger that inspired the Buzz Lightyear action figure coming out Friday.
The Baz Luhrmann-directed Elvis Presley biopic “Elvis” is out June 24, while Marvel’s “Thor: Love and Thunder” starring Chris Hemsworth, Natalie Portman, Tessa Thompson and Christian Bale arrives July 8.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

A crook snatched a Harlem worker's $8,000 chain after shooting him in the leg, surveillance video shows. (New York Daily News Handout)
A worker unloading a truck in Harlem was robbed of his $8,000 chain — and shot in the leg for putting up a fight, police said Tuesday.
The 55-year-old victim was unloading the truck on E. 129th St. near Madison Ave. when the masked mugger stormed up to him, pointing a pistol in his face, about 1:30 p.m. Monday, startling surveillance video released by the NYPD shows.
The gunman threatened to shoot the victim while trying to yank the pricy chain off his neck.
An armed crook snatched a Harlem worker's $8,000 chain after shooting him in the leg, surveillance video shows. (NYPD)
Despite the muzzle of the pistol being an inch from his face, the victim tried to hold onto his chain, even batting the gun away with his hand at one point, the video shows.
When the victim turned to escape, the suspect shot him in the left leg. As the victim fell, the suspect ripped the chain off his neck and ran off with it down E. 129th St., jumping into a black BMW.
Medics rushed the victim to Harlem Hospital, where he was treated and released.
Cops are asking the public’s help identifying and tracking down the shooter. He is described as Black, in his 30s, about 5-foot-9 and 180 pounds with a thin build. He was wearing a gray hoodie, light-colored blue jeans and white sneakers.
Anyone with information is asked to call Crime Stoppers at (800) 577-TIPS. All calls will be kept confidential.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

ALBANY — Gov. Hochul’s primary opponents finally got the chance Tuesday to press the incumbent Democrat on a host of issues including crime, bail and her 11th hour Bills stadium deal.
Rep. Tom Suozzi (D-L.I.) and New York City Public Advocate Jumaane Williams went toe-to-toe with Hochul as the trio sparred and attempted to appeal directly to voters during a primetime debate with only three weeks remaining ahead of the June 28 primary.
Right out of the gate, both Williams and Suozzi went after Hochul over recently signed gun laws and the Buffalo native’s past endorsements from the National Rifle Association.
Williams took a dig at Hochul by referencing disgraced former Gov. Andrew Cuomo, arguing the new gun laws will do little to stem gun violence in the city and other parts of the state.
“It reminded me of the Cuomo press conferences during the pandemic – and I’ll tell you why,’ he said. “It was in the middle of the Bronx that has some of the highest shootings that we’ve seen.”
Hochul, who did not attend a separate debate last week that featured just Suozzi and Williams, defended her record and said she’s proud of what she’s been able to get done since taking over for Cuomo last year.
“I’ve only been governor for nine months, I got it done in record time,” she said of recently enacted laws, including raising the age to purchase semi-automatic rifles to 21.
Hochul was also repeatedly forced to defend a taxpayer funded deal for a new stadium for the Buffalo Bills that was included as part of the state budget.
“I understand people questioning this,” Hochul said, adding that “the Buffalo Bills is the identity of Western New York the way Broadway is to New York City.”
She said $850 million going toward the stadium was the best deal she could broker for taxpayers.
From left: Rep. Tom Suozzi, Gov. Kathy Hochul and Jumaane Williams (AP)
The one-hour debate, hosted and broadcast by WCBS-TV, comes just 11 days before early voting begins.
Hochul, who has outraised her opponents by millions and is considered the frontrunner in most polls, is seeking a full term in office after replacing Cuomo last summer.
Cuomo, who was facing impeachment, resigned in disgrace following a series of sexual misconduct allegations. Hochul, as lieutenant governor, stepped up and became the first woman to lead the Empire State.
Suozzi has staked out a position as a moderate Democrat with past executive experience as Nassau County executive. He hammered Hochul over her initial pick for lieutenant governor, Brian Benjamin, who resigned after being arrested on federal bribery charges earlier this year.
He also lamented what some described as a secretive budget process under the Hochul administration and the fact that “we are the most corrupt state in the United States of America.”
The governor said she was “disappointed” and called Benjamin’s indictment “a setback” before touting newly installed Lt. Gov. Antonio Delgado.
Suozzi, asked about congestion pricing in Manhattan, pivoted to what he believes is keeping people from returning to the city.
“Crime is the number one issue,” he said, charging Hochul “didn’t engage” in fighting for further bail reforms.
A Siena Poll released earlier Tuesday showed three out of four city residents are concerned about becoming a victim of a violent crime.
Williams, who ran against Hochul in the 2018 Democratic primary for lieutenant governor, is a progressive darling running on the governor’s left flank.
Both Suozzi and Williams also lamented the fact that the Legislature failed to pass a constitutional amendment that would enshrine the right to abortion and civil rights protections based on sex, gender orientation or expression, disability, and other categories despite Hochul touting support in ads.
A second debate between the three Dem candidates is scheduled for next week.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

“Squid Game” has gotten the “green light.”
The hit Netflix survival series about 456 contestants fighting for their lives in a twisted dystopian competition with a $36 million grand prize has officially been renewed for a second season, the streaming service announced Sunday.
“And now, Gi-hun returns. The Front Man returns. Season 2 is coming,” Hwang Dong-hyuk, the director and writer, said in a statement. “The man in the suit with ddakji might be back. You’ll also be introduced to Young-hee’s boyfriend, Cheol-su.”
[ More than 87 million people binged all of ‘Squid Game’ in barely three weeks: report ]
"Squid Game" is returning for a second season. (Noh Juhan | Netflix/AP)
Netflix, which described the second season as “a whole new round,” did not provide any other details, including a premiere date.
The Korean-language series premiered in September to rave reviews, becoming Netflix’s most-watched series in just 12 days, according to the streaming platform. The show, which featured a giant creepy doll that played a deadly “red light, green light” game, became a global sensation.
The show was nominated for three Golden Globe awards and won one: O Yeong-su for best supporting actor for playing Oh Il-nam, an elderly contestant with a brain tumor. He is the first Korean actor to win a Golden Globe.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Fox News’ Gianno Caldwell said his younger brother was killed in Chicago on Friday, calling the news “devastating.”
Caldwell didn’t specify how his brother died in an Instagram post Saturday, but a report by Fox News Digital said 18-year-old Christian was fatally shot.
“Yesterday was legitimately the worst day of my existence,” Caldwell wrote on Instagram. “I received a call informing me that my teenage baby brother Christian was murdered on the south side of Chicago yesterday morning.
“After all the things my family has been through never could I have imagined my baby brother’s life would be stolen from him,” Caldwell continued. “Please keep my family in your prayers.”
Gianno Caldwell in Beverly Hills, Calif., in 2019. (Matt Winkelmeyer/Getty Images for THR)
Caldwell, who says on his Instagram page that he was born in Chicago, included two photos in Saturday’s post showing him with Christian, including one in which the younger sibling was wearing a graduation cap.
Chicago Police confirmed to the Daily News on Sunday that an 18-year-old male was killed in a shooting that also left a 25-year-old woman and 31-year-old man wounded. The woman was said to be in fair condition, while the 31-year-old man was in critical condition.
Police said “an unidentified male offender” fled the scene, and that nobody is in custody as the investigation continues.
Caldwell, who is a political analyst for Fox News, told his outlet that he’s waiting for more information from police, and said he hopes his brother’s killers “turn themselves in.” He also said he wants them to be “rehabilitated.”
“Then one day, whenever they’re out of jail — if it’s not for life — maybe they can turn their lives around and give hope to other young men if there is any hope of rehabilitating them,” Caldwell said.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

They may have found their Material Girl.
Two-time Emmy-winning “Ozark” star Julia Garner has been offered the lead role in Universal’s upcoming Madonna biopic, to be directed by the “Material Girl” singer herself, sources familiar with the film told Variety Tuesday.
Though there were more than a dozen others competing for the part, the 28-year-old actress, also known for starring roles in “Inventing Anna” and “The Assistant,” has long been predicted to be the frontrunner, a source told the outlet.
Madonna in 1986 (left) and Julia Garner (AP / Getty Images)
“Midsommar” star Florence Pugh as well as “Euphoria” favorite Alexa Demie and Odessa Young were among those previously reported to be up to play the pop music icon.
The biopic, which is centered on Madonna’s beginnings and was initially announced in September 2020, won’t just see the “La Isla Bonita” singer behind the camera, but co-writing and producing as well.
“I want to convey the incredible journey that life has taken me on as an artist, a musician, a dancer — a human being, trying to make her way in this world,” Madonna said at the time, vowing that the film will put music center stage. “Music has kept me going and art has kept me alive. ... It’s essential to share the roller coaster ride of my life with my voice and vision.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Former “X Factor” contestant Tom Mann was supposed to be a newly married man, but instead is mourning the sudden passing of his fiancée.
The 28-year-old musician took to Instagram Monday to share the death of Dani Hampson, with whom he shared infant son Bowie. She was 34.
“I can’t believe I am writing these words but my darling Dani - my best friend, my everything and more, the love of my life - passed away in the early hours of Saturday morning, 18th June,” Mann captioned a black-and-white photo of Hampson and the couple’s son.
Tom Mann performs with Stereo Kicks in 2015. (Ollie Millington/Redferns)
“On what was supposed to be the happiest day of our lives ended in irreversible heartbreak,” he continued. “I feel like I have cried an ocean. We never made it to the alter [sic]; or got to say our vows, or dance our first dance, but I know you know that you were my entire world and the best thing that has ever happened to me, Danielle.”
Mann promised to “wear this ring that I was always supposed to wear as a sign of my unconditional love to you.”
Noting he is “completely broken” as he tries to come to terms with the horrific turn of events, Mann said he needs to “use any strength I can muster for our little boy” and vowed to “do my everything to raise Bowie just the way we always wanted.”
“The most beautiful person inside and out. The most incredible soul,” said Mann. “My darling Dani, the brightest light in any room, my world is nothing but darkness without you. I will miss you forever.”
Mann, who previously auditioned for the talent show’s U.K. version in 2014, was originally supposed to marry Hampson — a public relations executive, according to her Instagram profile — in 2020 but delayed the nuptials as a result of COVID.
Hampson, who often posted photos of the couple and little Bowie, last took to Instagram at the end of May, when the couple and their son were vacationing in Italy.
On New Year’s Eve, Hampson said that “2021 started much like 2020 - expecting to become husband & wife - only we ended up as mum & dad instead :white_heart:” and referred to the birth of Bowie as “my highlight, proudest moment & biggest achievement. Now & always.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Jussie Smollett is setting the record straight.
The embattled “Empire” star is out of jail and on the rebound after the career-derailing scandal which resulted in him being sentenced to 150 days in prison on the five-felony-count disorderly conduct conviction in March.
Jussie Smollett visits the SiriusXM Studios on June 14, 2022 in New York City. (Cindy Ord/Getty Images)
During his first post-prison interview on SiriusXM’s “Sway in the Morning” Tuesday, Smollett discussed regret about the infamous “Good Morning America” exclusive, his time in jail , claims he staged the attack as a publicity stunt, and how Taraji P. Henson continued to support him.
The near hour-long interview with host Sway Calloway pales in comparison to the last major media opportunity on “Good Morning America” in February 2019 following the alleged incident, where he claimed to be victim of a racist, anti-gay attack in downtown Chicago.
In hindsight, he said he regretted interviewing with Robin Roberts.
“I didn’t wanna do an interview. You know what I’m saying? And I don’t wanna get too deep, you know, because I love and respect Robin Roberts… but I did not want to do that interview,” Smollett revealed. “ I hadn’t watched the interview at all until we were on trial and I had to watch it because they were trying to use the interview as evidence of lies or whatever. So, I had to watch it and I watched it and I was mortified…I cringed… every single word that I said in that interview was the truth, but there was a certain level of performative nature that came from it because I didn’t want to be there.”
Jussie Smollett after his court appearance at Leighton Courthouse on March 26, 2019 in Chicago. (Nuccio DiNuzzo/Getty Images)
The openly gay actor said his own internalized homophobia brought on shame and embarrassment.
“As an openly gay Black man who leads with his Blackness … I wanted to represent all of us that had been assaulted based on who we are … But I also didn’t wanna be associated with people who had been attacked. I’m genuinely sorry to say this, but this is the way that I felt, I don’t feel that way anymore, but I know that that’s the way that I felt, I felt like, I felt like I just became a [gay slur] that got his ass beat.”
As far as the scuttlebutt that he staged a hate crime for attention, the former publicity agent slammed that notion.
“If I had done something like this, it would mean that I stuck my fist in the pain of Black Americans in this country for over 400 years … It would mean that I stuck my fist in the fears of the LGBTQ community, all over the world.”
The 40-year-old Santa Rosa, Calif., native told Calloway he spent 6½ days in jail.
Admitting he was in “the f—ing psych ward,” he wasn’t in a straitjacket.
“I was sleeping on like a restraint bed,” Smollett added. “I wasn’t restrained and I have to keep it real, everybody inside was very kind. And when I left, I thanked them all..”
Jussie Smollett and Taraji P. Henson in 2014. (David Buchan/Getty Images)
However, it’s a whole other story for his so-called friends and close associates who spoke out against him.
“I do hold some people accountable for the things that they said, for the things that they did, for the ways that they reacted because half of those people should have picked up the f---ing phone and called me because they had my number, you know? And they didn’t,” he said.
One person who didn’t turn her back on him was Taraji P. Henson, the Golden Globe Award-winning actress who portrayed his mother on “Empire.” The two have maintained a tight connection throughout the scandal — even working together professionally on his latest endeavor, directing and producing a feature film adaptation of the 1994 best-selling novel “B-Boy Blues.”
“That is my heart. Taraji supported the film. Taraji gave me money for the film,” Smollett said. In return, he utilized her TPH scalp and hair care line in product placements throughout the LGBTQ+ romantic drama, currently streaming on BET+.
“It is unexplainable how much I love that woman. And she is literally one of my best friends in the whole world.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

In November 2001, David Gunby died of lifelong kidney disease in a Fort Worth, Texas hospital.
Gunby, 58, became the 17th murder victim of Charles J. Whitman, the monster who put shooting massacres on the curriculum in America’s schools.
On Aug. 1, 1966, Gunby, a student at the University of Texas at Austin, had forgotten a book at the library. He turned around to get it when a bullet crashed into his back.
Smoke rises from the sniper's gun as he fired from the tower of the University of Texas administration building in Austin, Texas, on crowds below.  (AP)
Doctors trying to save him discovered that Gunby had been living with only one functioning kidney. That kidney was now damaged by bullet fragments.
The electrical engineering student survived, but the “mad sniper’s” bullet would take his life 35 years later, a death that would be ruled a homicide.
“If his eyes were open, he was in pain,” Gunby’s son told the Fort Worth Star-Telegram. “The only reason my dad has died is because of Charles Whitman.”
Shootings at schools and campuses happened before, but the number of dead usually could be counted on one hand. Whitman’s rampage at the university killed 13 on the spot. Another 31 were wounded, and one died the next day.
As a prelude to the massacre, the one-time altar boy and Scoutmaster took two more lives — his wife, Kathleen, and his mother, Margaret.
One of the sniper's victims in place in a waiting ambulance during the shooting spree at the University of Texas at Austin, on Aug. 1, 1966. (Anonymous/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
On the morning on Aug. 1, Whitman, pretending to be a maintenance worker, hauled a dolly loaded with rifles, pistols, shotguns, and a Bowie knife to his sniper’s lair on the observation deck of the 307-foot-tall tower. He also brought along canned food, Excedrin, coffee, water, and a plastic bottle of gasoline.
Students were heading out for their lunch breaks a little before noon when Whitman, 25, a former Marine, took his first shots. A pregnant woman, a lifeguard, a visiting mathematics professor, a 22-year-old police officer, an electrician, and a Peace Corps volunteer were among the first to fall as the shooter sprayed bullets with great accuracy.
the foot locker and supplies sniper-slayer Charles J. Whitman carried with him when he ascended the University of Texas tower to terrorize the campus with fatal rifle fire. (Ted Powers/AP)
Three police officers and one civilian, a military veteran, entered the tower through an underground tunnel, took the elevator to five flights below the observation deck, then went up the rest on foot. They found a family of tourists — two dead, two injured — sprawled in the stairwell. The body of a receptionist had been dumped behind a couch near the entrance.
Patrolman Ramiro Martinez and officer Houston McCoy ended the rampage at 1:20 p.m., shooting Whitman dead.
At his mother’s apartment, police found her corpse and a note: “I have just taken my mother’s life.” At the couple’s apartment, there was another note next to his wife, who had five stab wounds in the chest. “Mon. 3 a.m. Both Dead.”
Whitman left a long note in which he wrote of suffering from mental anguish and tremendous headaches.
Charles J. Whitman, a 24-year-old student at the University of Texas, in a 1966 photograph.  (ASSOCIATED PRESS)
“After my death,” he said, “I wish that an autopsy would be performed on me to see if there is any visible physical disorder.”
An autopsy revealed a pecan-sized tumor on his brain, but doctors did not believe that it had triggered his violence.
Despite outward appearances, this tall, handsome, intelligent All-American boy was a time bomb — and he knew it.
In March, Whitman sought the help of Dr. Maurice Heatly, a psychiatrist at the university health center. They talked for two hours.
Whitman was “oozing with hostility,” Heatly recalled. The angry young man said he hated his cruel, domineering father and was upset about his parents’ recent separation.
Then, in a chilling statement, he told the psychiatrist that he was “thinking about going up on the tower with a deer rifle and start shooting people.”
Still, Heatly did not think these thoughts were signs of a psychopath.
When the killer’s brain structure offered no explanation, blame was placed on guns and society. Then, as now, the country was in the grip of a crime nightmare that defied explanation.
Richard F. Speck, in court in Peoria, Ill., on April 17, 1967, after he was convicted of the mass slaying of eight nurses in south Chicago. (ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Whitman’s rampage was preceded by another mass killing just weeks earlier. In July, Richard Speck, a violent young drifter, murdered eight student nurses in Chicago. He had been arrested 41 times and sported a tattoo announcing he was “born to raise hell.” Speck’s arraignment occupied space on the same front pages that covered the tower shooting.
Together, these cases are often seen as the opening volley in the age of mass murder in America.
Speck killed with his hands and knives. But Whitman, a crack shot who learned his skills while hunting with his father and later in the Marines, became a rallying cry for a growing anti-gun movement.
"The Right To Bear Arms," by Carl Bakal. (McGraw Hill)
A book — ”The Right to Bear Arms” by Carl Bakal — hit bookstores shortly before the Texas campus bloodbath. “A strange and peculiarly American plague has long swept our land — a plague of guns,” Bakal wrote.
The FBI reported that 57% of homicides in 1965 — 5,614 — were committed with firearms. (According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the number of gun murders in 2020 was 19,384.)
Gun-control legislation that would crimp firearm sales — introduced by Sen. Thomas J. Dodd (D-Conn.) in 1963 — had stalled in the Senate. Within a day of the massacre, politicians called for passage of the bill, stricter laws, and societal changes.
President Lyndon B. Johnson signs a gun control bill at the White House, Oct. 22, 1968. From left: Sen. Thomas Dodd (D-Conn.), almost hidden; James V. Bennett, retired director of the Federal Bureau of Prisons; Rep. Emanuel Celler (D-N.Y.); Joseph Barr, undersecretary of the Treasury; Rep. Seymour Halpern (R-N.Y.); Secretary of the Treasury Henry Fowler; Rep. Edward G. Biester Jr. (R-Penn.), and Fred M. Vinson Jr., assistant attorney general.  (AP)
President Johnson made a plea to “press urgently for legislation now pending in Congress to help prevent a criminal from obtaining firearms.” It passed in 1968.
But not everyone was convinced that gun laws were the answer.
“It appears there is nothing you can do short of outlawing guns for every person in the country,” Texas Governor John Connally said after the massacre. “And even that probably wouldn’t do it.”
JUSTICE STORY has been the Daily News’ exclusive take on true crime tales of murder, mystery and mayhem for more than 100 years. Click here to read more.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Pop star Lizzo is using her voice to support women’s reproductive rights after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade.
The “Truth Hurts” singer pledged $500,000 to support Planned Parenthood and abortion rights organizations following last Friday’s ruling, which ended the federal right to get an abortion.
Lizzo said concert promoter Live Nation promised to match with an additional $500,000, bring their joint pledge to $1 million.
“The most important thing is action & loud voices,” Lizzo said in her Instagram announcement. “@plannedparenthood @abortionfunds & organizations like them — will need funding to continue offering services to people who are most harmed by this ban.
“Black women & women of color have historically had disproportionately less access to family planning resources — this is a great loss but not a new one.”
Lizzo in Inglewood, Calif., in 2019. (Richard Shotwell/Richard Shotwell/Invision/AP)
The money will be raised through ticket sales for Lizzo’s upcoming tour, which begins Sept. 23 and runs through Nov. 18, the singer said. The tour includes an Oct. 2 show at Madison Square Garden.
Rage Against the Machine on Friday vowed to donate the $475,000 that the band had raised from charity ticket sales to support reproductive rights organizations in Wisconsin and Illinois.
“My great grandmother, Mary Maude Fitzgerald, died from an illegal, unsafe abortion,” Tom Morello, the band’s guitarist, tweeted Saturday.
“Her widower, Thomas Fitzgerald, an itinerant worker, couldn’t raise their 3 kids alone & sent them off to families that took them as servants. He died alone of TB in a work camp.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News

Back battling prehistoric foes 30 years after the first film, the Oscar winner explains why apocalypse seems more likely than ever – and why men in power are the real dinosaurs
On the final day filming Jurassic Park in 1992, Hawaii was hit by the largest hurricane in its history. Laura Dern stood on the beach with her co-star Sam Neill and watched the waves rise. Was he worried, she asked? “You know, I think we might die, Laura,” he said. She laughed.
That sounds about right. Dern is an optimism pro, cheerful and resilient as a windsock. Yes, humans are probably doomed, she thinks, but what an exciting time to be alive!
She beams behind the face mask (she’s currently shooting a movie, so catching Covid would be expensive). Doesn’t the Soil Association in the UK do wonderful work? Isn’t the popularity of plant-based protein terrific? “And look at the hopeful rediscovery of bicycles!”
No negative words have yet been spoken about Dern, an actor of depth and daring who also happens to be game and engaged. None will be added here. She is immediately convincing. A category four hurricane didn’t stand a chance.
Anyway, back in Hawaii, the cast and crew holed up in their hotel ballroom. Steven Spielberg played cards with the children. Dern shared rations with Neill and Jeff Goldblum, who was about to become her boyfriend for four years. The chandelier rocked and the ceiling buckled. The power failed. Gusts reached 145mph. By the morning, all the sets had been destroyed. The shoot was cancelled. (Richard Attenborough slept through the whole thing.)
“You go through something like that and it changes everything,” says Dern. “Steven and Jeff and Sam became my family. And remained my family all these years. Steven was there when my baby was born, and at my son’s baptism.”
Dern, it should be said, has been claimed by a lot of tribes. David Lynch, her five-time collaborator, is “home”. Her Big Little Lies co-stars (Reese Witherspoon, Nicole Kidman and Meryl Streep) are “sisters”. She has “a really beautiful familial energy” with the couple Greta Gerwig and Noah Baumbach, who directed her respectively in Little Women (as beatific Marmee) and Marriage Story (her ruthless divorce lawyer won her a Bafta, an Oscar and a fifth Golden Globe).
But the Jurassic WhatsApp group sounds especially intense: “It’s all: ‘I got married! I gave a speech! I directed for the first time! I had a baby!’” That is because, she says, making the new movie induced a surprising level of deja vu: “There was a sense of family that you could never otherwise get … unless you were on the first Jurassic Park.”
The shoot began in July 2020. Jurassic World Dominion was one of the first productions to start during Covid – and had the highest stakes. If it failed, there was a real sense that the industry might follow. The cast, the producers and the director, Colin Trevorrow, holed up in the Langley hotel, near Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, for five months, with a 107-page safety manual. They had a gym, a pool and Frisbee Sundays. Judging by the videos, Goldblum never stopped playing the piano.
“We lived together,” says Dern. “We made food together. We figured out what made us scared. We went through the presidential election together. It was a huge time. Huge.”
A strange and unsettling shoot, then, for a strange and unsettling movie. The sixth film – and the first to reunite Dern, Goldblum and Neill – is an unexpectedly radical beast.
Dern’s character, Dr Ellie Sattler, has moved from paleobotany to soil science. She is divorced and happy, unlike her old flame Dr Alan Grant (Neill), lonely with his fossils. “Ellie’s like: ‘This is amazing. It’s kind of sexy! I do whatever I want! I’m dating! My children are grown! I’m a major scientist effecting change!’”
Her current focus is a plague of enormous locusts ravaging the globe, feeding solely on non-GM crops. Might they be the creation of the enigmatic owner of a a hi-tech dinosaur reserve in the Dolomites? Along with Grant, she goes to find out, on the invitation of the “in-house philosopher”, Dr Ian Malcolm (Goldblum).
All pretty topical, Dern thinks. Even pre-Covid, Trevorrow was sending her news stories about “genetically modified mosquitoes being released in Florida to help potential disease issues. A swarm of locusts seen over Kansas who weren’t eating certain seeds. I’m reading these articles and I’m like: we ain’t in science-fiction any more! Jurassic Park is an everyday story now! Other than a T rex walking down the street.”
In the film, Goldblum’s Malcolm is promoting a book called How the World Will End. How does Dern think it will happen? She is not sure, she says, “but I’m not incredibly hopeful”. She recommends John Doerr’s book Speed & Scale, a net-zero manual by the former venture capitalist. “I like to believe that compassion is a required academic course in high schools. Considering other people’s safety and wellbeing should be our priority. Nurturing our soil, reforesting, sacrificing our dependency to eating beef and cheese.
“We’re the consumer,” she continues (Dern has a winning way with emphasis). “So if we say we’re not gonna buy things that are genetically modified and sprayed with petrochemicals, then put on a truck in a ton of plastic and shipped to our house, because we’d rather have them today than in three days, I think we’d change a lot of companies’ mindsets.”
Her hope is that Earth returns to “a massive gorgeous ocean of predominantly sea life”, with animals free to roam as humans “spread out a bit more” thanks to “planetary travel”. “I like that idea. Because the other answer is full extinction. Just like the movie proposes.”
That’s the thing about Jurassic World Dominion. It is more ideologically ambitious than you might at first clock. Yes, there is the overt caution against genetically modifying dinosaurs for use as weapons of mass destruction. But the discussion of how to manage a peaceful coexistence between humans and animals who ought to be extinct is, Dern explains, intended as political metaphor.
“It’s brilliantly subversive and kind of tongue-in-cheek,” she says. “How are we modern people gonna peacefully coexist with the ‘dinosaurs’ who were here first? And those boys made all the rules. And when they enter the room, we are dealing with bullies.”
She lowers the mask for coffee. “I feel privileged that you and I can have this conversation so that you can impact people reading. We are all having the same conversation, but in isolation, which is how bullies work, right? They isolate us and we think the world is so paralysing that hopefully we’ll do nothing so they can keep making more money and not have to worry about the inevitable, which is climate change. We gotta all figure this out together, because otherwise we’re not gonna have a home any more.”
Few could accuse Dern of not being a doer as well as a thinker. She made her film debut at seven, in Alice Doesn’t Live Here Anymore, the Martin Scorsese film starring her mother, Diane Ladd. That summer, she spent time with her father, Bruce Dern, on the set of Alfred Hitchcock’s Family Plot.
At 16, she gained legal emancipation from her parents, not because they weren’t close – a book of conversations between Dern and Ladd is out next year; Bruce’s 86th birthday was heartily celebrated on her Instagram on Sunday – but so she could work adult hours. At 18, she made Blue Velvet with Lynch. Wild at Heart came a few years later, then Rambling Rose, which won her and Ladd Oscar nominations.
On Goldblum’s advice, she followed Jurassic Park with Alexander Payne’s abortion satire Citizen Ruth. The template was set for a smart shuffle of popcorn and credibility. She made Little Fockers, then The Master; Kelly Reichardt’s Certain Women, then The Founder, a broad biopic about the man who started McDonald’s. Star Wars: The Last Jedi was followed by The Tale, a story of surviving sexual assault.
It has been a similar story on TV: high-profile, but happy to be unpopular. Remember not only her raging alpha mother in Big Little Lies, but also that Dern played the lesbian to whom Ellen DeGeneres came out in her sitcom in 1997. It stalled Dern’s career for a year and led to death threats of such plausibility that she required a full security detail.
Her confidence came young and consciously. Her parents had already lost a daughter, Diane, who drowned at 18 months, and Ladd was told that she couldn’t have any more children. Dern was a welcome surprise, but her parents, still reeling with grief, separated when she was two.
“I was terrified, being on my own with Laura,” Ladd has said. “I had to force myself not to be overly protective because I had lost one child. The result was that it worked the other way. I allowed her to be a free thinker, and that helped her become her own person.”
Indeed, Dern’s precocity – and perseverance – has extended outside her profession. At school, she led a successful student protest against their teachers’ low wages. At 17, she left home and moved in with Marianne Williamson, the self‑help guru and 2020 US presidential candidate, then in her 30s and running a metaphysical coffee shop. Activism was prioritised over washing up.
Since then, Dern has campaigned for immigrants’ rights, Down’s syndrome awareness and gender pay parity, among other causes. Last month, she and her daughter marched in New York against anticipated changes to the US’s abortion laws.
When we meet in London, it is two days after the Uvalde shootings. Her daughter and her friends – who, she tells me proudly, recently persuaded their school to switch to electric buses – are proposing a mass walkout. “What if we just said: kids in America aren’t going to school, because schools aren’t safe until you change gun laws in this country?”
Dern has spoken about how much her children – Ellery, 20, and Jaya, 17, by her former husband, the musician Ben Harper – were affected by the shootings a decade ago at Sandy Hook. Their sense of fragility has deepened, she says.
“The shock for them over the last five years, of watching how our country has changed and seeing a level of racism that may have been there but, as progressive, biracial kids growing up in LA, I don’t think they were aware of – I think that has been devastating to witness.”
It is the inertia that is most enraging, says Dern. “There has never, ever been a world where any Democrat or liberally minded politician or caring conservative parent said: ‘We are gonna take everybody’s guns.’ So they created a story. The narrative is: ‘They’re gonna take our guns!’ and it’s been feeding American culture all these years. And now we have weekly mass shootings.
“No boy with mental health history – no human being – should ever be able to go into a store and legally buy an AR-15 and 300 rounds of ammunition. You can have a hunting rifle and you can have guns to protect your family or whatever, but there are still profound ways we can effect change so that semiautomatic and automatic weapons and no background checks are not a part of our country.”
Dern leans forward, all poise and cogency. Forty years of professional empathising, as well as navigating Hollywood, have made her a realist. These are moderate opinions, coherently articulated – she is not calling for a ban on guns, after all.
In the first film, Sattler’s aside about dinosaurs eating man and women inheriting the Earth was hailed as a welcome note of radical feminism in a mainstream blockbuster. In the new film, the prophesy appears to have been fulfilled – a female scientist has reproduced though cloning. Dern is far too warmly inclusive – and too politic – to cheerlead for such a future.
“I really appreciate a great man,” she says, laughing. “There’s nothing like great men. I’m raising a really kind son. I think it’s such an exciting time to be knowing a new generation of young men who respect and love women and lift them up as leaders. And that’s just so gorgeous. My son and his friends go: ugh, how do we not have a female president running this country?”
What do they think is the reason? “Oh, they just don’t understand it,” she says. “And I know exactly why.” A mirthless chortle.
In Jurassic World Dominion, the stable door is swinging open and the velociraptors are licking their lips. It is too late to learn lessons; there is time only to try something new in a last bid for survival.
Dern has adopted that mindset. She quotes a member of staff at her daughter’s school: “Compassion and advocacy are the only two things I really need to teach any of you. I don’t know that history is ever going to be as valuable.”
Modernity must be embraced; its advantages far outweigh the pull of the past. “We have such constant access,” she says, gesturing at my phone. “The gift of that is that we can’t turn away from the faces of the children that are lost, or the faces of newborn babies whose mothers are having to hand them over at the border to Poland.”
She lowers her mask again – for urgency, not coffee. “We don’t get to cover our eyes any more. We’re constantly reminded how many people need our help, if we’re privileged enough to help.”
Jurassic World Dominion is in cinemas now

Tim Burton’s kinetic and kinky sequel pushed the boundaries for the summer movie template helped by a standout movie star turn from Michelle Pfeiffer
Thirty years ago, audiences came out in droves to see an over-the-top political satire about the mayoral campaign of a disgusting sewer mutant – a movie that also doubled as an oddball romantic comedy about two weirdos with mask fetishes, trading blows and spit in a snowglobe metropolis. Hindsight has a way of turning every box-office sensation into a curious time capsule, letting us gawk at the strange attractions that used to put butts in seats. But through the lens of the modern blockbuster machine, and the reigning superhero-industrial complex that powers it, Batman Returns looks like a true anomaly, as weird and horny and maybe personal as mega-budget Hollywood spectacles get.
It’s certainly a more idiosyncratic movie than its predecessor, Tim Burton’s record-breaking popcorn sensation Batman, released to teeming, cheering crowds in the summer of 1989. To lure Burton back to the world of the caped crusader, Warner Bros had to offer him greater creative control over the sequel. The director exercised it from top to bottom. In place of the original’s art deco noir aesthetic, Batman Returns goes full baroque fairytale. When the camera swoops like a creature of the night through the twisted architecture of the Gotham Zoo, it’s clear we’re fully in Burtonville, previous home to wisecracking prankster apparitions and lonely hairdressing androids.
With Batman Returns, Burton turned Gotham into the biggest of big tops, terrorized by a gang of criminal carnies and populated by freaks on both sides of the hero/villain divide. That includes billionaire vigilante Bruce Wayne (Michael Keaton, slipping back into the cumbersome cape and cowl), ostensible hero of the movie, who at one point likens himself to Norman Bates or Ted Bundy, serial killers with split personalities or secret pastimes.
Bruce’s problems are doubled, his screen-time halved. Just about everyone agrees that Jack Nicholson’s Joker stole the first Batman. The second surrenders the spotlight to the rogues’ gallery immediately, depriving Keaton of any dialogue for the opening half-hour. The movie belongs more to Danny DeVito’s deformed, anguished Oswald Cobblepot, AKA the Penguin, and to Michelle Pfeiffer’s Selina Kyle, reborn into the vengeful, vamping Catwoman.
The other thing that drew Burton back was the involvement of the Heathers screenwriter Daniel Waters, who gave the material an arch, black-comic zinginess. The absurdist political angle of the plot was his idea. It’s an inspired gag, imagining that a creature as vulgar as the Penguin could steal the electorate’s heart. In the film’s funniest reveal, DeVito’s supervillain is interrupted mid-meal, chowing down messily on a raw fish, by the new staff of beaming operatives and volunteers applauding his candidacy. What seemed cynical in 1992 now looks rather touchingly naive. Imagine a politician dropping out of a race just because he got caught on tape disparaging his base.
Waters’ plot is lumpy, forcing an illogical allegiance between the villains. No matter – for Burton, it’s just an excuse to collide these outsized cartoon personalities, to build a vaudeville stage for three tortured, animal-themed outlaws. The director twists that classic Batman theme of the bad guys being warped reflections of the good guy to suit his own enduring love affair with misfits. DeVito, deliciously overacting under mounds and hours of daily prosthetic labor, makes the Penguin a sympathetic monster: horrifying in appearance, crass and corrupt in nature, but still a tragic figure. Burton loves him as only a father could. And he recognizes him as a kindred spirit to his archnemesis. Who is Cobblepot but Wayne without privilege, abandoned instead of orphaned? “You’re just jealous because I’m a genuine freak and you have to wear a mask,” he tells Batman. It’s a point the dark knight concedes.
Pfeiffer, meanwhile, who nabbed the role after Annette Bening got pregnant and vacated it, delivers one of the great movie star turns in all of comic-book cinema: a slinking embodiment of hell-hath-no-fury attitude, hissing venomous one-liners with aplomb and waging war on the powerful, sexist exploiters of Gotham. In both stylized performance and instantly iconic skin-tight, patchwork attire, she could have strutted straight out of the panels of the source material. Yet Pfeiffer also summons the raw desperation of a true identity crisis, which comes roaring to the surface during a great alter-ego, ballroom tango with the enemy in the film’s quiet before the climax.
If the political contest suggests a classic Preston Sturges comedy in superhero drag, there’s a touch of Ernst Lubitsch to the screwball romance between Keaton and Pfeiffer, circling each other in different forms of evening wear, concealing their double lives, secret identities and battle scars during a fireside canoodle. Batman Returns is easily the kinkiest big-screen treatment of these characters: the one that dares to see some S&M fantasy in people burying their svelte physiques under rubber and leather. It’s one reason parents were so incensed by the stranger sequel, and why McDonald’s nixed the Happy Meals line. The dialogue drips with innuendo. The Penguin, a cackling pervert, ravenously sniffs Catwoman’s boot and lusts after his interns.
Remarkably, the film has a class conscience, too. Its real villain is neither the Penguin nor Catwoman but Christopher Walken’s shock-wigged robber baron Max Shreck, named for the actor who played Nosferatu but plainly modeled on a younger Donald Trump. He is, of course, another distorted mirror image of Batman – a Bruce Wayne looking to prey on the people instead of protecting them. “The law doesn’t apply to men like him,” Pfeiffer’s Catwoman astutely says of her boss, the man who pushed her out of a window to complete her supervillain origin story. Years before Christopher Nolan sent Bane to occupy Wall Street, Burton more casually sent a jolt of class warfare through Gotham.
As an adaptation, Batman Returns plays as fast and loose as, well, the first Batman. Burton was quick to admit, in the memoir Burton on Burton, that he wasn’t much of a comic-book reader – a confession that underscored his disregard for canonical backstory and elements such as the character’s traditional aversion to killing. For some diehards, his Batman movies are heresy. Certainly, they hail from a less faithful or fan-pleasing era of comic-book blockbusters. Yet their exaggerated visual pleasures and splash-panel-sized performances have their own fidelity to the original medium, a kinship of pulp spirit. They reject realism, which might be the more suitable approach to the story of a guy who dresses up as a bat to clobber those with a similar flair for the dramatic.
What really marks Batman Returns as a product of a very different age of superhero spectaculars is the decisive victory of authorship Burton claims over his borrowed intellectual property. Joel Schumacher, Nolan, Zack Snyder, Todd Phillips – all these film-makers have found ways to put their own brand on the Batman mythos. But none of them so fully, successfully molded it into the shape of their own preoccupations and obsessions. Batman Returns is a Tim Burton movie first, a Batman movie second. And to watch it today, at a time when finding the directorial soul of a superhero movie often requires some true detective work, is to bask in the eccentricity of its achievement. The bat signal just can’t compete with the freak flag Burton flies over the Gotham skyline.

The former Beatle has aged with dignity – but not too much of it – and 60 years after his first hit will be headlining Glastonbury
There’s a lovely scene in Peter Jackson’s recent documentary The Beatles: Get Back that sums up the taken-for-granted brilliance of Paul McCartney. It’s another day in Twickenham studios, where McCartney is single-handedly wrestling the Beatles into recording a new album. John Lennon, George Harrison and Ringo Starr are at best semi-detached but McCartney is grafting away, writing from scratch songs good enough to make them believe in the band again. In this particular scene he’s at the piano, guiding the band through a hymn-like new number while his fiancée Linda Eastman chats to Yoko Ono in the foreground. The song they are merrily ignoring is Let It Be.
McCartney has always been a doer. “He used to be the one to get things moving,” Starr said after the band’s break-up in 1970. More driven and more cautious than the others, he became a kind of parent and taskmaster. Sometimes this made him a pain but, as Get Back illustrates, a necessary pain. He knew better than any of them what an irreplaceably precious thing they had together. Five decades later, he is still forging ahead. He recently released a quasi-memoir, The Lyrics: 1956 to the Present, and embarked on yet another stadium tour. Next weekend he will headline Glastonbury for the second time, seven days after his 80th birthday. He has said that he considers retiring a prelude to expiring.
Born in Liverpool in 1942, James Paul McCartney lost his mother, Mary, when he was 14 – an experience that strengthened his bond with the similarly bereaved John Lennon. In 1957 McCartney joined Lennon’s skiffle band the Quarrymen, who evolved into the Beatles three years later. After cutting their teeth in Hamburg, they released Love Me Do in October 1962, launching themselves on a rocket trip that didn’t touch down for seven years. On holiday in Greece in 1963, McCartney realised he would probably be famous everywhere, for ever. He told himself, “You’ve gotta decide now: give it all up or be happy with it. And I thought, y’know what, I couldn’t give it all up.”
The Beatles became a global advertisement for youth and friendship – Paul and John wrote many of those early hits knee to knee, eyeball to eyeball – and their split was a generational trauma. McCartney took it hard. “The job was gone, and it was more than the job, obviously – it was the Beatles, the music, my musical life, my collaborator,” he told the New Yorker last year. “It was this idea of ‘What do I do now?’” His daughter Stella, the fashion designer, reflected that “we spent a lot of our childhood with dad recovering from the turmoil and the break-up”.
It wasn’t easy to move on, but it is easy to forget just how unfashionable McCartney once was. After the Beatles imploded, Lennon did a great job of talking up his contribution and talking down Paul’s, and this lopsided view solidified with his murder in 1980. While John was posthumously canonised as the Beatles’ soulful revolutionary (“Martin Luther Lennon,” McCartney snapped), Paul was derided as a showbiz people-pleaser who knocked out corny singalongs such as Mull of Kintyre and We All Stand Together: a “soppy arse”, he once complained. “I understood that now there was going to be revisionism,” he told Esquire in 2015. “It was going to be: John was the one.”
Even in 1997, the year McCartney was knighted for services to music, Alan Partridge’s claim that Wings were “the band the Beatles could have been” raised a big laugh. McCartney’s thin skin when it came to comparisons with Lennon, controversially reversing the credits on certain songs to read McCartney-Lennon in 2002, did him no favours. At his worst, he was an unwinning combination of tetchy and naff.
In 2022, however, McCartney is widely beloved. This is not just due to the sobering recognition that cultural giants will not be around forever. His reputation has also benefited from a cultural swing away from troubled rock’n’roll mavericks and towards artists who manage to combine brilliance with decency. In his book Dreaming the Beatles, the critic Rob Sheffield calls him “almost freakishly untortured”, a quality that was once uncool but now seems admirable. In an era of free love and buccaneering machismo McCartney was a dedicated father to Mary, Stella, James and stepdaughter Heather, and a devoted husband to Linda. Until her death in 1998, they never spent a night apart except for the week he was jailed in Japan for marijuana possession in 1980. He has another daughter, Beatrice, from his six-year marriage to Heather Mills and married American businesswoman Nancy Shevell in 2011.
McCartney’s progressive politics stem from a desire for inclusivity and mutual understanding. No celebrity did more than Paul and Linda to champion the cause of vegetarianism. Rarely does he decline a request to sprinkle some high-grade stardust on a charity record or concert. He likes to be helpful. He carries himself well with strangers, too. “People say, I’m really scared to meet you,” he told Q in 2001. “So I go, OK, let’s try to get past that. I’ve really done very well but, believe me, I’m just some geezer.” If anything, he has performed normality too well. Like his songs, he is tougher, cleverer and stranger than he appears on the surface.
McCartney’s emotional generosity defines his songwriting. While Lennon usually wrote in the first person, McCartney’s interest in other people and the quiet magic of everyday life is audible in the avuncular embrace of Hey Jude, the bustling street life of Penny Lane and the profound empathy of Eleanor Rigby. Lennon’s sense of humour was barbed and cryptic; McCartney’s beckons you into the joke.
Who else would write a song as charmingly daft as Back in the USSR and then record it alongside the tender Blackbird and the heavy thunder of Helter Skelter? Who else could come up with something as jaunty yet moving as When I’m Sixty-Four and, what’s more, do it when he was just a teenager? Standards such as Let It Be and Yesterday are almost too famous to appreciate as entities that a young man sat down and wrote rather than plucking out of the ether.
McCartney’s catalogue is far from spotless but he has been writing good-to-great songs since 1956. He is also a singular singer, bass player and producer who can turn his hand to piano, guitar, drums and electronics. “He can do it all,” Bob Dylan told Rolling Stone in 2007. “And he’s never let up. He’s got the gift for melody, he’s got the rhythm, and he can play any instrument. He can scream and shout as good as anybody… He’s just so damn effortless.”
What must be especially satisfying for McCartney is the long, ongoing reassessment of his post-Beatles work: the DIY farmhouse intimacy of his self-titled solo debut; the ambitious multi-part songwriting of Wings’ 1973 blockbuster Band on the Run, recorded in Lagos; the eccentric synthesizer experiments of 1980’s McCartney II. Tom Doyle’s biography Man on the Run: Paul McCartney in the 1970s makes a strong case for McCartney as a risk-taking adventurer whose efforts to reinvent himself were far from cosy. His proto-techno oddity Temporary Secretary became a club anthem 23 years later. For someone so famous, McCartney has a remarkable amount of buried treasure.
He has aged with dignity but not too much of it. In recent decades, he has worked with younger producers including Mark Ronson, Nigel Godrich and Kanye West and recorded three freewheeling albums with Youth under the alias The Fireman. He is also a generous live performer who knows fans want to hear three hours of the songs that have soundtracked their lives. His first Glastonbury appearance, in 2004, remains one of the festival’s most euphoric highlights. He closed, as always, with The End, his simple valediction to the Beatles, Lennon’s favourite McCartney lyric, and the purest expression of his worldview: “And in the end the love you take is equal to the love you make.” Rock stars are accustomed to receiving love: McCartney is just as good at giving it back.

From the glam-punk of Handbag to the ultra-camp Steve Elgin, award-winning gay music historian Darryl W Bullock picks out deep cuts to play at this year’s Pride celebrations
Fifty years ago this month, a fortnight of gigs, talks and discos to mark the third anniversary of the police raids on New York’s Stonewall Inn culminated – on 1 July 1972 – in the UK’s first Pride march. About 700 LGBTQ+ people ambled from Trafalgar Square to Hyde Park, waving banners and demanding their civil rights. There were no carnival floats, no rainbow-bedecked drag divas, not even a Pride flag, and no music to accompany the protesters either.
But British activists already knew how important music was to this new community. The Gay Liberation Front had been organising discos and dances for 18 months prior to the march, and 1,200 people descended on Kensington town hall shortly before Christmas 1970 for Britain’s first publicly advertised gay disco, filling the place to capacity, with 500 revellers turned away at the door. There were no LGBTQ+ bands, and no artists making records for LGBTQ+ people; at least most of the acts playing those early dances – including David Bowie, Hawkwind and Pink Fairies – were sympathetic to the cause of gay liberation, but the discs being spun were the same ones you would hear in the contemporary singles chart.
That would soon change, and as annual Pride events began to spread across the country, artists and songwriters inspired by the gay liberation movement began to make music specifically for LGBTQ+ audiences. Here are some of those songs that tend to be forgotten.
It’s a toss-up as to what would be the world’s first gay liberation record: many would argue that Stone Wall Nation by Madeline Davis, written in March 1971, predates the UK release A Gay Song, first performed that year. But with lyrics by Gay Liberation Front activist Alan Wakeman, A Gay Song is the first recording by a British act to explicitly address the LGBTQ+ community in a positive way.
It appeared on the album Either/Or by a collective known as Everyone Involved, and featured volunteers from the GLF on vocals. Covering themes such as ecology, world peace and free love in a rousing folk-rock arrangement, Either/Or also included a second gay-themed song, A Sad Song, sung by Gillian Dickinson of folk quartet the Solid British Hat Band. “I felt enormously proud to be involved in that. It was a magical time,” she explains.
“There were various different people, which is why we called it Everyone Involved. Freya Hogue, who was in Sunforest, an all-female band; Arnolpho Lima Filho, the bass player of Brazilian rock band Os Mutantes … We had James Asher, the cousin of Jane and Peter Asher, on drums, and everyone played for free. The idea was to give the album away … We were terribly idealistic and young, but it was a wonderful thing.”
Starbuck were two members – Brian Engle and Martin Briley – of 60s psych-rock band Mandrake Paddle Steamer: a studio project, recording material written by Ken Howard and Alan Blaikley, who first hit the big time in 1964 with the Honeycombs. That band’s Joe Meek-produced No 1 Have I the Right “was an echo of the closing words of Radclyffe Hall’s classic lesbian novel The Well of Loneliness: ‘Give us also the right to our existence’,” Howard recalls. “Alan and I were always keen to make our songs reflect something of our personalities and we liked the title Do You Like Boys, which could appeal equally to gays as well as girls.”
According to Briley, “to promote this song we were flown to Germany on a tour of what turned out to be gay discos”; Gay News highlighted its “potential to become a disco favourite”. But despite Starbuck appearing on TV shows including Lift Off with Ayshea, neither this nor their two subsequent 45s troubled the Top 40. Post-Starbuck, Briley and Engle appeared on the soundtrack to the Rocky Horror Picture Show, and Briley has written songs for dozens of artists including Monkee Peter Tork, Céline Dion, ‘NSync and Pat Benatar.
As camp as a pantomime dame, dripping in innuendo and complete with pub piano and a chorus of Ain’t She Sweet, this single sparked controversy: Elgin’s team suggested that the BBC had dropped plans to feature Don’t Leave Your Lover Lying Around (Dear) as record of the week on the David Hamilton show because of the obviously gay lyrics, leading his manager to inveigle his way into Broadcasting House and pin copies of Gay News on noticeboards throughout the building.
Despite his efforts, the single was a flop, and no record that told a story from an LGBTQ+ point of view would bother the British charts until 1978 – (Sing If You’re) Glad to be Gay by the Tom Robinson band, which charted (as part of the Rising Free EP) in February 1978, reaching number 18. By that time, Elgin was fronting new wave act Steve Elgin and the Flatbackers, “a rock group with a difference” according to the Stage, with our man backed by four female musicians.
Outside members-only clubs, pub backrooms and the occasional gay-friendly dinner-and-dance venue, there were no permanent gay discos in Britain until Bang! opened its doors in Charing Cross in 1976. That did not stop audiences feverishly grabbing hold of LGBTQ-themed records whenever they appeared and demanding that DJs spin them.
One such record was I Was Born This Way by Valentino, which also proved to be a hit on the Northern Soul scene. It was the only 45 issued on Gaiee records, founded by the song’s co-author Bunny Jones, a beauty salon owner with several gay employees. “I named the label Gaiee because I wanted to give gay people a label they can call home,” she once said. After the disc broke big on the dancefloor and Bunny had sold 15,000 copies from the back of her car, Motown bought her out.
Advertised as “the first gay disco single”, Billboard magazine noted that “feelings on the disc are mixed, as some think it is offensive; others feel it is a great cut. Without a doubt it’s a strong disco record”. Valentino himself told Gay News: “It’s just music with a message. I’m not forcing anyone to turn gay and in the same way no one is trying to turn me straight.” Although Valentino’s recording failed to cross over into the mainstream, the song was later covered (with greater success) on Motown’s main label by Carl Bean, and, later still, its sentiment immortalised by Lady Gaga.
Almost a decade before Bronski Beat, Handbag were the first out gay trio in Britain to win a recording contract, when, in 1975, David Arden – son of notorious hardman music mogul Don Arden and brother of Sharon Osbourne – signed them to Jet Records, home to ELO and Ozzy Osbourne. The band were in for a rough ride: that year a gig with lesbian band the Stepney Sisters was abandoned following a bomb scare, and the much-vaunted album recorded for Jet was never issued, but they did get to write and perform the soundtrack to documentary film David is Homosexual.
In 1977 the group laid down demos for a second album, songs with a heavier edge such as the punk-influenced live favourite Just Raped, and soon after they were headlining a weekly gay night at legendary London punk venue the Roxy. “The clientele at the Roxy were similar to any other night,” says Handbag’s Paul Southwell. “Teenagers trying to find themselves. Although the club was a shithole I do remember Handbag having some great nights in there, with the kids really liking us.’
Unbeknown to them, those unpolished demos emerged in Italy as an LP titled Snatchin’, later repackaged as The Aggressive Style Punk Rock. “I would never have let that go out, with someone on the cover with a swastika on his face, but I had no control over it,” says Southwell.
Musicians Rosemary Schonfeld and Jana Runnalls met in 1976 and quickly became romantically involved. Driven out of their home by drunken neighbours, they ended up in a squat with members of the Brixton Faeries commune where, inspired by the burgeoning women’s music scene in the US, the pair began performing as the Dykier Than Sky High Forever Band.
By 1978 they were recording, first as the Lupin Sisters (in a nod to Monty Python), and later as Ova, issuing their debut album in 1979. The Yoko Ono-influenced Lesbian Fighting Song, with its rallying cry of “you men better watch out … We’re going to fight the power, you hold us down” became a live favourite, and over the following decade Ova toured Europe and America and released three further albums via women’s collective Stroppy Cow records.
From the outset, they wore their political beliefs on their sleeves. “The political perspective helped make sense of our personal experiences,” Rosemary explains. “We naturally started writing about what was happening in our lives. The gay, lesbian and feminist movements were taking off, and our politics and music became inextricably linked. We realised that there was a real hunger for political songs written and performed by lesbians. We all shared the burning desire to play, create and develop our music in a safe environment. Women were still not allowed the freedom of forming and leading bands. It was a fight to be allowed to be anything other than the eye-candy singer fronting a load of men.”
Darryl W Bullock is the author of The Velvet Mafia, winner of the 2022 Penderyn music book prize. His new book Pride, Pop and Politics is published by Omnibus Press on 9 June

After 50 years, the prize has been scrapped. How did it change Britain’s literary landscape? And what happened at the awards when Margaret Drabble was seated next to Theresa May?
Margaret Drabble was a bright young star with five novels to her name in 1971, when she was talked into joining her old friend JB Priestley on the judging panel for a new book prize. “Jack told me that I should spend the fee (which came in wine) by choosing some very nice half-bottles to drink by myself, which I did,” she recalls.
Drabble argued for a biography of the playwright Henrik Ibsen, Priestley was keen on a novel by Gerda Charles, and their fellow judge, the critic Anthony Thwaite, championed a poetry collection by Geoffrey Hill. The glory of the new, brewery-sponsored awards was that all three could have prizes, so it all went swimmingly, with none of the squabbles that had already begun to bedevil the Booker, launched two years earlier. These arguments had included one over the literary quality of a certain Margaret Drabble, who (according to Booker judge Dame Rebecca West) would insist on lowering the tone by writing about the washing-up.
The USP of the Whitbreads, which morphed into the Costas 14 years before they were abruptly scrapped this month, was that they didn’t buy into that sort of literary snobbery. For 50 years, they spread a wide and egalitarian net across different genres, supporting bookshops as well as writers and publishers (later panels would include a bookseller). Drabble doesn’t remember much about that first awards ceremony, except that Hill was “quite grumpy”. The following year, poetry was dropped as a category, in favour of children’s fiction. It would take 15 years for it to be reinstated, as part of a roster that by then had grown to include first novels alongside novels, children’s fiction and biography.
Yet poetry, so often consigned to the literary ghetto, would come to be one of the great beneficiaries of the awards, winning nine of the 36 books of the year, an overarching category introduced in 1985 that brought the medieval epic Beowulf and Ovid’s Metamorphosis to the bookshelves of England in the late 1990s (thanks to those rockstars of rhyme Seamus Heaney and Ted Hughes). It was a lower-key collection – Hannah Lowe’s The Kids, inspired by life as a schoolteacher – that became the final overall winner this February.
“Winning the Costa book of the year has meant that collections which might normally have only sold hundreds of copies have gone on to sell tens of thousands, so that’s been wonderful in widening readership in the UK to people who might never have thought that poetry written in these times had anything to offer them,” says Neil Astley, editor of Bloodaxe Books, which published both Lowe and Helen Dunmore’s posthumous 2017 winner, Inside the Wave.
But it’s a sad economic reality that poetry’s gain was usually the book trade’s loss. The shadow of a sigh would pass through the room – originally a banqueting hall in Whitbread’s East End brewery, and latterly a moshpit in the West End – whenever a poet was announced overall winner. That’s because the industry knew it would make more money from a well-known novelist, a timely piece of non-fiction or an agenda-seizing debut.
But even the category winners could get a big boost from the award. Last year’s first novel winner, Open Water by Caleb Azumah Nelson, for example, was already lined up to be Waterstones’s book of the month when the Costa news came through, and the chain went on to sell 20,000 paperback copies. It is now one of Waterstones’ most successful books of the month ever, coming second only to another debut, Gail Honeyman’s 2017 bestseller Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine. The British Ghanaian writer’s classy story of troubled love already had booksellers on its side, but after its Costa win it became “huge”, says fiction category manager, Bea Carvalho. Many previous winners of the prize’s various categories are still on the shelves, points out Carvalho. “The great thing is that they tend to last.”
The Costas’ left-field successes are not, however, limited to first novels. The British Trinidadian writer Monique Roffey had slogged away for years, producing seven novels before The Mermaid of Black Conch hit the jackpot. “When it was shortlisted I was astonished, when it won novel of the year I was dumbfounded, and when it became book of the year I was flabbergasted. I still am,” says Roffey, who had crowdfunded her own publicity for the novel. “None of the mainstream publishers would touch me. I’d been around for long enough to know the score with small publishers: they put their heart and soul into editing you but have no money for promotion.”
What the Costas demonstrated, she says, “is the gap between what the publishing industry currently thinks and what is true … They think that middle-class readers who, like it or not, are the main book buyers, are never going to enjoy a novel written in creole by a white Trinidadian about a black mermaid, but that’s not true. The Costas mainstreamed a book that had been excluded.” An imprint of Penguin Random House is already lined up to take her next novel. “All those years of just keeping going in uncertainty and penury,” she sighs. While she knows literary fiction is never going to be a secure calling, the £30,000 prize gave her the luxury of taking a year out from her teaching job, and cutting down on the “busman’s holiday” circuit of masterclasses and public speaking engagements which make getting down to the next novel so hard.
Part of the value of awards is the buzz that they generate through a razzmatazz that peaks at the ceremony itself. Roffey was unfortunate in that her win fell into the social abyss of the Covid pandemic, so she missed out on the presence of celebrity judges such as model Jerry Hall, actor Hugh Grant and rower Matthew Pinsent that have been brought in for previous years to sprinkle stardust over the judging process. “I remember some very enjoyable awards dinners,” says Drabble, “though once I sat next to Theresa May, who didn’t seem all that interested in the books.”
Spouses Claire Tomalin and Michael Frayn found themselves on a particularly dizzy merry-go-round when they went head to head with his novel, Spies, and her biography of the 17th-century diarist Samuel Pepys. “I won by a hair’s breadth,” says Tomalin. “Our being rivals for the same prize generated a great deal of publicity: we were invited to pose for a photograph hitting each other over the head with our books (we declined). It was all a little bit embarrassing, but well worth that because it sold lots of copies of both our books.”
Frayn and Tomalin were well-established stars by the time of their face-off. Hard though it may be to imagine today, Philip Pullman was not, at the point when the final part of his now canonical His Dark Materials trilogy became the first children’s novel to be anointed 2001 book of the year. Pullman was 55 and had previously refused to allow his early books to be entered for any awards. Chair of judges Jon Snow said: “If I am honest, the wind was against Pullman at the very beginning. We did worry about giving such a literary prize to a children’s book, but then we thought of CS Lewis and that was that.”
“It made a huge difference to my reputation and sales,” says Pullman. “After the Whitbread I was sort of known about, whereas I hadn’t been before. The Carnegie medal I won for Northern Lights was a big thing in the children’s book world, which is neither known or very much cared about by the rest of the reading public; but the nature of the Whitbread/Costa award guaranteed that the news pages as well as the book pages took notice. Whoever set up the prize in that way did something very clever and very generous. It put the children’s book on a level with the other four category winners, and that said a great deal about the value of children’s literature.”
Pullman’s win was part of a new golden age for children’s books, when it started to be studied in universities and the YA market took off. By the time Mark Haddon followed him on to the podium in 2003, with a “crossover” debut The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time - published in both adult and YA imprints – nobody blinked an eye. It was, said chair of judges Joan Bakewell, “quite exceptional in the way Haddon is able to express the voice of the child and to get into the boy’s language. It is extraordinary because of the limitations he has put on himself. None of the judges has known anything like it.”
In 2012, the novelist Joan Brady – who in 1993 had become the first woman to win book of the year – ranted about the corporatisation of literary awards. “Canada has the Governor General’s literary awards. The US has the National Book awards. Australia has its Premiers’ awards. France has Academy prizes. Germany, the German book prize. Don’t UK writers deserve national recognition, too?” she wrote. It’s in some ways a fair point – commercial sponsors are fickle and subject to their own fluctuating fortunes – but it’s less likely than ever to cut through in today’s austerity politics. Sometimes you don’t know what you’ve got till it’s gone.

I remember chilly trips to the beach in Fife, and my first visit to the Mediterranean. The association of heat with pleasure is hard to shake
I never saw my mother in a swimsuit, and I only once remember my father in one. In Fife in the 1920s, when both of them were young, sun-worshipping had yet to catch on. When my father swam, he swam in rivers, and then warmed himself up with a brisk towelling. My mother, who never learned to swim, would enjoy a day on the sands with tea brewed over a fire and sometimes a dance or two, if anyone had a squeezebox and the rain held off.
My parents remembered these things fondly during my childhood, when we might spend a summer afternoon on the local beach – it was only a 15-minute walk away – sometimes with relatives: cousins, a grandfather, uncles and aunts. Meteorology was less reliable then, and there seemed to be little question of adults “dressing for the weather” other than carrying a tightly folded plastic mac, which removed the precautionary need for a proper raincoat neatly arranged over the forearm.
Otherwise, they kept most of their clothes on, even in my grandfather’s case the peaked cap, the bannet, that he wore every month of the year. When, near naked, we ran up the beach from the sea to join a fully dressed party of knitters and pipe-smokers, we completed a seaside version of Manet’s Déjeuner sur l’Herbe. Our mothers would then insist we ate what they called a “shivery bite”, a sandwich of corned beef or meat paste or cheese.
On a good day, the temperature might peak at 20C (68F), though on the more frequent less-good days it might struggle to reach 13C (55F). It was the wind, bringing grey skies and rollers from the North Sea, that tended to spoil things in Fife and elsewhere on the east coast of Scotland; on the west coast the spoilers were the clouds that swept in from the Atlantic to unleash downpours on the resorts in the Firth of Clyde. Stoicism was needed wherever you were. The actor and comedian Stanley Baxter remembers the annual question from his mother to her neighbour, after the neighbour’s annual Rothesay holiday: “How was the weather?” And the neighbour’s annual answer: “Well, it never kept us in.”
In these cool and sometimes damp surroundings, it was hard to imagine hot air as anything other than pleasurable. Most children’s fiction reinforced this idea, with pictures of cake and ginger beer bottles spread out on picnic cloth, and in the distance a lighthouse, a cliff, a ship and a calm sea. Nobody in these scenes seemed to perspire and yet, thanks to the presence of short sleeves and sandals, an impression of warmth was created, somewhere in the south. Might the sun ever be dangerous? At the local cinema we watched a rerelease of Alexander and Zoltan Korda’s The Four Feathers, in which Ralph Richardson loses his helmet in the desert (he is on his way to fight the Mahdist revolt) and in its absence suffers sunstroke and goes blind. But that (and later films in which crickets chirped and people sweated) did nothing to prevent a feeling that the ideal climate was more dependably sunny than the one we lived in.
Aged 25, I saw the Mediterranean for the first time. I lay on the sand and got badly burnt; and then, like many millions of other northern Europeans before and since, I decided the weather and all that came with it – food, wine, manners, architecture – came close to perfection. Really, ignoring the politics and applying the sun cream, what was not to like? The great lake around which European civilisation grew: books had been written about it.
This idealisation had consequences when global warming began to edge into our consciousness. Initially, one popular reaction was to predict the northward march of English vineyards under the influence of benevolent sunshine. The idea that heat could be oppressive and damaging – ruinous to many forms of life, in fact – took longer to sink in.
As something to be frightened of, it seemed to belong to another age: in the imperial era of The Four Feathers, heat was often what the British dreaded most in the territories they conquered or annexed, and for many years they coped with it rather badly. In 18th-century Bengal, for example, the combination of pre-monsoon heat and monsoon humidity was deathly, but the British stubbornly continued to eat, drink and dress as though they lived in Berkshire. Their behaviour makes a vivid historical study in gluttony, stupidity and dissipation of all kinds. They drank torrents of madeira, champagne, burgundy and claret; wolfed down soup, roast fowl, mutton pie, lamb, rice pudding, tarts and cheese at dinner (a meal consumed at two in the afternoon, the hottest time of day); pelted each other with bread rolls at supper; vomited from carriages; and fell drunkenly into ditches, soiling their topcoats and silk waistcoats, their lace sleeves and their breeches, the whole splendid apparel already wet with sweat.
Naturally, many of them died. The records for 1780 show a surgeon expiring after “eating a hearty dinner of beef with the temperature being 98 deg F”, though privileged excess wasn’t always to blame. Along the Grand Trunk Road and other routes used by the British military, tiny clusters of graves known as “marching cemeteries” appeared at roughly 12-mile intervals, where the casualties of heatstroke were buried when their fellow marchers camped for the night.
Bengal is hotter now – the average temperature of Kolkata has risen at least 1.2C since the mid-19th century – and in May a prolonged heatwave in north India produced a record temperature in Delhi of 49.2C. France and Spain have had their hottest May on record. This month, a weather station in Catalonia registered 43.1C, which is among the hottest days recorded there in any month ever. Forest fires have broken out in Europe; dairy herds suffer in India; farmers everywhere worry about crops. A friend in Delhi writes to tell me of the cruel effects on the urban poor. “At traffic lights you see bicyclists leaning away from cars, to try to duck the flow of recycled air – even hotter than the ambient air – that’s the byproduct of the air-conditioning keeping the driver nicely cool inside.”
And still we present news of heat cheerfully, ignoring the obvious like an East India merchant tucking into his six-bottle dinner. Newspapers show crowded beaches and swimmers splashing in the Serpentine, the TV weather forecasters smile when they promise us a sunny and warm weekend. (And we, too, are glad.) Saffron O’Neill, an academic at the University of Exeter, wrote recently of a conflict in the coverage, which perhaps represents a conflict in ourselves. A study of the European media, she wrote, revealed “a mismatch between the text of the articles and the accompanying visuals”. The headlines announced news of unprecedented heat and the consequences for the sick and elderly people; the photographs featured people having “fun in the sun”. The mismatch was particularly prominent in the UK, O’Neill wrote, which perhaps said something “about how British culture narrates the experience of very hot weather in our historically mild climate”.
It does, it does. I look at the forecast for Rothesay and what do I see? Cloud, some sunshine, light rain showers, a moderate breeze, a maximum of 14C. Rejoice!
Ian Jack is a Guardian columnist

Between 15 hours of baking and three hours’ sleep, Stéphane Ravacley is trying to knead a little faith back into French politics
After dark in a bakery kitchen, Stéphane Ravacley was bashing blocks of butter with a giant rolling pin as he prepared his croissant pastry. “A lot of French people have lost faith in politics,” he said, shaping the first of 500 croissants. “They’re not voting, they don’t feel listened to, and it’s my battle to win them back.”
The 53-year-old baker who hails from what he calls the “bottom rung of the social ladder” has captured France’s imagination as one of the most improbable newcomers in this weekend’s first round of the parliamentary elections.
Ravacley’s outsider challenge to Emmanuel Macron’s centrist party in the Doubs near the Swiss border in eastern France is focusing attention on the newly re-elected president’s image problem as being aloof, especially concerning people’s everyday worries.
Macron is seeking a centrist parliamentary majority in order to have a free hand for his policies, such as raising the pension age and overhauling the benefits system. But turnout on 12 and 19 June is expected to be at a record low of less than 48% amid a growing mistrust of the political class. Some voters feel that the real battle will take place with street demonstrations against Macron’s policies from the autumn, so there’s “not much point” in voting, as one unemployed man said on a housing estate in the eastern town of Besançon.
A historic alliance of parties on the left, led by the radical Jean-Luc Mélenchon, is seeking to make big parliament gains, and is predicted by pollsters to triple its seats and become the main opposition to Macron’s centrists. Marine Le Pen’s far-right National Rally is also seeking to increase its seats.
Ravacley, who does not belong to a political party, is running for parliament for the leftwing alliance, backed by the Greens. He argues that the French parliament, which is overwhelmingly middle-class with a high level of formal education, needs more working-class, manual labourers who understand the way French people think. He grew up in eastern France, in a poor family who worked the cereal fields. His mother died in a tractor accident when he was four, leaving his father with three children.
France votes in two rounds of parliament elections on 12 and 19 June, which will set the balance of power for the next five years. The results will define Emmanuel Macron’s capacity to deliver his domestic policy, such as raising the pension age and overhauling benefits.
How does the vote work?
Voters choose 577 parliament representatives for the National Assembly in a "first past the post" voting system. Most constituencies go to a second-round run-off between two or three, sometimes four, candidates. The top scorer wins.
What do the polls look like?
Macron’s centrist grouping is seeking an absolute majority, which requires winning at least 289 seats.
It is hard for pollsters to accurately predict the number of seats of the final result.
Two polls in early April suggested Macron’s grouping might take between 275 and 315 seats. If Macron’s grouping wins the greatest number of seats, but falls short of an absolute majority, it would have to seek support on legislation from allies, potentially on the right.
Jean-Luc Mélenchon’s alliance of leftwing parties has been predicted in polls for Ifop-Fiducial and Elabe to greatly increase its number of seats to between 155 and 205, which would make it the main opposition force.
Marine Le Pen’s far-right National Rally party has historically been limited by the absence of proportional representation and is predicted by pollsters to increase its seats to between 20 and and 65.
Ravacley is known as the “humanist baker of Besançon”. He became famous last year for going on hunger strike in defence of his Guinean bakery apprentice, Laye Fodé Traoré, an orphan who had arrived in France as an unaccompanied minor aged 16, but faced deportation when he turned 18. Ravacley’s protest tapped into national concern for unaccompanied minor migrants. Stars including the actors Omar Sy and Marion Cotillard signed an open letter to Macron on his behalf. Still, it took 11 days of hunger strike and Ravacley’s sudden hospitalisation for the authorities to make contact and begin processing Traoré’s paperwork, allowing him to stay.
“When I went on hunger strike, I was initially met with silence from the authorities and that changed me as a person,” Ravacley said. “I’ve become a monster now – a kind and gentle monster – I really understand that if you want to change things you have to fight for it.”
The baker’s campaign schedule is gruelling. He works on his croissants until 10pm, sleeps three hours, rises at 1.30 am to bake bread for his shop until midday, briefly naps, then sets off in his old Renault Twingo full of flour-sacks as he canvasses in his eastern constituency that spreads from the housing estates of Besançon to the small villages outside.
Ravacley still supports migrants who arrived as unaccompanied minors, as well as French young people leaving the care system, which has opened him to far right attacks. Last week, one of his election posters was sprayed with the Nazi swastika and racist slurs. “I’ll never give in to hate,” he said.
In an election described by pollsters as lacklustre and dull, Ravacley has become a high-profile figure. During last month’s Cannes film festival, the Dardenne brothers directing-duo, whose latest film is about young migrants in Belgium, dedicated their film to Ravacley. They called his hunger strike a “great act of resistance in our era”.
Ravacley said: “I was rolling out my croissants, as usual at that time of night, the phone rang and someone said: ‘Put on the TV, they’re talking about you at Cannes.’ Incredible.”
The town of Besançon, run by a Green mayor since 2020, saw a high vote for the left’s Mélenchon in the presidential race – he topped the poll in the first round, beating Macron and Le Pen. Ravacley’s challenge is whether the new leftwing alliance can now persuade voters to turn out again in the parliamentary elections, particularly on housing estates where abstention is high.
On the estates of Besançon’s Clairs-Soleils neighbourhood, as Ravacley knocked on doors, people said their biggest concern was making ends meet, as well as the climate crisis, but that trust in politics was low.
Outside a primary school, Ahmed, 32, an accountant collecting his two daughters, said he recognised Ravacley from TV. “It’s important to have someone in parliament who understands people’s everyday concerns, and we’re really struggling with the cost of food and petrol,” he said. “If I vote, I’ll vote for him. But I’m not really sure if it’s worth voting any more, nothing ever changes.”
Nabia Hakkar-Boyer, a regional councillor for the Socialist party, and Ravacley’s runningmate, said: “He comes across as down to earth and different to other candidates. He looks like the voters themselves, and he understands their lives. He always has flour on his trousers and he works more than 15 hours a day.”
Since the gilets jaunes anti-government protests of Macron’s first term, there has been a demand for “ordinary citizens” to play more of a role in political decision-making. Under pressure, Macron promised this month that he would set up a vast democratic consultation with the French people, but he is yet to spell out in what form.
Ravacley is not the only citizen protester who has turned parliamentary candidate this year. Rachel Keke, a hotel housekeeper who led a two-year strike for better conditions for cleaners at a hotel on the edge of Paris, is running for the left alliance east of the capital.
Meanwhile, Ravacley has even made his flour-encrusted, worn-down work shoes a campaign argument. “I’ll go to the National Assembly in my magic shoes,” he said. “They keep my feet on the ground.”

Ukraine won the Eurovision song contest 2022 with a song mixing rap with elements of Ukrainian folk music. A tidal wave of public support saw the entrants, Kalush Orchestra, move from eighth place after the jury votes to first place, as they were awarded a staggering 492 points. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, welcomed the victory, and said the country would 'do its best' to host the contest in the port city of Mariupol one day. Zelenskiy and Kalush Orchestra said any victory was meaningful for Ukraine at this time. The UK also had an exciting night, as Sam Ryder had a considerable lead at the halfway point and placed second overall with his song Space Man. This is the highest the UK have ranked since 1998
Sun 15 May 2022 15.25 BST
Last modified on Mon 16 May 2022 09.19 BST

Although artist Aïda Muluneh had an itinerant childhood in Europe and America, she was born in Addis Ababa and is an expert in African photography. When charity WaterAid asked her to participate in a campaign highlighting water poverty, it was the women of Afar, northern Ethiopia, that she shot for her series Water Life, now included in Ekow Eshun’s new book of African art and photography, In the Black Fantastic (Thames & Hudson), published to coincide with a show at London’s Hayward Gallery. Muluneh was pleased that WaterAid wanted to use art for advocacy rather than reportage. “Our continent has many layers,” she says. “However, we have been at the mercy of the international media that does not show the complexities of our challenges. My approach has been to tell a story from my perspective, not based on cliches often covered by foreign photographers.”
Sat 25 Jun 2022 17.00 BST
Last modified on Thu 30 Jun 2022 11.01 BST

There are so many examples of the arts being used to unite and galvanise people. Here it is being deployed as a tool of division
For most of my 25 years as a journalist, “the arts” have usually been seen as a calming antidote to life’s harsher moments. In newspapers and on websites, culture often functions as a way to introduce visual interest to – and tonal relief from – the parade of awfulness we know as “the news”.
This unspoken ideological assumption can be irritating if, like me, you happen to think that the arts and culture are a fundamental part of human existence. Then again, in the wider world too, they are generally understood to be bound up with human expression and fulfilment – but not thought to be the stuff of life or death.
Now this is changing. At this moment in history, it would be hard to make the argument that culture and the arts are merely decorative. You wouldn’t want to try to say that to the Ukrainians I met this year at the Venice Biennale. The Russian pavilion at the event stands empty: the artists and curators recused themselves before they were asked not to come. But the Ukrainians were determined to show up. Pavlo Makov, the official Ukrainian artist, had been sleeping in a bunker in Kharkiv before he decided to make the perilous journey, driving elderly relatives to safety and exile in Vienna en route. “Russia’s idea … is to eliminate Ukrainian culture. If it has no culture, Ukraine does not exist,” he told me. “I felt that Ukraine has to be represented.”
Culture, in this sense, is absolutely central to the war. For Ukrainians, it is also a means of resistance: back in Kyiv, the national military history museum has already mounted an exhibition of captured Russian military hardware and recreated a bunker in which besieged citizens had sheltered for a month. The president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, a former comedian and television producer, has wasted no opportunity to use cultural events to spread his message: he was beamed into the opening of another exhibition of Ukrainian art in Venice, and to the Cannes film festival. In what might be the closest modern analogue to the prophet Joel’s line about beating ploughshares into swords, the Ukrainian winners of the Eurovision song contest sold their trophy to fund military drones.
Culture really does become a matter of life and death, then, when a society is under pressure. This can be for good or for ill: how narrative is shaped can, of course, be damaging – or dishonest. Before the war in the former Yugoslavia, politicised Serbian historians fomented ultra-nationalist feeling. But during the conflict, in 1993, Susan Sontag and Haris Pašović’s production of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo became both an act of defiance against the violence of the siege and a powerful metaphor for the city’s plight. Look to any troubled or repressive society and you’ll see culture weaponised, or made a target. Shostakovich’s career’s was almost destroyed by a review, widely thought to bear Stalin’s own fingerprints, of his opera Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk. The Nazis confiscated “degenerate art”, promoting an anti-modern aesthetic that valorised militarism and obedience to the regime. Islamic State destroyed archeological remains at Nimrud, Nineveh and Palmyra. Uyghur language, poetry, storytelling and music are being eradicated by repressive laws and Chinese re-education camps. These are, obviously, extreme cases. But illuminating ones.
A polity in which politicians wade in and mess about with culture is one that is malfunctioning. Which brings us to Britain. It is undeniable that culture and the arts have become “newsworthy” recently, in a way that they weren’t for many of my years as a journalist: think of the toppling of the statue of slaver Edward Colston, or the arguments over the direction being taken by the National Trust, or the awful scenes of Nazi-saluting, far-right protestors “protecting” the Cenotaph from Black Lives Matters protesters. This is because society has become more fractured – and, crucially, because the Westminster government has become more malignly interventionist, finding it useful to foment rather than de-escalate such moments of tension. (It’s noteworthy how many of these disturbing events have been, specifically, English; culture policy is, of course, devolved.) These moments are symptoms of something rotten in the state. At the same time they demonstrate, in a truly perverse way, how important culture really is.
The culture war waged by the right may by now have passed its dizzying peak. Oliver Dowden, who seemed sincerely to believe that there was a “woke” army intent on tearing down the fabric of society, is no longer in charge of the DCMS. Munira Mirza has departed No 10, and with her, or so it seems for the moment, the determination to block, wherever possible, appointments to the boards of cultural organisations of anyone with ideologically unacceptable views. Moderate voices in the party are beginning to express themselves more forcibly; there are plenty of Tories who think the culture war is ridiculous and dishonest.
Nevertheless, we have entered a more chaotic phase, in which surreal, late-period Johnsonism, as well as inventing the repugnant notion of sending asylum seekers to Rwanda, has dreamed up the bizarre spectre of Nadine Dorries as culture secretary. As one senior figure in the arts said to me, a toddler might as well be in charge of a chainsaw. It all fits together: we are in a zone of every kind of incoherence, moral and otherwise. Unfortunately, Dorries’s targets are two great cultural institutions, the BBC and Channel 4. Fortunately, there is some hope that Boris Johnson will destroy himself and his cronies before too much damage is done. Either way, fasten your seatbelts, it’s going to be a bumpy night.
Charlotte Higgins is the Guardian’s chief culture writer
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a letter of up to 300 words to be considered for publication, email it to us at guardian.letters@theguardian.com

The once mysterious show-as-a-puzzlebox has, four seasons in, become nothing but an endless MacGuffin hunt. How maddening for its seven remaining fans
American TV has a very weird and specific problem right now: every child exists on TV simply to reflect an adults’ trauma back at them, and nothing else. They droop around the house with a teddy bear asking weird, direct questions at bedtime about how, “Mommy … you seem sad.” Response: “I am, sweetie. [Crying, catching the cry, lowering to a whisper] I am.” I’ll admit I don’t interact with children very often (I am personally childless), but is this how they talk now? These scenes are unbearable, and there is a plague of them. This is just one of my many, many issues with the new series of Westworld (Monday, 9pm, Sky Atlantic).
I know, I’d forgotten about Westworld too. I recently rewatched that first glorious pilot episode on a plane, and I was reminded just what a spectacular piece of TV it really was: Anthony Hopkins quietly chilling while drinking whiskey with a robot, James Marsden’s heartbreaker eyes, Ed Harris’s musky villainy, that small-but-huge moment when Evan Rachel Wood figures it all out.
Back then, Westworld was a perfect sci-fi idea – “What if this weird world existed? What stories would occur if it went wrong? How good a cast can one TV show really have?” – and the first series was an astonishingly well-worked run of that simulation. Then series two happened, which was just Thandiwe Newton telling a load of samurai how much she missed her daughter (“Mommy? Why do these men have swords?”). Series three also occurred. And now we’re on the fourth version of this, somehow, and … wow. All I can say is: whoever is still watching this show, I’m sorry. They’ve really let all seven of you down.
There’s only so much I can tell you about where we are at the start of season four, but, as is typical for Westworld, they are truly making it up as they go along. Aaron Paul is back, and if you didn’t get enough of him crying and being anguished in a way where you can see all the spit stick to his teeth in Breaking Bad, well, he’s doing it again. Other actors return – the aforementioned Newton is back, being fed some of the worst lines of dialogue I’ve ever heard; Evan Rachel Wood seems to only be there because they signed the actor to a too-long contract and now need to give her 10 more episodes or pay a bankrupting kill fee. But Paul is the de facto lead of this season – and he just spends a lot of it talking in weird code to his daughter, then going on yet another endless MacGuffin hunt.
There are exactly three kinds of scene in Westworld, I’ve figured out: “Two people are making threats past each other, not to each other”; “Two people have arrived in a place that leads them to the next place and they are both talking like aliens about it”; and “Evan Rachel Wood is knotting her eyebrows and softly discovering a truth” (until later in the series, after hours and hours of softly knotting and being passive, when she will suddenly become steel-strong). There is a fourth variation, where an actor arrives out of nowhere and says “Remember me?” – which I explicitly do not – but it normally descends into one of the other three scenes. Nobody in Westworld seems to be capable of answering a direct question without reciting a riddle. It is maddening.
Back at the stage of that good pilot, maddening was sort of the point: there was a space in the TV landscape for a show-as-a-puzzlebox, something with a lot of aesthetic foreshadowing and mysteries for subredditors and episode recappers to try and unlock. Season one had the maze, the satisfying timeline tilt, a grim shadow overlooking the entire park: people’s heads got cut open and obtuse clues were inside.
The problem with a puzzlebox show, though, is to keep people interested, you have to really trust that the producers know what they are doing and where they are going with this, and with Westworld, I have never seen a worse example of that. Normally when I hate something, I hate it with no remorse. But with Westworld, I genuinely feel sorry for the few remaining viewers who are invested in this story. You are not going to get a satisfying conclusion to all of this. What an amazing first episode that once was. What an absolute mess it is now.

A black film-maker is using ground-penetrating radar to find 28 potential sites of unmarked graves and headstones
On a quiet weekday afternoon, James Russell knelt down in a grassy field and planted a tiny Canadian flag. When he stood up and looked around, 27 other little flags fluttered in the wind.
The site – in Niagara-on-the-Lake, on the edge of the Ontario, New York border – is a relatively nondescript parcel of land between a Subway restaurant and a white clapboard bungalow.
But nearly two centuries ago, it was the location of a Baptist church and a centre of activity for one of Canada’s earliest black communities.
At least two dozen black people are buried here: those fleeing the US through the Underground Railroad, enslaved people brought over by Loyalists during the American Revolution, black soldiers who joined the Loyalists in battle against the US, and some free people of colour who escaped an increasingly hostile American nation in the making.
But their graves are not marked, and their names are not known.
Russell argues that it’s only right to give these people a dignified burial, and their descendants a place to lay flowers. That’s why he is self-funding the use of ground-penetrating radar to locate the graves and headstones of those interred at the burial ground.
“It’s always bothered me that this just looks like a soccer field,” said Russell, a film-maker who has spent the last 37 years visiting Niagara-on-the-Lake from his home in Toronto.
“Finally, last November I said: ‘You know, no one’s going to fix this unless I fix it myself.’”
So far, the radar has found 28 potential sites. Nearly 20 more have been found by a local man who uses dousing to find graves.
“Every one of those folks have family, have grandkids or great, great-grandkids who would like to know where their ancestors are buried,” he said.
“I think it’s my responsibility, as a black person in Canada who understands the importance of not only respecting the living, but respecting the dead as well.”
Norm Arsenault, a Niagara-on-the-Lake town councillor, said he supported Russell’s work. “I’m glad to see somebody’s taking it up, because frankly, that’s just a graveyard that’s been ignored for, I don’t know, 150 years? Probably longer,” he said.
Across Canada, Indigenous communities are using ground-penetrating radar and other tools to uncover the final resting places of thousands of children who attended residential schools – institutions designed to rip children from their families and assimilate them, often through the use of violence.
In 2021, the former site of the Kamloops Indian Residential School made international news after the potential graves of more than 200 people were discovered.
Since then, hundreds more graves have been identified at the sites of former residential schools.
Uncovering the former inhabitants of historic black communities in Canada, however, has not yet been given the same urgency.
For generations, Canada has not adequately honoured its historic black communities, said Dr Afua Cooper, a historian, author and professor at Dalhousie University. She pointed to a lack of meaningful acknowledgment at the site of Priceville, Ont., where black pioneers lived in the 1800s, and at Fort Erie just south of Niagara-on-the-Lake, which was home to 18th- and 19th-century black settlements.
“For me, it speaks to the bigger issue of how invisible black history is in this country. Visible but invisible at the same time,” said Cooper.
“The history has been literally been covered up. So whether it’s that cemetery at Niagara-on-the-Lake, or it’s Africville [in Nova Scotia] or it’s Amber Valley in Alberta, what you have is this marginalization of black history,” she said.
Local historian Ron Dale said that the cemetery at Niagara-on-the-Lake was likely abandoned when black people in the area moved away in search of work.
He also warned that there is no guarantee that the buried headstones will be legible once they are excavated. He has given Russell some names of black Baptists he found in census records from the mid-1800s, in hopes that he can use them to help identify some of the names.
Lezlie Harper, a tour guide at Niagara Unbound with ancestors buried in Fort Erie, hopes what Russell is doing to help unearth black history in Canada catches on.
“We may find some amazing information about the people who were buried there,” said Harper. “Everybody says: ‘Oh, you can’t find the information.’ Yes, you can – it’s just different, and it takes time. But there’s all kinds of information out there about black folks who were here before. It’s just a matter of digging it out.”

Late Show host says ‘everyone was calm’, and says detention of crew members should not be compared to US Capitol attack
Talkshow host Stephen Colbert on Monday called the recent arrests of seven staffers near the US Capitol “unpleasant” but said both his employees and the police officers who detained them “were just doing their job”.
“Everyone was very professional,” Colbert added during the monologue of his show Monday, four days after the arrests. “Everyone was very calm.”
The Late Show host also bristled at comparisons – even tongue-in-cheek ones – between the deadly January 6 attack at the Capitol and Thursday night’s detentions, including that of the voice behind the puppet character Triumph the Insult Comic Dog.
“This was first-degree puppetry,” Colbert joked, before striking a more serious tone and adding: “Drawing any equivalence between rioters storming our Capitol to prevent the counting of electoral ballots and a cigar-chomping toy dog is a shameful and grotesque insult to the memory of everyone who died and trivializes the service and the courage the Capitol police showed on that terrible day.”
Colbert’s crew members were arrested after US Capitol police (USCP) officers found them filming in a sixth-floor hallway inside a building housing offices for members of the House of Representatives at about 8.30pm.
The facility – the Longworth House Office Building – was closed to the public at the time, and officers said they had asked the crew members to leave earlier in the day. The crew members – including Robert Smigel, who voices Triumph – were detained and given citations accusing them of unlawful entry.
Colbert explained that Smigel and the others were on their second consecutive day in the congressional offices filming material for Triumph, a foul-mouthed dog puppet with a penchant for chewing cigars.
The crew had reportedly already interviewed Democrats Adam Schiff, Stephanie Murphy and Jake Auchincloss. An aide to Auchincloss reportedly brought the crew back into the building, after they had been escorted out earlier on Thursday.
“They went through security clearance, shot all day Wednesday, all day Thursday, [and were] invited into the offices of the congresspeople they were interviewing,” Colbert said. “That’s very important.
“After they finished their interviews, they were doing some last-minute puppetry and jokey make-em-ups in a hallway, when Triumph and my folks were approached and detained,” Colbert said.
Colbert said the Capitol police were on the lookout for potential intruders at congressional buildings as the public hearing by the House committee investigating the deadly riots on 6 January 2021 continue.
Schiff is on the panel investigating the attack, which unsuccessfully aimed to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s win over Donald Trump during the 2020 presidential election.
A bipartisan Senate report says the riots led to seven deaths and injured about 140 officers, resulting in criminal charges against more than 800 participants.
“The Capitol police are much more cautious than they were, say, 18 months ago, and for a very good reason,” Colbert said. Making fun of Fox News’ tendency to downplay the Capitol attack, Colbert added, “If you don’t know what that reason is, I know what news network you watch.”
Though they were soon released from custody, Colbert said the arrests were still “a very unpleasant experience” for his staffers – and “a lot of paperwork for the Capitol police”.
He also added: “The Capitol police were just doing their job, [and] my staff was just doing their job.”

Theme parks, toy brands and even coastal hotspots are looking to the latest dinosaur blockbuster for a bump in sales
Dinosaur attractions across the UK are braced for a fresh wave of visitors following the release of Jurassic World Dominion this weekend.
The sixth film in the franchise is expected to offer a boost not only to UK cinemas – the series’ box-office takings so far top £200m – but to the country’s many dinosaur-themed attractions.
Most of these were founded over the past 30 years to capitalise on the popularity of paleontology inspired by the first Jurassic Park film in 1993. Roarr!, the UK’s largest dinosaur attraction, was founded in Norfolk in 2006 and plans a further expansion next year to lift annual visitor numbers from around 300,000 to 500,000.
Big rises in footfall are usually seen a few weeks after the release of major dinosaur movies, says park manager Ben Francis, although he anticipates a more muted effect this year because of the economic climate.
“Days out are taking a back seat at the moment as families have to see how much money they have left at the end of the month. The tourism market has improved since Covid but the cost of living is now having an impact and there is no support from the government.”
The Natural History Museum in London – whose subsidies allow it to waive an admission fee – was established 160 years ago. But a substantial uptick in visitor numbers coincided with the release of the first Jurassic Park, reports Professor Paul Barrett, the museum’s senior dinosaur specialist.
“Those levels have been maintained, with smaller peaks around the release of sequels or blockbuster documentaries such as Walking with Dinosaurs in 1999 or Prehistoric Planet earlier this year. At the moment, interest is very high indeed.”
The museum monetises such interest with a carefully curated programme of events and sponsorship deals. As well as touring the museum’s galleries, current visitors are, for instance, encouraged to take a selfie in front of Andy’s clock - the time-traveling grandfather clock used by CBeebies’ Andy Day for his prehistoric adventures.
Two weeks ago, the museum’s most famous skeleton, the cast of a diplodocus from around 150m years ago, returned from a three-year UK tour, just in time for half-term and the Jurassic World Dominion release.
The UK section of Dippy on Tour drew more than two million visitors with each of the eight venues reporting record-breaking numbers. A report commissioned by the museum estimated a nationwide economic benefit of £36m.
A new Dino Snores sleepover programme at the museum for 7-11 year olds (£69) is now waiting list-only; an adults-only version (£185) remains highly popular.
Yet dinosaurs’ status as the preeminent cash cow for the primary school demographic extends far beyond bricks-and-mortar attractions.
Figures from the NPD market research group show that the dinosaur toy sector grew 23% in the year to May 2022 and was worth £51.6m. Melissa Symonds, the executive director of UK toys at NPD, predicts dinosaurs will overtake superheroes as the fastest-growing toy theme later this month, once audiences have seen Jurassic World Dominion.
Such popularity is in part due to the fact that, unlike superheroes or Disney characters, dinosaurs are untroubled by copyright. This makes them easy wins for a wide range of brands and retailers.
As well as toys, colouring books, watches, nightlights and hot water bottle covers, clothing featuring dinosaurs is popular across all price-points. Dinosaur T-shirts retail for £3 at George at Asda and £17 at Boden.
Official Jurassic Park and World merchandise is the largest UK dinosaur toy property and accounts for 27% of all sales, with 44% year-on-year growth. Items are available via more than 30 manufacturers, including Mattel and Lego, WOW! Stuff, Tomy, Ravensburger and Posh Paws. Adults are also catered for, with Folio Society editions of Michael Crichton’s novels (£39.95), chess sets (£42.99) and inflatable adult triceratops costumes (£85).
Only a handful of film tie-in products are available at the National History Museum. Yet content creators work closely with the institution, eager for their educational stamp of approval. This gives the NHM time to “modify or add to our product ranges to take advantage,” says Barrett.
One of the three permanent museum shops is exclusively devoted to dinosaur products. Most are NHM-branded and created in collaboration with in-house paleontologists so that they are “at least not inaccurate”, says Adam Farrar, director of commercial and visitor experience.
Soft toys remain the biggest sellers for the museum; this year overall dinosaur-themed sales are expected to surpass £1m.
Yet some prehistory attractions remain relatively insulated from the popularity of the films. A spokesperson for the Jurassic Coast Trust, which oversees tourism to the 95-mile stretch of cliffs on the south coast renowned for their fossil density, reports that it would be “difficult to ascribe a quantifiable uplift in visitor traffic specifically to the films”.
Programmes such as Broadchurch, filmed in the area, as well as the recent biopic of Mary Anning starring Kate Winslet, “have a comparable effect”.
Nonetheless, they concede: “The Jurassic movies and Prehistoric Planet definitely add something extra to the mix, and they encourage people to have a go at fossil hunting and to visit our wonderful local museums and centres.”
Mass popularity and specialised science are not always compatible interests. Some have expressed fears that the more ubiquitous dinosaurs become, the more they may suggest to children that extinction is not necessarily the end.
Yet Professor Barrett remains optimistic an appropriate message is being communicated. “Dinosaurs give us some sense of place in the universe. They teach us you can be very successful but then for reasons beyond control everything goes wrong.”

You either love reality television, or you secretly love it. Here are the most shocking, ridiculous and weird moments from Australian TV. Game on molls!
Where now so much of our entertainment feels orchestrated, reality television hasn’t always been so streamlined. From memorable catchphrases to touchdowns and tantrums, here are some of the moments from the annals of Australian reality TV history that live in our heads rent-free … sorted.
It was 2006 when a then 20-year-old personal assistant and promo model named Anna Lind-Hansen became an overnight national treasure after uttering the now infamous catchphrase of “game on molls” on Big Brother.
Anna, who said her family would describe her as “a psycho bitch, a bimbo, a show pony, but deep down a great friend” in her house entry video, later admitted to forgetting she’d even made the comment: “I don’t even remember saying it. After I got evicted, everyone was yelling out ‘moll’ and I thought I had done something absolutely terrible.”
From David finding an Idol to going crazy on the popcorn to the fake tears, we are honestly shook to our very core 😳 #SurvivorAU pic.twitter.com/SLPSO6tA0Q
Nothing says you miss your family and carbs quite like sobbing into a giant pile of popcorn. Such was the scene set by Australian Survivor contestant David Genat who, after existing on rice and beans for weeks, ruthlessly smashed a mound of popcorn during a reward challenge while simultaneously hunting for an immunity idol and watching a video message from his family. The self-proclaimed “Golden God” sadly had his torch snuffed soon after, but returned just one season later in 2020 for Australian Survivor: All Stars and ultimately took out the top spot, winning a cool $500,000.
Legend has it you have to kiss a few frogs before finding your prince, but Bachelorette Angie Kent took another route when she booted the “King of Noosa” Jess Glasgow from the show in 2019.
Glasgow, who was a local councillor at the time, also faced disciplinary proceedings after being shown making “offensive” comments about women on the show and pretending to lick Kent. At one stage, when another contestant spoke about not trying to kiss Kent, Glasgow said: “I would have just grabbed that sweetie and laid one on her … I’ve kissed plenty of girls and they’ve turned their heads before. I’m used to it.”
Following his eviction, Glasgow apologised but refused to resign from his job. In 2020, he failed to win re-election and lost his council seat. In 2021 Glasgow was hit with a $4,000 fine from the councillor conduct tribunal over his behaviour on the show, plus another $1,000 to reimburse the Noosa shire council for costs arising from the whole incident.
Glasgow told a local paper he’d appeal the fine and argued he was encouraged to behave in an extroverted way and that the show was heavily edited, saying “it’s not a real-life scenario, it is a managed TV performance.”
This moment lives rent-free in the minds of reality TV diehards. Viewers of The Bachelor were perplexed and a little bit nauseous in 2017 when “rope access technician” Richie Strahan enjoyed some close and personal bath time with Alex Nation. Incredibly though, producers chose to forgo the traditional hot water and Radox route and opted for rivers of melted chocolate instead. The moment was less picturesque fairytale, more food poisoning crime scene. Somehow, soaking in a giant vat resembling faecal matter managed to bring the two closer together, with Richie declaring his love for Alex during the finale. Sadly, the pair broke up a little over a year later.
What’s a politician to do after having their conviction quashed and leaving prison? Head to a nationally televised dancefloor, of course. After an 11-week stint in jail for an electoral fraud conviction that was overturned on appeal in late 2003, One Nation founder Pauline Hanson took part in the first season of Dancing with the Stars in 2004. She somewhat unexpectedly made it all the way to the finale, losing to Home & Away alum Bec Hewitt. The show’s most memorable moment came early on when hosts Daryl Somers and Sonia Kruger lead the audience in a round of applause to celebrate Hanson’s acquittal and release from prison.
One of the darker periods of reality television came in the early 2000s when Australian Idol judges Ian “Dicko” Dickson and Kyle Sandilands took it upon themselves to comment on young female contestants’ weight. It began in 2003, when Dicko told a then 21-year-old season one contestant Paulini Curuenavuli, “You should choose more appropriate clothes or shed some pounds.” Then in 2005, Sandilands told the 20-year-old Kate DeAraugo that she had “tuckshop lady arms”. The following year, he told the then 16-year-old Jessica Mauboy to “lose the jelly belly.”
DeAraugo later revealed she underwent “full-body” liposuction after appearing on the show, while Curuenavuli has stated she believes “there’s no way anyone could do that today”. In 2016, Dicko told Curuenavuli his words had been “cruel”, adding: “I was trying to be nice at the time, can you believe, but I’m glad that you’ve gone on to do such great things.”
History was made in 2004 when Merlin Luck used his exit from the Big Brother house to protest the Australian government’s controversial refugee policy. During his eviction, which was being broadcast live across the nation, the 24-year-old taped his mouth shut and held up a homemade sign that read “FREE TH REFUGEES” (an “E” had fallen off at some point).
While the moment is now legendary, Luck was initially booed by the audience as host Gretel Killeen scrambled to salvage the situation.
Luck continued to advocate for refugee rights following the show, and now works in the tech industry and is married with children. “Fair to say I’m well on my way to being a middle-aged corporate dad – in the best way possible,” he said in 2016.
Among the most memorable moments from The Bachelor was the jaw-dropping finale of 2018, when footballer turned lothario Nick “Honey Badger” Cummins decided to ignore the entire premise of the show and stay single. During the finale, Cummins told the last two contestants, Sophie Tieman and Brittany Hockley, that he wasn’t ready to commit to a relationship. As Hockley put it following his noncommittal breakup, “What a giant waste of time that was.” But happily, Cummins recently announced he’s expecting his first child with his new partner later this year.
What initially seemed like your run-of-the-mill finale quickly became very awkward in 2010 when Australia’s Next Top Model host Sarah Murdoch said the wrong name.
Initially declaring Kelsey Martinovich as the winner, Murdoch was forced to backtrack moments later and tell the live audience she had delivered the wrong news and that the winner was, in fact, Amanda Ware. Clutching her earpiece and clipboard, Murdoch said: “I’m feeling a bit sick about this … Oh my god. I don’t know what to say … This was a complete accident. I’m so sorry, it’s Amanda.”
Murdoch blamed the error on a miscommunication. She departed as host and executive producer the following year.
The Big Brother turkey slap is a moment which will live forever in reality TV infamy. In the early hours of 2006, contestants Michael “John” Bric and Michael “Ashley” Cox invited Camilla Severi into their bed. She hopped in, saying “you’re not going to turkey slap me are you?” and “you are, liars, I’ll hurt you if you do” – before Bric held her down and Cox rubbed his penis in her face.
“I’ve been turkey slapped!” Severi yelled to the other housemates.
Shortly after the incident, Severi described it as “just mucking around” to Big Brother, saying: “It was something that happened just in fun and I wasn’t offended as such, but I did think they took it a little bit too far. But we laughed it off, and as soon as I said ‘Enough’s enough’ it stopped.”
But the incident quickly became a national firestorm. Both men were almost immediately evicted from the house, with Cox insisting it was “just a practical joke” and Bric declaring they “only ever intended to have fun with Camilla”. Producers handed footage of the incident to Queensland police, who, after speaking with those involved, concluded that there was insufficient evidence for a criminal investigation. Prime minister John Howard even called for Channel 10 to “get this stupid program off the air”. They didn’t, but the way the show was made changed forever.
The men later told Zoo Weekly (rest in peace) the moment had “ruined” their lives, with Bric saying he felt the show “used and abused them”. In 2020, Severi addressed the issue again, saying: “Sometimes when people ask me about it, I say, ‘Well, it’s really interesting this keeps following me around because I didn’t do it.’”

More than four months after she was arrested at a Moscow airport for cannabis possession, a Russian court has set the start date of the criminal trial of US basketball star Brittney Griner for 1 July.
The Phoenix Mercury star was also ordered to remain in custody for the duration of her criminal trial. She could spend 10 years in prison if convicted on charges of large-scale transportation of drugs. Fewer than 1% of defendants in Russian criminal cases are acquitted, and unlike in the US, acquittals can be overturned.
On Monday, the court in the Moscow suburb of Khimki extended Griner’s detention for another six months after she appeared for a preliminary hearing held behind closed doors. Photos obtained by the AP showed her appearing in handcuffs. Griner had previously been ordered to remain in pretrial detention until 2 July.
Griner’s detention and trial come at an extraordinarily low point in Moscow-Washington relations. She was arrested at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo Airport less than a week before Russia sent troops into Ukraine, which aggravated already-high tensions.
Amid the tensions, Griner’s supporters had taken a low profile in hopes of a quiet resolution, until May, when the State Department reclassified her as wrongfully detained and shifted oversight of her case to its special presidential envoy for hostage affairs effectively the US government’s chief negotiator.
That move has drawn additional attention to Griner’s case, with supporters encouraging a prisoner swap similar to the one in April that brought home Marine veteran Trevor Reed in exchange for a Russian pilot convicted of drug trafficking conspiracy.
Russian news media have repeatedly raised speculation that she could be swapped for Russian arms trader Viktor Bout, nicknamed “The Merchant of Death,” who is serving a 25-year sentence on conviction of conspiracy to kill US citizens and providing aid to a terrorist organization.
Russia has agitated for Bout’s release for years. But the discrepancy between Griner’s case – she allegedly was found in possession of vape cartridges containing cannabis – oil and Bout’s global dealings in weapons could make such a swap unpalatable to the US.
Others have suggested that she could be traded in tandem with Paul Whelan, a former Marine and security director serving a 16-year sentence on an espionage conviction that the United States has repeatedly described as a set-up.
The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, was asked on Sunday on CNN whether a joint swap of Griner and Whelan for Bout was being considered. He sidestepped the question.
“As a general proposition ... I have got no higher priority than making sure that Americans who are being illegally detained in one way or another around the world come home,” he said. But “I can’t comment in any detail on what we’re doing, except to say this is an absolute priority.”
Any swap would apparently require Griner to first be convicted and sentenced, then apply for a presidential pardon, Maria Yarmush, a lawyer specializing in international civil affairs, told Kremlin-funded TV channel RT.

Carl Otto von Eicken, an ear, nose and throat specialist, treated Nazi dictator for 10 years from 1935
The Swiss descendant of one of Adolf Hitler’s doctors has released details of letters that show how he treated the Nazi dictator for voice problems, the newspaper NZZ am Sonntag reported on Sunday.
The letters show Hitler’s fear of serious illness. “If there is something bad, I absolutely have to know,” Hitler told the doctor after their first consultation in May 1935, according to the letters.
Hitler was treated several times by Carl Otto von Eicken, a German ear, nose and throat specialist, for 10 years from 1935, the newspaper said.
The letters from the doctor to a cousin were discovered by Robert Doepgen, Von Eicken’s great-great-grandson, who found them when researching family archives for a school project. Von Eicken died in 1960.
The British historian Richard J Evans, a specialist in German history, had vouched for the authenticity of the unpublished letters, the newspaper said.
The newspaper said the letters also showed the importance Hitler attached to his voice, which he used in speeches to whip up support for his regime.
One operation to remove a polyp was postponed until after a speech, the letters say, as Von Eicken advised Hitler he needed to rest his voice after the procedure.
In his letters, Von Eicken never questioned that he had treated a man whose actions led to millions of people being killed in the Holocaust and second world war, the newspaper said.
The paper said that when asked by Russian interrogators after the war why he hadn’t killed Hitler, Von Eicken said: “I was his doctor, not his murderer.”
Hitler died by suicide in a bunker in Berlin in 1945, shortly before the end of the war.

Photographer Callie Chee captures the weird and wonderful landscapes that spring to life in the dark(Please do not pick or eat any mushrooms found growing wild)
Fri 10 Jun 2022 21.00 BST

After 31 days, the film has held on to its global audience to outstrip highest previous earner Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness
Top Gun: Maverick has crossed the $1bn (£810m) mark in global box office receipts, making it the most successful film of 2022 so far, and the most successful of Tom Cruise’s career.
Variety reports that Top Gun: Maverick’s global box office takings now total $1.006bn (£813m) after 31 days on release, overtaking 2022’s previous highest earner Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, which now stands on $947m (£772m). By far the film’s biggest territory is the US, where it has earned $522m, followed by the UK ($70m) and Japan ($41m).
Top Gun: Maverick has also comfortably overtaken Cruise’s highest grossing film at the global box office: 2018 thriller Mission: Impossible – Fallout, which managed $792m.
The film has proved durable in the US box office charts, with revenue projections suggesting it would returned to the No 1 slot in its fifth week on release, ahead of the Baz Luhrmann-directed Elvis. In the event, Elvis just shaded it, taking $31.1 m compared to Top Gun: Maverick’s $29.6m. Top Gun: Maverick had previously been pushed lower by films such as Lightyear and Jurassic World Dominion, but has been able to maintain its audience as the figures for its rivals diminished.
Variety says that “critical praise and stellar word-of-mouth” are helping the film to achieve these figures, while rightwing pundits claim that audiences are responding to its supposed conservative and “anti-woke” themes. It is, however, well behind the highest grossing film since the upheaval that the Covid pandemic brought to the cinema industry: that remains Spider-Man: No Way Home, released in 2021 with a global box office of $1.9bn.

The actor recently opened up about the time his insecurities were tweaked by a famous film-maker. So who do we think the insulting director was?
If you haven’t heard it yet, Bradley Cooper’s recent appearance on the SmartLess podcast is a total doozy. Not only does he reveal he was once heavily addicted to cocaine – and that he ended the habit when one of the podcast’s hosts, Will Arnett, called him an “asshole” – but more importantly he outs himself as an all-time world class grudge-holder.
During the episode he recounts a time at an awards season party, while riding high on his multiple nominations for A Star Is Born, when he ran into a “dear friend” actress and a famous director: “[The director] was like, ‘What world are we living in where you have seven nominations and she’s only got three?’ I was like, ‘I fucking hate this business.’ I’m like, ‘Bro, why are you such an asshole? Like, go fuck yourself.’”
Now there are two ways of looking at this. One is to use Cooper’s story as a learning opportunity. After all, we are talking about a performer at the very top of his game here, yet he still finds himself riddled with as much anguish and self-doubt as the rest of us. The reasonable and empathetic response would be to realise that our words have weight and to try and act with kindness wherever possible.
But that’s boring, so let’s play Hunt the Asshole Director instead. That’s much more fun, right?
So, we know this incident took place during the 2019 awards season. That helps with the other unknown figure in the story, Cooper’s actress friend. This was the year Emma Stone gained her third nomination for The Favourite (following her La La Land win), and don’t forget that she co-starred with Cooper in Aloha in 2015. True, other actresses had three Oscar nominations in 2019. He could have been talking about Natalie Portman or Marisa Tomei or the vengeful ghost of Claudette Colbert, but Stone seems the most likely bet.
Now the asshole director. We have two key pieces of information: the fact that this incident took place at an awards season party and the fact that Bradley Cooper called him “bro”. Although Hollywood isn’t exactly short of obnoxious directors, let’s boil things down to the directors most likely to attend an awards season party: the ones with nominations. The best director winner that year was Alfonso Cuarón, but let’s rule him out as well. Like most actors, Bradley Cooper would sell his parents to appear in a Cuarón film, so by this measure he fails the bro test.
Who does that leave? Paweł Pawlikowski was nominated for Cold War but he probably doesn’t qualify as famous. The other nominees, on the other hand, are all vaguely feasible. There’s Yorgos Lanthimos, director of The Favourite, who just about passes the bro test on account of his age (he’s just one year older than Cooper). Plus, “What world are we living in where you have seven nominations and she’s only got three?” could have been a clumsy attempt to butter up Emma Stone, his actress.
That leaves Spike Lee and Adam McKay. Lee is no stranger to saying stupid things but I just can’t see him bending over backwards to single out Emma Stone for praise. And this leaves Adam McKay. Is Adam McKay a famous director? Yes. Would Bradley Cooper call Adam McKay “bro”? Yes. Does Adam McKay give off the impression he’d be rude to a stranger to feel better about himself? Yes. So was it Adam McKay? I’m still not sure. Like Cooper, he has forged a prestigious reputation after years of producing lightweight fare, so perhaps he would be able to empathise with Cooper’s insecurities.
Could it be anyone else? Of course. Green Book eventually won best picture that year, and God knows Peter Farrelly seems like an ideal candidate. He passes the bro test with flying colours, and he’s sort of famous, and his career is so spotty that Bradley Cooper might judge that he wouldn’t be jeopardising anything by slagging him off on a podcast.
So, was Peter Farrelly the director who turned Bradley Cooper from a lovable everyman into a rage-fuelled, revenge-fixated crank? We may never truly know. But, hey, a bit of wildly unfounded speculation never hurt anyone, right?

Family of Ehud Yonay, author of source material for the 1986 blockbuster starring Tom Cruise, launch legal action against hit sequel
The family of the author whose article inspired the 1986 Tom Cruise movie Top Gun on Monday sued Paramount Pictures for copyright infringement over this year’s blockbuster sequel Top Gun: Maverick.
According to a complaint filed in Los Angeles federal court, the Paramount Global unit failed to reacquire the rights to Ehud Yonay’s 1983 article “Top Guns”, which appeared in a 1983 issue of California magazine, from his family before releasing the “derivative” sequel.
Shosh Yonay and Yuval Yonay, who live in Israel and are respectively Ehud’s widow and son, said Paramount deliberately ignored that the copyright reverted to them in January 2020, “thumbing its nose” at federal copyright law. Paramount did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
The lawsuit seeks unspecified damages, including some profits from Top Gun: Maverick, and to block Paramount from distributing the movie or further sequels.
Top Gun: Maverick is this year’s biggest box office hit, generating $291m (£232m) in North America and $548.6m (£438m) globally in its first 10 days of release.
According to Deadline, a spokesperson for Paramount responded by saying: “These claims are without merit, and we will defend ourselves vigorously.”

This effervescent subculture has been struggling since the 90s, but a passionate group of diehard aficionados and musicians are determined to keep the party going
Vittorio Piovani is a barber in Traversetolo, a village in central Italy. Every Sunday, he dons an elegant suit, shines his shoes, curls his long moustache and goes dancing at a club in a nearby town, like many other weekend clubbers. Except Piovani is a 75-year-old grandfather of three, living for a scene that gives him a deep-rooted sense of community and belonging.
Piovani is a diehard fan of liscio, an Italian music genre and dancing scene, with dedicated venues called balere, and a fandom that is generally over 50 (more often, over 65). In its own way, it is a glamorous, wild and countercultural corner of European clubbing. The music is effervescent – with a lot of accordion – and the aesthetic is unmistakable: band members wear satin dresses and bell-bottom suits, with lots of shiny fabric and sequins; patrons dress up as if they were attending a wedding. “Liscio has everything: a bit of waltz, a bit of polka, a bit of tango and a bit of slow-dance,” Piovani says inside the club, Redas.
Decades ago, liscio dominated central Italy, especially the region of Emilia-Romagna, but it has gone into a slow decline and now some fear that Covid might have put the final nail in the coffin. Dance halls were closed, on-and-off, for almost two years, before they were allowed to fully reopen when Italy lifted its state of emergency laws this spring. Some of them had shut down for good; others have reopened, but changed genre.
When I visit on a Sunday afternoon, Redas is full and about 150 people are lined up even before the venue is open. “Here we are – for the most part elderly people,” says Ornella, a retired clerk in her 70s. She has been a liscio aficionada since she was young, when the local Communist party organised summer festivals that included liscio dances. Claudia, 69, a cook, comes twice a week, on Thursday evenings and Sundays, because “ballroom dancing is good for my health and takes away my melancholy”.
Many of the people at Redas have a special relationship with the Lucchi-Venturi orchestra, who are playing tonight: “Of course we also hear other orchestras, but this one is special for us, it’s like there’s no distance between musicians and the audience,” says Letizia, who follows the orchestra around Italy with her husband, Massimo. When the band celebrated its 25th anniversary, right before the pandemic, the couple attended a three-day dancing party at a Lake Como hotel.
The orchestra’s namesake and accordionist, Barbara Lucchi, is a celebrity – in the 1980s she was a frequent guest on TV. Together with her husband, Massimo Venturi, also an accordionist, she leads a band of eight members, for the moment cut down to four. In the 1990s, her orchestra was playing 300 concerts each year, which had fallen to about 130 before Covid hit: “It was a complete disaster, during and after the pandemic,” she says. “Liscio artists were hit the worst.”
True, all live music was hit by lockdowns and restrictions, but liscio suffered particularly badly because its audience was more vulnerable to the virus and more cautious about returning. “We had many losses; members of our public have died,” says Lucchi. “Even now, not everyone feels like coming back, and those who do are dancing less often.” Moreover, liscio is about dancing in couples and is incompatible with social distancing.
Liscio, looked down on by Italian mainstream culture because it’s perceived as provincial, low-class and far too camp, has a strongly local and working-class dimension. Its roots are in peasant dancing fairs at the dawn of the 20th century, when Carlo Brighi, a violinist who played with Arturo Toscanini, adapted central European dances, such as the waltz, polka and mazurka, to an Italian taste. But the genre as it is known today was born in the aftermath of the second world war, when violinist and composer Secondo Casadei added modern elements such as saxophone, drums and vocalists, and became a national star. His 1950s hit Romagna mia is still a classic.
Liscio was the only dance native to Italy that survived the import of American genres, such as swing and boogie-woogie, says music critic Giulia Cavaliere. Its success, she explains, was in its romantic appeal: “It’s about dancing and eroticism. The balere were places where women dressed up to attract a companion, and where dance was a precursor to a kiss.” But there’s also an element of class redemption: “For the whole week, you are a farmer or a factory worker, but at the weekend you dress up, and for two days you have a different social role.”
Liscio further boomed in the 1960s and 70s, with orchestras such as Vera Romagna, Vittorio Borghesi, and Castellina e Pasi getting big tours. The star of that era was Raoul Casadei, Secondo’s nephew, who died last year aged 83. Remembered as “il re del Liscio,” Casadei was an icon of the 70s, even beyond the liscio circles, with his concerts aired on TV, and such a powerful household name that other orchestras randomly took the Casadei name to trick the public into believing there was some kind of connection.
But since the 1990s, liscio has suffered a steady, if slow, decline – too distinct to renew itself without losing its aficionados, but perceived as passé by younger Italians. “Back in the day, the clubs were always full and so many orchestras could find good work. Now, a big crowd comes only if big names are playing,” says Venturi. “This used to be a good job, even if you played in a smaller orchestra, but that’s no longer the case.” The economic crisis has prompted some orchestras to cut down on costs, even resorting to karaoke backing tracks, while others simply switch to more profitable genres such as Latin American dance.
“Liscio is becoming lower quality, more repetitive,” laments Moreno Conficconi, a clarinettist, vocalist and arranger who recently founded, with singer Mauro Ferrara and jazz performer Mirco Mariani, a music project called Extraliscio aiming at modernising the style, gleefully contaminating it with punk and electronica.
To liscio fans, Conficconi is a legend: he started to play in 1972 and served as head of orchestra to Raoul Casadei, who gave him the nickname of “il biondo,” by which he still goes today (even if he was never blond). But his fellow Extraliscio crew come from different backgrounds and – given liscio’s low cultural standing – they got some raised eyebrows. Mariani says that, when other jazz musicians learned he was doing a liscio project, “they were so surprised that they thought I must be having some affair with a liscio girl. To them it was just second-class music”.
Extraliscio now enjoy some prestige and have been invited to San Remo, Italy’s most prestigious music festival, but Cavaliere, the critic, doubts that that prestige will extend to the entire genre and says that its decline has deep roots. “Liscio revolved around small communities that gathered in squares and balere, but today young people don’t have that connection to their micro-community – they want to break away from it.” Conficconi, says that Covid acted “like a guillotine”, to hundreds of orchestras, and when clubs could finally reopen they didn’t get the public that they had hoped for, while Venturi says liscio is going to eventually die: “You don’t find any young person in a balera; the world changes.” But Conficconi says hope is not lost: “It’s a music that brings people together; people have found love dancing liscio. It can’t just disappear.”
Back at Redas Lucchi announces: “Now we’re doing the polka challenge!” The crowd erupts in cheers: they dance, chat and drink for hours, still having the time of their lives.

New York-born Such played bass for American rock band in its 1980s heyday
Alec John Such, the bassist and a founding member of Bon Jovi, has died. He was 70.
Jon Bon Jovi on Sunday announced the death of Such, the New Jersey rock band’s bassist from 1983 to 1994. No details of when or how he died were immediately available.
“He was an original,” Jon Bon Jovi wrote in a post on Twitter. “As a founding member of Bon Jovi, Alec was integral to the formation of the band.”
Alec, you will be missed pic.twitter.com/yK0RlgVkZc
Jon Bon Jovi, 60, credited Such for bringing the band together, noting that he was a childhood friend of drummer Tico Torres and brought guitarist and songwriter Richie Sambora to see the band perform. Such had played in a band called the Message with Sambora.
Such, born in Yonkers, New York, was a veteran figure on the thriving New Jersey music scene that helped spawn Bon Jovi. As manager of the Hunka Bunka Ballroom in Sayreville, New Jersey, Such booked Jon Bon Jovi & the Wild Ones before joining the singer-songwriter’s band. He played with Bon Jovi through the group’s heyday in the 1980s.
Such left the band in 1994, and was replaced on bass by Hugh McDonald. He later rejoined the band for their induction into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame in 2018.
“When Jon Bon Jovi called me up and asked me to be in his band many years ago, I soon realised how serious he was and he had a vision that he wanted to bring us to,” Such said at the Hall of Fame induction. “And I am only too happy to have been a part of that vision.”

As the hit show appears in its third iteration, jump down the rabbit hole with an 80s romcom, a power ballad, a London spy, a very English scandal and a cucumber
“Don’t read your reviews‘; weigh them,” Andy Warhol is reputed to have said. AnotherOne way to judge a film or TV show is by how many remakes it prompts: Russell T Davies’s Channel 4 series Queer as Folk is gaining fast on A Star is Born. The 1999 drama about gay men in Manchester became a US version set in Pittsburgh; now another round (StarzPlay, 1 July) centres on New Orleans’ diverse queer community. Devin Way, Jesse James Keitel, CG and Fin Argus are among the cast.
Also in a recurring role is Kim Cattrall, clearly not opposed to all TV reboots. Long before Sex and the City, Cattrall was in Mannequin, an 80s romcom about a window dresser at a New York store who falls in love with a mannequin that comes to life after closing time. It was accompanied by Starship’s Nothing’s Gonna Stop Us Now, written by Diane Warren and Albert Hammond.
His son, Albert Hammond Jr, is the Strokes’ guitarist. Their story, and that of the 2000s rock revival, is retold in Meet Me in the Bathroom, a book and documentary. In it, James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem has a life-changing conversion to dance music and having fun, aided by ecstasy and Northern Irish producer/DJ David Holmes.
Central to Holmes’s oeuvre has been his jazzy, funk-infused scores for Steven Soderbergh films. Elsewhere, he collaborated with Keefus Cianca on the score for the 2015 BBC series London Spy, featuring Ben Whishaw and Edward Holcroft in a love story twisted into an espionage thriller.
Whishaw appeared alongside Hugh Grant in the BBC’s A Very English Scandal, written by Russell T Davies, whose handprints have been across British TV for two decades. Years on from Queer as Folk, he returned to Manchester (and C4) with Cucumber, while last year’s Aids crisis drama It’s a Sin was an international hit.
Dance The original series had Cruz 101 in Manchester’s Gay Village standing in for Babylon. It’s still going strong.
Read Jeremy Atherton Lin’s Gay Bar: Why We Went Out, published last year, was described by Colm Tóibín as “​​a brilliantly written and incisive account of gay life in Los Angeles, San Francisco and London”.

Bob Marley’s multiple Grammy-winning son’s musical life is dominated by memories of his father. But which 60s novelty song lives rent free in his head?
The first record I boughtMy father had a record store, so it was less buying a record, more saying: “Can I have this record?” But the first record I remember purchasing was One Wheel Wheelie by Early B, from Harry J’s record store in Jamaica.
The first song I remember hearingLively Up Yourself by Bob Marley and the Wailers which came out in 1974. I was born in 1972, so I would have been two years old. We had a turntable at home in Jamaica, so it would have been on vinyl.
The song I do at karaokeI’ve never done karaoke. But if I was to put myself in the position, I think I would do Billie Jean by Michael Jackson. That song was played all the time in Jamaica when I was growing up – as it was all over the world – so I know all the words.
The song lyrics I know and like the bestWell, I know the lyrics to a lot of songs, but I think the lyrics to One Love by the Wailers are so uplifting, they give you hope and calm you.
The best song to play at a party It depends on what type of party! But I’d say you can play Could You Be Loved by Bob Marley and the Wailers at any type of party, and everybody will be bumping to that.
The song I’ve streamed the mostI don’t really do a lot of streaming. I’m too busy making the music that’s going to be streamed, so I live in the studio!
The song that I secretly like but tell everyone I hate It’s actually a song for a commercial for Downy Fabric Softener that was shown in the 80s [a take on the 1963 novelty song Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh (A Letter from Camp Granada) by Allan Sherman]. I don’t normally like to watch the commercials, but I still find myself singing that one.
The song that I can no longer listen to I Know by Bob Marley and the Wailers. That was one of the last songs that he sung on. It’s a song about when the race gets hard to run and you just can’t take the pace. I get very emotional when I listen to that one, so I skip it.
The song I wish I’d writtenThere are quite a few songs I wish I had written. But Redemption Song by Bob Marley and the Wailers is just a strong statement because it addresses humanity and mankind.
The song I can’t help singingNo Ordinary Love by Sade. I don’t sing it consciously. I’m always bubbling that just out of nowhere. It just speaks to me. I love the melody, the texture of her voice and the words.
The song that best reminds me of me dadMy brother’s [Ziggy Marley] music reminds me of my father. Toots and the Maytals remind me of him too, so I’ll choose their song Do the Reggay.
Stephen Marley’s new EP Celebrating Nina: A Reggae Tribute To Nina Simone is out now

With its mesmerising seascape, the long, low green isle of Shapinsay is perfect for mindful exploration
The wind is fierce, making it weather to move fast in, but Louise Hollinrake and I are moving as slowly as we can along the deserted Bay of Furrowend on the island of Shapinsay. I say deserted, but now that we’re doing virtually nothing, save concentrating on our slow walking (a Buddhist meditative tool, says Louise), it’s clear how busy the place actually is. I’m aware of a cacophony of sound from a flock of long-tailed ducks, the crash of the waves and the sound of Louise’s dog’s paws on the sand. The blues and greys of the sea and sky seem more pronounced, and the wind’s power is awesome (it’s not unknown in Orkney for gales to tear car doors off).
Shapinsay is one of Orkney’s more than 70 islands: it’s seven miles across, with a population of 300. It has no pub, no restaurant, no cafe, and there’s only one place to stay. But it may soon have more tourists, thanks to a new guide to mindful travel called Shapinsay Reflective Routes, written by residents including Louise who want to share the island’s peace, wildness, nature and space for contemplation with visitors.
You don’t have to stay on Shapinsay to enjoy its walking and cycling routes, beaches and wild swimming: most visitors come for the day, on a 35-minute ferry crossing from Kirkwall. First, though, there’s the long journey to Orkney itself. Even from Glasgow, where I live, it’s a six-hour drive to Scrabster, then a 90-minute ferry ride to Stromness and a drive across to Kirkwall.
The guide’s authors encourage visitors to see the journey as preparation for the experience. “There’s something about the time it takes you to get here that removes you from the busyness, and sets you up for a different perspective on life,” says Julia Meason, Church of Scotland minister for Shapinsay. “The island’s old Norse name was Hjalpandisey, which means ‘helping’ or ‘guiding’ island. That was one of our inspirations for the project.”
Julia lives in Kirkwall, so she and I meet on the ferry, standing on deck to watch the long, low green island getting closer. We dock in Balfour, which anywhere else in Britain would be a hamlet, but here is the capital: a single street of stone houses below its 19th-century castle. First stop is the village store, which as well as all the usual staples sells rhubarb and strawberry jam made on the island. Behind the counter is Carol Moncrieff, one of the guidebook’s photographers.
On the walk to Furrowend to meet Louise, the only people Julia and I see are a couple who have hired electric bikes at the harbour (£7.50 a day); there’s plenty of ground to cover in a day on Shapinsay, and a bike is a good idea ( car are allowed, but cycling or walking gives a better sense of the island). As well as the slow walking, Louise, who moved here 35 years ago, originally to run outward bound courses, has contributed a water route to the guidebook. Shapinsay’s “teardrop”, Helliar Holm, is peppered with caves, beaches, coves and passages ripe for exploration.
Next stop is the Old Kirk in the centre of the island. It’s now a ruin, though worship here dates back to the 1400s, and the present roofless church was built in the 19th century. Sheila Garson is the author of the kirkyard section of the guide. Apart from a brief spell in Kirkwall, she has lived on Shapinsay all her life. “I’m Orcadian first, Scottish second, and British third,” she says.
It’s still windy but the sun is peeping round the clouds, brightening the pretty wild flowers and the seascape beyond the stone arches. Sheila shows me some of the graves, including that of William Borwick and his three young daughters who, on 3 November 1822, crossed to Kirkwall to attend a church service: all four of them, plus eight others, were drowned when their boat overturned on the way back.
Time and again, the guide’s authors link what a visitor sees and feels on Shapinsay with their broader life. On the walk from the pier to Weland Beach, which will take around two hours, you’re encouraged to sing out loud because it improves mental health, reduces stress. The guide suggests doing this to synchronise your life with the nature around you, and, when you go home, singing more often. You’re encouraged to focus inwards rather than outwards: instead of thinking about the pictures you can post on social media, think about what the crashing waves, the empty field or the single flower links to in your own life. Revel in the sounds you hear, the scents you smell and the sights you see; and when you leave, take your renewed appreciation for nature with you.
Many residents rarely leave the island. “I go across to Kirkwall every month or so – it feels as busy as London,” says Louise. That makes me laugh (Kirkwall has a population of 8,500); but when I arrive back there on the last ferry, the early-evening bustle takes my breath away. That’s when I know I’ve had a proper reset, Shapinsay-style.
Shapinsay Reflective Routes (£6) is available from the Orcadian Bookshop, or at the island’s shop. Travel was provided by northlinkferries.co.uk, which sails between Scrabster and Stromness (and also between Kirkwall and Aberdeen). Orkney Ferries runs from Kirkwall to Shapinsay. Kevock B&B (doubles £72) in Kirkwall is run by Jane Liptrot, whose daughter Amy’s memoir The Outrun is being filmed on Orkney, starring Saoirse Ronan. On Shapinsay itself Iona Cottage sleeps six from £300 a week

West Side Story, Midnight Cowboy and The Godfather would all have been very different if Elvis had got his way – or if his manager Col Tom Parker hadn’t turned down so many roles on his behalf
According to Baz Luhrmann’s biopic, Elvis Presley’s dream was to be a great actor. But his Hollywood ambitions were frequently stifled by his controlling manager, Colonel Tom Parker (played by Tom Hanks). A key scene in the film has a rueful Elvis (Austin Butler) explaining that he won’t be able to co-star opposite Barbara Streisand in the 1976 remake of A Star Is Born (a part he really wanted), because negotiations between Streisand and Parker ended extremely badly. Though that’s the only example that makes it into the movie, there are a number of other films that Elvis could have made, proving that his big screen career would have been very different if Parker had wielded less influence.
The same year that Elvis landed his first film role in Love Me Tender, he was asked to screen test for The Rainmaker, a Depression-era drama starring Burt Lancaster as a conman who hoodwinks a small town and falls in love with a middle-aged spinster (Katharine Hepburn). Elvis auditioned for the role of Hepburn’s brother but, according to the film’s screenwriter N Richard Nash, he only showed the acting ability of “the lead in a high school play”, and the part eventually went to Earl Holliman.
Robert Mitchum had seen Elvis on stage before he was famous, and the pair remained friends once Elvis hit Hollywood. At a Christmas party, while playing songs together, Mitchum tried to talk Elvis into taking the part of his younger brother in Thunder Road, a moonshine-fuelled chase thriller he was producing. However, Parker vetoed the idea because it wasn’t a musical and he didn’t want Elvis “to do a movie he couldn’t get an album out of”. The part of Robin Doolan eventually went to Mitchum’s son, James Mitchum.
In 1958, Elvis was offered the role of Brick Pollitt in the adaptation of Tennessee Williams’ play about an alcoholic former high school athlete trying to recapture his glory days and resisting the affections of his wife, Maggie “the Cat” (Elizabeth Taylor). Parker apparently refused the role on Elvis’s behalf and it went to Paul Newman instead.
By 1958, Elvis had made his first three movies: Love Me Tender, Loving You and Jailhouse Rock. His film career established, he was keen to play the role of John “Joker” Jackson, opposite Sidney Poitier, in The Defiant Ones: about a black and a white escaped convict who are shackled together. Once again, Parker vetoed the role, which eventually went to Tony Curtis – the actor and the film were both Oscar-nominated.
It has long been rumoured that Elvis was considered for the part of Tony, but Parker turned down the role on the grounds that he didn’t think a film about street gangs would be good for the King of Rock’n’Roll’s image.
Clearly, Elvis didn’t have much luck when it came to parts in Tennessee Williams adaptations that eventually went to Paul Newman. He was approached to play Chance Wayne, a drifter (a sanitised version of the play’s gigolo) who has a relationship with a faded movie star. Once again, Parker reputedly vetoed the role because he didn’t want Elvis playing a seedy character.
In 1964, MGM considered Elvis for the lead in their Hank Williams biopic. This time, however, it was Williams’ widow Audrey Williams who intervened, saying that she didn’t want the King to take away from Hank’s legacy. The part eventually went to George Hamilton.
According to a Vanity Fair article, author Jacqueline Susann wanted Elvis to play crooner Tony Polar in the screen adaptation of her Hollywood potboiler, but the studio ignored her request. Elvis probably had a lucky escape on that one, as the film was a critical disaster and regarded as one of the worst movies of all time.
United Artists wanted Elvis for the role of Joe Buck, a naive Texas hustler trying to make it in New York. True to form, Parker turned down the part on the grounds of its seedy connotations, without even bothering to consult Elvis. Of all Elvis’s near-misses that one probably stung the most, as the film won three Oscars as well as best actor nominations for both Jon Voight as Joe and his co-star Dustin Hoffman.
Elvis was briefly considered for the lead role in the 1971 musical adaptation of Roald Dahl’s Charlie and the Chocolate Factory. The part eventually went to Gene Wilder (two years older than Elvis).
Elvis was a huge fan of Mario Puzo’s novel and wanted to play the the role of consigliere Tom Hagen – the part that eventually went to Robert Duvall. Various sources suggest he got as far as being asked to screen test, and also that he lobbied for the title role.

Comedian says he was asked to explain context of gag to investigating officers, and will keep it in his show
The comedian Joe Lycett has said he was investigated by the police after an audience member made a complaint about a joke in one of his shows.
In a post on Instagram, he revealed that he was asked to explain the context of the gag and that the authorities have now closed the case.
Lycett, 33, said he hoped the joke amused the investigating officers and that it would stay in his standup routine for the remainder of his UK and Ireland tour.
Sharing a photo of the police’s message confirming the matter was closed, he wrote: “So someone came to my tour show a few weeks back and was offended by one of the jokes.
“And their perfectly understandable response to this was … to call the f****** police. To be fair to them the fuzz were very nice about it all but felt they had a duty to investigate.
“This involved me writing a statement explaining the context of the joke for them; I particularly enjoyed putting the words ‘giant donkey dick’ into a message to a police detective.
“Charmed, and hopefully amused, the rozzers have since closed the matter.”
He added: “You’ll be pleased to know that the joke – which I consider to be one of the best I’ve ever written – remains firmly and proudly in the show. The tour continues until September, unless I am jailed.”
The Birmingham-born comic, who has appeared on comedy shows including Taskmaster and QI, has been behind several public stunts in recent years.
He previously attempted to raise awareness of single-use plastics by storming off the set of Steph’s Packed Lunch – after the host pointed out a photo of him using a plastic bottle, despite him claiming to have given up using them.
Lycett also made headlines in March 2020 when he temporarily changed his name by deed poll to Hugo Boss, after the German luxury designer used trademark claims to target small businesses and charities who use “boss” in their branding.

Having gathered evidence on deaths of Maksim Levin and Oleksiy Chernyshov in March, Reporters Without Borders says evidence against Russia is ‘overwhelming’
Ukrainian photographer Maksim Levin was “executed in cold blood” alongside his friend Oleksiy Chernyshov by Russian forces north of Kyiv on 13 March, Reporters Without Borders (RSF) said in a 16-page report on Wednesday.
“The evidence against the Russian forces is overwhelming,” the press freedom group said in an introduction to the report on its website.
Reuters could not independently verify the report’s conclusions. Russia’s defence ministry did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Born in 1981, Levin was a documentary film-maker who had occasionally contributed to Reuters coverage of the country since 2013. He went missing on 13 March, the day RSF says he was executed.
John Pullman, Reuters’ global managing editor for visuals, said of Levin in April: “His death is a huge loss to the world of journalism. Our thoughts are with his family at this difficult time.”
RSF said it examined evidence at the scene that included bullets and Levin’s burnt-out car, as well as photos taken of Levin and Chernyshov’s bodies when they were discovered on 1 April.
The report said the position of Chernyshov’s body and other evidence indicated that he may have been burned alive, and Levin was likely killed by one or two gunshots from close range. It said a photo of his corpse showed three visible bullet impacts.
RSF gathered evidence from 24 May to 3 June.
Ukrainian prosecutors say Levin was killed by two shots from small arms by members of Russia’s armed forces. Reuters was unable to independently verify this information.

The new film ‘Mr Wilder & Me’ reveals how a search for funding led the director on an uneasy journey back to the central Europe he fled
Some Like It Hot, Double Indemnity and The Apartment were just some of the classics that made Billy Wilder one of the most successful and lauded directors in Hollywood.
But when, in his 70s, he set out to make a movie telling the story of how an ageing screen siren, Fedora, is lured out of retirement, he was snubbed by the very studios that had once feted him.
The story of the troubled shooting of the 1978 film Fedora was told in a novel by Jonathan Coe in 2020, a book described by the Observer as “a novel to cherish”.
Now Mr Wilder & Me is itself to be turned into a movie with a multi-award winning screenwriter, director and producer. It will also explore Wilder’s journey to central Europe, where members of his family perished in the Holocaust. Wilder himself will be played by Oscar winner Christoph Waltz, who, like the great Hollywood director, was born in central Europe before becoming a star in recent Bond films.
Mr Wilder & Me, the film version of Coe’s book, has what the novelist calls a “dream team” behind it: Christopher Hampton for the screenplay and Stephen Frears (The Queen and My Beautiful Laundrette) as director, while the producer is Jeremy Thomas, whose films include the Oscar-winning The Last Emperor.
The character Fedora was played in the original movie by Marthe Keller, while the main star was William Holden, who had been in Wilder’s Sunset Boulevard. Coe, whose previous novels include the Costa book prize winner Middle England and What A Carve Up!, uses a fictional translator-cum-assistant Calista, hired by Wilder to help on the film’s shoot in Europe.
“I saw Fedora when it came out,” says Coe, a film buff who has also penned a biography of Hollywood giant James Stewart. “It was in a cinema in Birmingham and there were four of us in the audience. All my friends were going to see Alien and Close Encounters. I realised this was a sea change moment in cinema, and that Wilder had lost his audience.”
Born in the then Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1906, Wilder was one of many talented film-makers and executives who fled to Hollywood in the 1930s. His mother, grandmother and stepfather stayed behind, and all lost their lives in concentration camps.
The new film, like the Coe book, will reflect how Wilder’s return in the late 1970s to central Europe for Fedora took him on a journey into the darkness of his own family history. It was ironic, too, that Wilder, rebuffed by Hollywood for Fedora, had to use German funding for his movie.
By the late 1970s, Wilder was out of fashion with audiences and out of favour with Hollywood. “I had long thought it would be a poignant subject for a book,” says Coe.
Hampton, whose films include Atonement and, most recently, The Father, knew immediately from reading Coe’s book that he wanted to turn it into a film. “I’d first met Billy when talking to American émigrés as a preparation for Tales From Hollywood [Hampton’s 1983 play about the European exiles who moved to Los Angeles]. He was extremely generous with his time, professing also to be very interested in a play about those, like Thomas Mann and Bertolt Brecht, who actually didn’t succeed in Hollywood.” Wilder, of course, did.
“I later wrote to him about the rights over a libretto for a music version of Sunset Boulevard. He instantly replied that by some ‘cruel boo-boo of the capitalist system’ he retained no rights whatsoever. Paramount, which did own them, then turned me down, adding that they were negotiating with somebody else. That turned out to be Andrew Lloyd Webber.”
Hampton, along with lyricist Don Black, then joined forces with composer Lloyd Webber to turn the 1950 movie into a musical. “Billy liked it very much,” says Hampton, who admits to “an extravagant admiration” for Wilder’s films. “It’s their unique combination of mitteleuropean and American sensibilities. What fascinated me, too, about Jonathan’s book is his treatment of the way older artists can feel nudged out by the pressures of modernity.”
Coe himself recalls reading an interview with Wilder, who – while clearly hurt by Fedora not being made by a Hollywood studio – related his feelings about filming in Germany with German funding. “He actually said it was a ‘win-win situation’. If the film was a success, it was his revenge on Hollywood. If it was a failure, it was his revenge on Auschwitz.
“I felt this was such an audacious comment from somebody whose mother had died in a camp that it would have to form the heart of a novel. I felt a compulsion to attempt a portrait of a man who could make a joke like that.”
Disappointingly, Fedora was neither a critical nor a box office success. However, the Mr Wilder & Me film will at the very least remind audiences what an extraordinarily talented man Wilder was – even if viewed through the lens of his fading movie career.

Royal Festival Hall, LondonStylish and commanding, Grace Jones retains perfect poise in this strong show – even during a hula-hooping wardrobe malfunction
Grace Jones appears on stage at the Royal Festival Hall in silhouette: a long, impossibly lean figure in an enormous hat, framed in an oblong of white light at the top of a flight of stairs. It could be an image from A One Man Show, the 1981 tour and subsequent “video album” that was the dernier cri in arty pop cool 40 years ago: a series of beautifully staged, strikingly lit vignettes with the besuited Jones a perfectly poised figure at their centre.
As she descends the stairs to the strains of Nightclubbing, opening the Meltdown festival she is curating, Jones seems impossibly stylish and eerily unchanged. She is clad once again in a suit and heels, and the enormous hat eventually comes off to reveal precisely the kind of flat-top haircut she sported in the early 80s, while her sprechgesang voice remains as commanding as ever. But a few weeks after her 74th birthday, Jones feels less an icily remote figure than a gleeful agent of total chaos.
Her between-song chat ranges from gnomic – “It’s been a long time,” she growls, “like no time at all” – to so out-there it seems to confuse even her: “Does that make any fucking sense to you?” she frowns. Her performance of My Jamaican Guy ends with Jones at the top of the stairs, flat on her back with her legs in the air, wildly scissor-kicking. There are numerous costume changes, but not all the costumes are capable of containing the woman wearing them: “Maybe you’ll get to see some tit,” she says, pre-empting another wardrobe malfunction. At one point, accompanied by a gospel choir, she sings the old hymn Amazing Grace prostrate on the stage, a performance that is concluded by a stagehand dragging her into the wings by her ankles.
Perhaps the most remarkable thing about the show is that the music doesn’t feel overshadowed by the performance. There are a couple of new songs: the best is Afrobeat-infused and features a chorus of “I’ll paint you all black”, a line Jones keeps returning to long after the track is finished, barking it in the face of the aforementioned stagehand between songs. But the set draws most heavily on her early 80s albums: Demolition Man and Walking in the Rain (both from Nightclubbing), and a version of Roxy Music’s Love Is the Drug that turns the song upside down, replacing its louche mood with an almost menacing urgency. The tracks still sound unlike anything else in pop, occupying a unique space between reggae and post-punk, their mood somehow managing to be aloof and emotive at the same time. A performance of the autobiographical Williams’ Blood underlines how good her last studio album, Hurricane (now 14 years old), was.
A kind of climax is reached with Slave to the Rhythm. Jones performs it while standing on a platform and hula-hooping, an activity that causes another wardrobe malfunction: she tries decorously covering herself with the hand that isn’t holding her microphone before giving up. It’s the kind of spectacle you should, theoretically, just gawp at – it isn’t every day the Royal Festival Hall plays host to a 74-year-old woman hula-hooping half-topless – but people aren’t gawping. The entire audience are on their feet, dancing and singing along. It’s a sight that says a lot about what a transcendent song Slave to the Rhythm is, and what an utterly inimitable artist Grace Jones continues to be.
Grace Jones is at the Royal Festival Hall, London, tonight, and the British Summer Time festival, Hyde Park, London, on 10 July.

Tilda Swinton aces Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s dreamy fable, director Clio Barnard’s forbidden affair and Catherine Clinch in The Quiet Girl rank in the pick of this year’s films
More of 2022’s best culture so far
70s-set romance from Paul Thomas Anderson, starring Cooper Hoffman as a former child actor who sets his sights on 10-years-older Alana Haim as he gets into the waterbed business.What we said: “This hypnotically gorgeous, funny, romantic movie freewheels its way around from scene to scene, from character to character, from setpiece to setpiece, with absolute mastery.” Read the full review.
Jason Isaacs and Ann Dowd are among the cast of a drama about the “healing” meeting between the parents of a high-school shooting victim, and the parents of the perpetrator.What we said: “A wonderfully acted, if claustrophobic, ordeal of emotional pain.” Read the full review.
Glossily mounted film noir, directed by Guillermo del Toro, with Bradley Cooper as the carny who becomes a high society mind-reader/grifter, and Cate Blanchett as a psychologist who aims to expose him.What we said: “A spectacular noir melodrama boasting gruesomely enjoyable performances and freaky twists.” Read the full review.
Documentary from American Honey director Andrea Arnold, following without comment the lives of farm cows from birth to slaughter.What we said: “The most eerie moments come when we look directly into the cow’s eyes, as she is perhaps directly looking into ours – or at any rate, the camera lens – and mooing, repeatedly, intently or even meaningfully.” Read the full review.
Tilda Swinton joins forces with Thai auteur Apichatpong Weerasethakul for an English-language, Colombia-set fable about a woman who can hear sounds that others don’t appear to.What we said: “A beautiful and mysterious movie, slow cinema that decelerates your heartbeat.” Read the full review.
Kenneth Branagh’s memoir of a kid growing up in 1970s Northern Ireland as the Troubles mount, with Caitríona Balfe and Jamie Dornan as the married couple who have to decide whether to emigrate.What we said: “Spryly written, beautifully acted and shot in a lustrous monochrome, with set pieces, madeleines and epiphanies that feel like a more emollient version of Terence Davies.” Read the full review.
Documentary following the bizarre but revealing story of Georgian billionaire Bidzina Ivanishvili’s plan to dig up and transport hundreds of trees from across the country to his own private garden.What we said: “Transporting these trees is a Fitzcarraldo-type operation: a folie de grandeur of staggering proportions.” Read the full review.
Penélope Cruz and Pedro Almodóvar collaborate once again to tremendous effect; this time Cruz plays a woman sharing the same maternity ward as a much younger, troubled mother to be (played by Milena Smit).What we said: “Almodóvar’s new movie has the warmth and the grandiloquent flair of a picture from Hollywood’s golden age, and the whiplash twists and addictive sugar rush bumps of daytime soap.” Read the full review.
Biopic of Tammy Faye Bakker, wife of televangelist Jim Bakker and latter-day supporter of the US’s LGBT community; Jessica Chastain won the best actress Oscar for her makeup-caked performance in the title role.What we said: “Chastain gives a hilarious turn as Tammy Faye: like Tammy Wynette with a bit of Nancy Reagan and Eva Perón.” Read the full review.
Chadian auteur Mahamat-Saleh Haroun’s quiet fable, about a woman torn between social proprieties and respecting her daughter’s decision to get an abortion.What we said: “The intense, focused performances from the two central women keep this drama in a hyper-alert state: we are intensely aware of all that is at stake and how mother and daughter are battling for survival.” Read the full review.
Second half of Joanna Hogg’s autobiographical drama, with Honor Swinton Byrne as film student Julie as she abandons her social issue documentary in favour of making her own autobiographical memoir.What we said: “An amazingly luminous self-portrait of the film-maker as a young woman: metatextual, confessional and autobiographical.” Read the full review.
The fourth feature-film instalment of the dumb stunt TV show that first aired in 2000, with many of the same gang led by Johnny Knoxville, but now augmented by a younger generation.What we said: “The Jackass crew is back with yet another festival of fantastically pointless and immature bad taste.” Read the full review.
Distinctive fusion of documentary and animation from Danish film-maker Jonas Poher Rasmussen, outlining the journey and heartache of a gay Afghan man living in Copenhagen, having left his home country as a 10-year-old.What we said: “An irresistibly moving and engrossing story, whose emotional implications we can see being absorbed into the minds of the director and his subject, almost in real time.” Read the full review.
Japanese film-maker Ryusuke Hamaguchi, who subsequently made Drive My Car, directs this three-part film, in which different stories are played out with thematic echoes.What we said: “This trio of stories is elegant and amusing, with a delicacy of touch and real imaginative warmth.” Read the full review.
Documentary telling the life story of the “Little Tramp” – the silent film comic who achieved global celebrity before turning to sound and hitting even greater heights – before legal troubles took their toll.What we said: “Chaplin’s amazing story is something that would have electrified Charles Dickens, that other poverty survivor who conquered the US.” Read the full review.
Sixty-minute feature carved out of Peter Jackson’s mammoth series chronicling the making of the Let It Be album; this repurposes the original footage shot by Michael Lindsay Hogg of the famous Apple building gig, restored at full length.What we said: “This engrossing film is a time capsule of London itself – the faces not so very different from those you would see in the 40s or 50s.” Read the full review.
Jim Broadbent stars as Kempton Bunton, the Newcastle taxi driver who was tried for one of the 1960s most celebrated crimes: the theft of a Goya painting from the National Gallery.What we said: “For what has become his final feature film, director Roger Michell made this sweet-natured and genial comedy in the spirit of Ealing, which bobs up like a ping pong ball on a water-fountain.” Read the full review.
Manifesto-cum-profile of Don Letts, the film-maker and DJ who was a key figure in the original punk movement and played a significant role in overcoming the era’s race hostility.What we said: “Letts is a brilliant entrepreneur, an inter-disciplinary artist and eloquent speaker about what life was like in the punk era.” Read the full review.
Gentle romance between a British Asian from Bradford (played by Adeel Akhtar), whose relationship with his wife has broken down, and classroom assistant Claire Rushbrook; their relationship sparks disapproval among their respective families.What we said: “It’s a drama of autumnal love conquering the divisions of race, the disillusionments of middle age, the discomfort of parenthood and grandparenthood, and the tensions of class.” Read the full review.
Social-comment body horror from debut feature director Ruth Paxton, with Sienna Guillory as the apparently perfect single mother with two daughters, one of whom develops a mysterious eating disorder.What we said: “Paxton’s movie sketches out the sinister dread just under the happy-family surface; she is in expert control of her film, achieving her effects with economy and force. It is really unnerving.” Read the full review.
Interesting German drama about a former concentration camp inmate imprisoned after the war for gay sex acts, and who develops a complex relationship with his straight cellmate.What we said: “A formidably intelligent and well-acted prison movie and also a love story – or perhaps a paradoxically platonic bromance.” Read the full review.
The latest film from Rust and Bone director Jacques Audiard, here putting together a short story collection of sexual encounters and relationships in Paris’ 13th arrondissement, shot in tough black-and-white.What we said: “Audiard achieves something very watchable and entertaining in anthologising [the characters]. This is a connoisseur date movie.” Read the full review.
Kosovan-set memorial-to-loss drama about a war widow who sets up a business selling honey and other local delicacies, but who then clashes with villagers when she starts getting successful.What we said: “This is a richly intelligent drama, in which every word and every shot counts.” Read the full review.
Epic Indian blockbuster set in the 1920s, following a pair of real-life revolutionaries as they take on the might of the British Raj.What we said: “Wave after wave of lush, beautifully crafted bombast is gleefully dished out to a bedazzled audience.” Read the full article.
Thelma director Joachim Trier comes up with an unexpectedly moving drama about a twentysomething woman (played by Renate Reinsve in a star-making performance) as she navigates relationships and jobs at a tricky period in life.What we said: “Trier has taken on one of the most difficult genres imaginable, the romantic drama, and combined it with another very tricky style – the coming-of-ager – to craft something gloriously sweet and beguiling.” Read the full review.
Another exercise in nostalgia from Boyhood director Richard Linklater, here using rotoscope animation to tell the story of a kid growing up in thrall to the Apollo space programme.What we said: “It’s a nonstop madeleine-fest, a revival of memories curated with passionate connoisseurship.” Read the full review.
Mysterious fable from Italian director Laura Samani, about a woman desperate to revive her stillborn baby who heads off on a quest to find the church that may be able to accomplish it.What we said: “Samani’s film-making language has consistency and urgency, and there is an interesting streak of atheism that goes alongside this movie’s spiritual aura.” Read the full review.
Finnish director Juho Kuosmanen directs this answer to Before Sunrise, about an archaeology student who shares a train compartment with a boorish Russian; the pair connect despite their differences.What we said: “[There is] a wonderful human warmth and humour in this offbeat story of strangers on a train and of national characteristics starting to melt.” Read the full review.
Chris Pine and Thandiwe Newton star in a clever and complex spy yarn about a CIA officer ordered to interrogate his former lover over dinner as part of an investigation into a mole.What we said: “A very watchable and classily upscale espionage drama-thriller in the spirit of John le Carré.” Read the full review.
From director Tatiana Huezo, a study of the traumatising life experience of a Mexican woman trying to ensure her daughter escapes the attentions of rapists and narcos who can apparently operate with impunity.What we said: “A complex, subtle, tender and heart-rending story of a young girl’s upbringing in a village menaced by the drug cartels and people traffickers.” Read the full review.
Brutal Viking saga, based on the same legend as Shakespeare’s Hamlet, with Alexander Skarsgård as the chieftain’s son out for vengeance on the man who murdered his father and took his throne.What we said: “A horribly violent, nihilistic and chaotic story about the endless cycle of violence … It’s entirely outrageous, with some epic visions of the flaring cosmos. I couldn’t look away.” Read the full review.
Drama based on the bizarre real-life story of Hiroo Onoda, a second world war Japanese soldier who held out in the jungle in the Philippines until 1974.What we said: “A really well-made, old-fashioned anti-war epic in a forthright and robustly enjoyable style.” Read the full review.
Golden Lion-winning abortion drama, more relevant than ever, from director Audrey Diwan; a study of a woman (played by Anamaria Vartolomei) who becomes pregnant in early 60s, pre-legalisation France.What we said: “A brutal Handmaid’s Tale from our recent European past – a situation that still exists in many parts of the world, longed for by reactionary nostalgists elsewhere.” Read the full review.
Seven-year-old Maya Vanderbeque is brilliant in this Belgian schoolyard drama, as a girl called Nora who tries to confront classroom bullies in this short, intense film.What we said: “A kid’s-eye-view nightmare of playground bullying impossible to watch without a sick, jittery feeling of rage and dread.” Read the full review.
Creepy account of a teenager becoming immersed in an online horror role-play game, from trans director Jane Schoenbrun.What we said: “Strangeness is a quality valued and yearned for in so many sorts of movies, but rarely found – yet this really is strange, an experiment in horror form.” Read the full review.
Irish rural drama set in the early 80s, with Catherine Clinch as the silent child of the title who goes to stay with relatives over the summer.What we said: “This beautiful and compassionate film from first-time feature director Colm Bairéad is a child’s-eye look at our fallen world; already it feels like a classic.” Read the full review.
Split-screen dementia drama from Argentinian provocateur Gaspar Noé, starring Dario Argento and Françoise Lebrun as an elderly couple whose lives are dogged by the latter’s cognitive decline.What we said: “Noé brings his cauterisingly fierce gaze to the spectacle of old age: the world of those about to enter the void.” Read the full review.
Creepy-kid horror from Norwegian director Eskil Vogt (co-writer of The Worst Person in the World), about two young sisters who make friends with other children who apparently possess supernatural powers.What we said: “It greased my palms with anxiety and incidentally has some of the best child acting I have ever seen.” Read the full review.
Terence Davies’ account of the life of Siegfried Sassoon (played by Jack Lowden and Peter Capaldi in younger/older versions), tracing his career from lionised war poet to unhappy later life.What we said: “It is a film which is piercingly and almost unbearably about failure: the catastrophic moral and spiritual failure of war which is aligned to Sassoon’s own terrible sense of personal shortcomings.” Read the full review.

French-Senegalese film-maker Alice Diop offers a sensitive portrayal of the disparate communities that live along one of Paris’s commuter rail lines
Alice Diop’s calm and subtle documentary is very loosely and freewheelingly structured around people and communities that she has found along the RER rail line in Paris: Diop acknowledges the inspiration of author and publisher François Maspero and his 1990 book Les Passagers du Roissy Express. But it is also more obviously structured around her memories of her parents, incomers from Senegal: she has interviews with her dad which she committed to videotape but is still deeply regretful that she has only the briefest footage of her mum.
Diop meditates on the diversity and difference in the French people: interestingly, in one scene, she shows some people sunbathing and listening to Edith Piaf’s song La Foule (The Crowd), and the lines about the lovers pushed together: “Écrasés l’un contre l’autre, nous ne formons qu’un seul corps / Et le flot sans effort nous pousse, enchaînes l’un et l’autre …” (Crushed against each other, we are one body / And the effortless flow pushes us, chained together …”) One guy remarks: “Together? No one’s together any more.”
Diop also shows some aristocratic white people preparing to join a hunt and scouting for stags at dawn; she shows us a garage mechanic from Mali who is wary of racists; she shows us her sister, a carer, and has a formal interview with the French author Pierre Bergounioux, who says he wanted to write to give a literary identity to his own neighbourhood in Corrèze in central France, much as Diop says her film-making is driven by the need to bear witness to represent people and communities who might otherwise go unnoticed.
Interspersed with these more foregrounded conversations are ambient scenes of crowds of people just being. It’s a film which needs an investment of attention, but there is a great observational intelligence and sympathy at work.
We (Nous) is available on 29 June on Mubi.

Alexander Drueke, 39, and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, 27, from Alabama have been taken into detention in Donetsk
The Kremlin has said that two captured US volunteers are not covered by the Geneva conventions and could face the death penalty.
“We are talking about mercenaries who threatened the lives of our service personnel,” the Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said. “And not only ours, but also the service personnel of the DPR and LPR,” he added, referencing the Russian-controlled self-proclaimed peoples’ republics of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Russian media has claimed that two of three US volunteers missing in Ukraine have been captured and are being held by pro-Russian separatist forces.
The Kremlin, however, denied that it knew the location of the two men.
Asked whether the Americans could be put on trial in Russian-controlled territory in Donetsk and sentenced to death, Peskov said: “We cannot exclude anything because these are decisions for the court. We never comment on them and have no right to interfere in court decisions.”
The two men were taken into detention by Russian-backed separatists in Donetsk after being captured last week, according to Russian state media.
Alexander Drueke, 39, and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, 27, both from Alabama, were filmed on Russia’s RT channel at a detention centre in the DPR on Friday.
The threat of the death penalty against the two men follows the sentencing to death of two Britons and a Moroccan who surrendered in Mariupol after fighting with Ukrainian forces, amid some suggestions that Russia may use the men to bargain for the release of captured Russians.
While Russia has a moratorium on the death penalty, that moratorium does not extend to the DPR, despite being a proxy of Moscow.
The two Americans went missing earlier this month during a battle north of Kharkiv.
Despite claims by Russia and its allies in Ukraine that the Geneva conventions do not cover captured foreign fighters – who it characterises as “mercenaries” – all of those being threatened with the death penalty were serving with the Ukrainian armed forces, which means they should be treated as prisoners of war.
The Geneva conventions also forbid the prosecution of captured combatants for lawful participation in conflict as opposed to illegal acts committed as combatants.
A State Department spokesperson told CNN on Friday they “have seen the photos and videos of these two US citizens reportedly captured by Russia’s military forces in Ukraine” and were “closely monitoring the situation”.
“We are in contact with Ukrainian authorities, the International Committee of the Red Cross, and with the families themselves. Due to privacy considerations, we have no further comment on these cases.”
On 9 June – the day the two US volunteers were captured – a Donetsk court sentenced British citizens Sean Pinner and Aiden Aslin, and the Moroccan national Saaudun Brahim to death. Concern over the men’s welfare has been raised further by a statement by the head of the DPR, Denis Pushilin, that he did not plan to swap them for Russian prisoners of war.
“The exchange of the British men sentenced to death in the DPR is not under discussion, there are no grounds for pardoning them,” Pushilin told independent Russian investigative newspaper Novaya Gazeta last week.
A third American missing in action in Ukraine has been identified as the former US Marine veteran Grady Kurpasi, who has been out of contact with his family since late April.
The State Department also confirmed on Tuesday that US citizen Stephen Zabielski was killed in mid-May, apparently by a landmine, fighting with Ukrainian forces. “We can confirm the death of US citizen Stephen Zabielski in Ukraine,” a spokesperson said.
Zabielski is the second American citizen to have died after Willy Joseph Cancel, a 22-year-old ex-Marine, was killed fighting in late April.

Despite its roots in India, the sector is not diverse, and women report ‘wall of silence’ about studios’ lack of inclusiveness
When Sue Forde returned to practising yoga in a studio earlier this year, for the first time since the pandemic, it was with a sense of trepidation. Because it meant she was, once again, usually the only black woman in the room.
“I’ve had my body pointed to as ‘an African body’,” said Forde, from Hackney, east London. “Recently, in a class, this discussion sprang up about whether black women have a bigger tendency to a pelvic tilt. You think: ‘Oh, please don’t bring this into the yoga room.’”
Forde is one of a growing number of black and minority ethnic yoga teachers and practitioners who are challenging racism in British yoga organisations. Many said they have experienced inappropriate touching of, and comments about, their bodies and hair in classes, as well as crass racial stereotypes, such as Indians being ‘naturally bendy’, and ignorance of yoga’s sacred texts, including the Bhagavad Gita.
Last autumn, Forde was among several members of the renowned Iyengar Yoga London in Maida Vale who raised concerns about racism at the centre. A meeting in September to discuss equality and diversity at the institute heard about “women of colour who had visited IYMV once or twice and not returned as they felt unwelcome and uncomfortable”. Forde, who has not since returned to the studio, also told the group that it was “not reflecting the diversity that is on the streets around it”.
Despite its roots in India, the sector, which, along with pilates, is worth more than £900m, is not diverse. In a report about yoga practice in the UK in BMJ Open in 2020 87% of practitioners who responded to the survey were women, and 91% were white. This reflected the findings of an ethnicity audit by the British Wheel of Yoga in 2016, which found that 86% of its members were white British, 2.8% were British Asians, and 0.5% were Black British.
In a book published this week, yoga teacher trainer Stacie Graham argues that in Europe and North America, yoga’s traditions have been misappropriated and commodified as fitness.
In Yoga As Resistance, which Graham wrote as a guide to making yoga more inclusive, she noted that social media representations of the practice are dominated by images of white women who are “very skinny, bendy and blonde”.
Graham, who has led anti-racism workshops for yoga studios including Triyoga, said whenever she asked studio managers why their membership did not reflect the ethnic diversity of the local area, their answers were often based on inaccurate racial stereotypes “about what ‘those people’ do”.
Together with three other yoga teachers of colour, Graham has set up Radical Darshan, an anti-racist teacher training course in London. It covers the harmful impact of British colonialism on India and how that led to modern western-style yoga, focused on exercise rather than spirituality.
One of the other course leaders, Kallie Schut, who also runs decolonised yoga group Rebel Yoga Tribe, said many UK yoga organisations were exploiting India’s cultural heritage while failing to appoint south Asian teachers.
She recalled a class where a white teacher “who’d just come back from an ashram in India was wearing Indian clothes, and all the accoutrements, in a class full of white people”.
“It felt like it was almost a parody of being south Asian,” said Schut, from south-east London. She added that such experiences in white-led yoga spaces were traumatising for people of colour, and she was no longer willing to practise in them.
Amanda Evans from Brighton said she had quit teaching yoga in commercial studios because some white students had walked out of classes when they saw a black or brown teacher. “It happened to me a couple of times and with south Asian teachers I know as well,” she said.
Other yoga teachers of colour said they had stopped providing anti-racism work for white-led yoga organisations in recent years because they had not carried out meaningful reform.
Sophia Ansari, a Cardiff-based yoga teacher and therapist, who has run workshops on decolonising the yoga curriculum for trustees of the British Wheel of Yoga, said she had distanced herself from the industry because “they’re doing a disservice to yoga”.
“I felt like I was getting nowhere with studio owners after challenging them for the last two years,” said Ansari. “There is a wall of silence, always. I had to withdraw from it because it’s exhausting.”
Dorothy Hosein, chief executive of British Wheel of Yoga, said the training body had recently set up an equality, diversity and inclusion working group to discuss how to change the culture of the organisation.
Hosein, who is white, said the organisation’s new board, which is elected annually, was all white. She added: “We haven’t got diversity in our demographics, and there’s a lot of work to do.”
Alan Reynolds, manager of Iyengar Yoga London, said he accepted that people of colour were underrepresented in classes. He added that the institute had several teachers of colour and had recently formed a diversity advisory group to address how it could become more inclusive.
This article was amended on 22 June 2022. The 2020 report was published in BMJ Open, not the British Medical Journal, and the figures relate to those who completed the survey, rather than the findings of the survey. Related information was added from a British Wheel of Yoga audit in 2016.

Evidence uncovered in Preseli Hills in Pembrokeshire extends known reach further west across Britain
The awe-inspiring beauty of the Preseli Hills and the surrounding wild moorlands have long drawn visitors to north Pembrokeshire in Wales. Now an archaeologist has found evidence that even the Romans were drawn to the area, with the discovery of an ancient road showing they travelled farther west across Britain than previously thought.
Dr Mark Merrony, a Roman specialist, tutor at Oxford University and “a native of Pembrokeshire”, said the road had been completely missed. “This thing is just extraordinary. I’m astonished,” he said.
“I think they’ll go crazy in Wales over this because it’s pushing the Roman presence much more across Pembrokeshire. There’s this perception that the Romans didn’t go very far in Wales, but actually they were all over Wales.”
He said antiquarians in the late 17th and early 19th centuries had embraced the existence of a Roman road and it had been marked on 19th-century Ordnance Survey maps. “But the idea was then rejected and removed from those maps,” he said.
Merrony spoke of finding a section of perfectly preserved Roman road buried in peat and further evidence in sunken lanes and low causeways barely discernible today but which followed straight routes and worked round hill contours “with perfect economy”, all typically Roman.
At up to five metres in width in places, the road was “quite wide”, he said, and stretched to around 11km. “Whoever did this must have had hundreds and hundreds of men doing it. It can only be an army.”
He said he expected evidence of a fort could emerge along its course, but that the Celtic Demetae tribe, who inhabited modern Pembrokeshire and Carmarthenshire, were thought to have been pro-Roman, so there would have been less need for a major military presence to quell local resistance.
Merrony is the founding editor of Antiqvvs, a quarterly magazine dedicated to archaeology, ancient art and history, where he will publish his latest research this month. He was also the founding director of the award-winning Mougins Museum of Classical Art in southern France and his books include The Plight of Rome in the Fifth Century AD.
Discussing antiquarians of previous centuries who referred to a Roman road, he singled out Edward Lhwyd, a keeper at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford in the 1690s who visited Wales in 1698. He observed that “along this mountain is to be seen an old dyke, or as it is conjectured a Roman way, Roman coins being frequently found near”.
Lhwyd was not only right, he said. The existence of a road made perfect sense because it linked Roman farmsteads or villas, the remains of which have been found in the area: “That’s how I started to investigate the road,” he said. “I thought ‘why is a villa in the middle of nowhere?’”
The route also goes straight past a mine, which may be significant, he believes: “I think that’s one of the reasons this road is there, the silver mine, which has never been investigated archaeologically … If there’s a silver mine, odds-on the Romans knew about it and were exploiting it.”
Much of the route is within the Pembrokeshire Coast national park, which would oversee any exploratory excavations.
This article was amended on 6 June 2022 because the second mention of Edward Lhwyd’s last name was misspelled as Llwyd.

Defendants named in judge’s report include football star’s three doctors, a psychiatrist and two nurses
Eight people who took care of the Argentinian football superstar Diego Maradona will be tried for homicide, according to a ruling released on Wednesday following an investigation into his death from cardiac arrest.
In the 236-page document seen by Reuters, the judge in charge of the case questioned “the behaviours – active or by omission – of each of the accused which led to and contributed to the realisation of the harmful result”.
The ruling said eight people including doctors, nurses and a psychologist who cared for Maradona at the time of his death in 2020 are accused of “simple homicide,” a serious charge that means taking a life with intent. A medical board appointed to investigate Maradona’s death concluded in 2021 that his medical team acted in an “inappropriate, deficient and reckless manner”.
Maradona was considered one of the greatest football players in history, though the diminutive player nicknamed “Pelusa” for his long mane of hair and “D10S” as a play on the Spanish word for “God” using the number on his shirt, battled drug and alcohol abuse for years.
Mario Baudry, a lawyer for one of Maradona’s sons, told Reuters that the World Cup winner was “in a situation of helplessness” by the time of his death. Maradona died on 25 November 2020, at the age of 60.
“As soon as I saw the cause, I said it was homicide,” he said. “I fought for a long time and here we are, with this stage completed.”
Argentinian prosecutors began investigations shortly after Maradona’s death at a house near Buenos Aires, including ordering searches of properties of his personal doctor and probing others involved in his care. The defendants named in the ruling were: Maradona’s neurosurgeon and personal doctor, Leopoldo Luque; his psychiatrist, Agustina Cosachov; his psychologist, Carlos Diaz; two nurses, Gisella Madrid and Ricardo Almiron; their boss, Mariano Perroni; and two doctors, Pedro Di Spagna and Nancy Forlini.
The defendants have denied responsibility for Maradona’s death. The judge said lawyers for some of them had requested the case be dismissed.
Vadim Mischanchuk, an attorney for Cosachov, said they would appeal against the decision, adding that the psychiatrist’s area of care had no relation with the cause of death. “A guilty party is being sought at all costs and objectivity is being lost,” the lawyer said.
Reuters could not immediately reach the defendants or the other lawyers for comment.
The crime of “simple homicide” in Argentina usually leads to a prison sentence of between eight and 25 years, according to the country’s penal code. There is no set date for the trial yet.

From Gucci’s collaboration with Harry Styles to Prada’s ‘normal clothes’, a heatwave-hit Milan saw the temperatures turned up on and off the catwalk
Tue 21 Jun 2022 18.00 BST
Last modified on Tue 21 Jun 2022 18.21 BST

Jacqueline Lentzou’s highly anticipated debut feature follows a daughter struggling to reconnect with her ailing father
Jacqueline Lentzou’s debut feature is a difficult, elusive, but ultimately rewarding study of a daughter struggling to reconnect with her father: it’s a film which – initially at least – appears to occlude its own meaning with mannerisms which I associate with the absurdist style of the Greek new wave.
Sofia Kokkali plays Artemis, a young woman who has been away from her Athens family for a long time, but comes home when her father, Paris, (Lazaros Georgakopoulos ) suffers a stroke, rendering him hardly able to walk and all but speechless. Somehow, the responsibility of caring for Paris falls on Artemis while her extended family interview live-in caregivers and squabble about how to proceed. Meanwhile, her mother, estranged from Paris, seems detached from the whole situation, and Artemis is faintly disquieted to be reacquainted with an affectionate family friend: Iakovos (Nikitas Tsakiroglou).
It is all the more painful for Artemis because she and her father argued constantly in her teen years: the kind of confrontation which, in one agonised and faintly surreal scene, Artemis reenacts while alone in her bedroom, playing both parts, before finally collapsing in tears. The action – at first displayed through disorienting closeups and odd camera angles – is broken up with references to tarot cards and the phases of the moon, as well as old analogue video footage which Paris appears to have shot himself 20 years before with his own commentary, footage whose emotional meaning is effectively withheld until the very end of the film.
There is a kind of unemphasised intensity about this movie, which makes the climactic dialogue scene between Artemis and Paris effective, although I wondered if there was not perhaps a little too much tricksiness and contrivance in the way the “discovery” was managed and the opening scenes were shot. But Kokkali persuasively enacts both the emotional hurt and emotional healing.
Moon, 66 Questions is released on 24 June in cinemas.

Hilariously candid confessions of a journalist; a psychological drama in Donegal; and a ‘what if’ tale of a feminist ghetto in Nazi Britain
Marcus Berkmann Little Brown, £16.99, pp208
If you think being a journalist and author is a noble profession, Marcus Berkmann’s splendidly entertaining semi-memoir will enlighten you. This vivid trawl through a career misspent in New Grub Street offers hilariously candid anecdotes about (ever-present) failure and (far rarer) success in the writing profession. Whether musing on his career as the least appropriate Spectator rock music critic imaginable, or the joys of an afternoon nap, Berkmann’s book is an affectionate and uproarious ode to an existence lived precariously by the pen.
Tish Delaney Hutchinson Heinemann, £16.99, pp448
Tish Delaney’s first novel, Before My Actual Heart Breaks, suggested that she was an author of rare promise and acuity. This follow-up confirms her as one of the most arresting voices of her generation. The tale of an aunt and niece living in uncomfortable proximity and mutual antagonism with each other in rural Donegal, it combines deep psychological insight with unexpected touches of lightness and humour. Delaney never succumbs to cliche, but creates a vividly realised narrative in which you long for her characters to break free and triumph.
CJ CareyQuercus, £8.99, pp400 (paperback)
Novels exploring what would have happened if the Nazis had conquered Britain are one of the most popular “what ifs” in dystopian fiction, but CJ Carey brings an intriguing twist to well-worn tropes. Her protagonist, Rose Ransom, is a so-called “Geli”, one of the elite in 50s Britain, whose job censoring classic works of literature to make them acceptable to the “Alliance”, a thinly disguised Nazi party, leads her into the unexpected terrain of “Widowland”, a ghetto for subversive middle-aged women. And then the drama truly begins in this delightful page-turner.
To order How to Be a Writer, The Saint of Lost Things or Widowland go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply

‘She seems to be surveying her domain, knowing she will soon be on her own. Or maybe she’s just thinking about what needs done in the garden’
I began making photographs at home with my parents nearly 15 years ago. My elderly father was going through a slow decline and I wanted to spend time with him. I’m not sure if I was fully conscious of it then, but I was using my camera to do that thing photography does: allowing you to hold on to something on the brink of disappearing.
I was in my late 20s, didn’t yet have children, and I lived close to their house, where I’d grown up. When I wasn’t working I’d go back and forth, sometimes staying for a day or two. The images, which would later make up the book Still Here, came about privately, over a long period of time.
In the photographs of my father, he is almost a child again in the way he had to be cared for. He is there and already absent. But my mother was 24 years younger than him and, at the time, I could not comprehend her not being there. Looking back at the pictures now, I see the tension between the images of them, the different stages they were at. My mother is vulnerable yet strong, active and in control, albeit with a frailty that presages what was to come.
She was happy for the pictures of her to be quite intimate – there’s one in the bath, another of her screwing in a lightbulb with curlers in her hair, something I don’t think I’d ever seen before. My parents were both very supportive of the process, though only my mother got to see the images as a book and in exhibitions.
What is immediately striking about this shot is the fact that it’s so verdant. The saturation of green becomes a kind of claustrophobic, containing and constraining space: there isn’t anywhere outside it. But my mother is facing away – from the camera, from the house, from me. She seems to be surveying her domain and reaching beyond it, looking out to what might exist on the other side of the garden wall. It becomes symbolic of where she was at, emotionally and psychologically, in her role of being the younger partner looking after the older one, knowing she’s soon going to be on her own.
She cuts a really interesting figure. She’s dressed quite smartly, her hair perfectly in place and wearing clothes she could be going to work in, although she’s also got slippers on. She has a strong stance, hands on hips, feet placed firmly on the ground, and is looking towards the corner of the garden where the two walls meet, invisible to us. But also in that corner is the washing line, which I think of as an umbilical cord that goes from the house to the boundary edge of the domestic sphere, pulling her back.
Of course, I’m reading all this into the image when, as far as I can recall, she was just looking at what needed to be done in the garden. But this photograph reminds me off a picture I took during lockdown of my daughter Eden inside a plastic seedling tent in our garden. There’s a 10-year gap between the two images, but they both provoke ideas of love, protection and isolation – one made during a pandemic, the other made during another time leading to death. The themes of mothering, being mothered, love, loss and time run through my work. That picture of Eden features in my series Fugue, which also includes a photograph of my mother’s ashes being scattered in a garden, next to my father’s.
Born: London, 1978.Trained: Masters in photography, London College of Communication.Influences: “Rebecca Solnit, Rachel Cusk, Claire Wilcox, Eva Hoffman, and Nigel Shafran, Rinko Kawauchi, Robert Adams, Sian Bonnell, Rineke Dijkstra, William Eggleston.”High points: “Having the freedom to work, explore, think and experiment.”Low points: “Self-doubt, which comes in many forms as a freelancer, a creative, a woman, a mother.”Top tip: “Answer back to the self-doubt. Show work to people you trust.”

The Australian auteur’s films are intoxicating, polarising spectacles – so from the very bad (Australia) to the very good, we rank his works across film and TV
As we know from having had our senses pounded by various glitter-filled, hyperactive and blindingly bright spectacles, Baz Luhrmann’s films don’t talk – they shout. The Sydney-born auteur practises a film-making ethos he and veteran editor Jill Billcock (who cut his first three films: the “red curtain trilogy”) sagely described as “frame fucking”.
Luhrmann is a polarising director, as everybody and their dog have pointed out. The trick to making sense of Luhrmann is to understand that he doesn’t really consciously manipulate, or even necessarily believe in, subtext. Everything is always on the surface. There are broad, agreed upon meanings – for instance, Romeo + Juliet and his new film Elvis are obviously tragedies. Problems arise when his work cries out for considered layering of themes and messages, only for viewers to discover there is always little under the bonnet.
Luhrmann is at his best when focusing on musical inspirations and performative elements. His best two films are very good; his worst two are cataclysmically awful; and the rest are spectacles that are nothing if not intoxicating. Here they are, ranked from lemon to (apologies) Luhrmannastic.
Luhrmann’s superhuman ego is stamped across every frame of this stupefyingly sheep-brained epic: a thick, buttery goo of cringe-inducing stereotypes and melodrama, told in a style of an extreme kind of visual jibber-jabber. Titling the film “Once Upon a Time in Australia” might have given it a gentler reception and suggested the director’s tongue wasn’t all that far from his cheek. But no, Luhrmann couldn’t help himself. The film rightly sparked a shitstorm of debate, including a widely read takedown from Germaine Greer sampling a review from yours truly.
Brandishing fridge-sized pecs, Hugh Jackman stars as a drover convinced by Nicole Kidman’s prissy station owner to move livestock across many miles of treacherous land, in a plot recalling The Overlanders. The film seems to go on for an eternity, jerking between shampoo commercial romance, retrograde depictions of Indigeneous people as magical mystics, and an endless parade of Hollywood cliches.
Rare is the literary adaptation that makes you think: “I’m pretty sure the director didn’t even read the book.” F Scott Fitzgerald’s brilliant critique of the American Dream uses the excessiveness of the Jazz Age to construct a chimera: the illusionary happiness provided by glitz, glamour and opulence, masking foundations of broken dreams and pointlessness. In Luhrmann’s hands, parties hosted by the enigmatic Jay Gatsby (Leonardo DiCaprio) are purely fabulous, dreamy spectacle – a gross misinterpretation of the source material.
As usual, Luhrmann literalises symbolic meaning; when narrator Nick Carraway (Tobey Maguire) reflects that, “I was him too, looking up and wondering”, the director cuts to a shot of Maguire, looking up at Maguire and wondering. This glossily berserk picture book approach reduces every human interaction to fluff and renders his actors impotent.
This intensely gaudy jukebox musical initially struck me as being like a huge and hideous alien plant that never stops flowering – I wanted to dive in and kill it from the inside, like Rick Moranis in Little Shop of Horrors. Subsequently, I’ve kind of come around to it, or at least made peace with it. Moulin Rouge! is a carnivalesque experience with a wild, incantatory energy, even before Kylie Monogue appears as an absinthe fairy singing “the hills are alive”.
Ewan McGregor’s poet describes the titular night club as “a kingdom of night-time pleasures”; Moulin Rouge!’s fans may view the film in a similar way. McGregor and star performer Satine (Kidman) fall in love, belting out various songs to very subtly and in no way obviously reiterate the point – such as I Was Made For Loving You Baby. Largely devoid in narrative, careening through an anachronistic splatter of styles and genres, with a modus operandi to conjure sheer stagey spectacle, this is “pure” Luhrmann.
Elvis is less a biopic than a circus act, with a preposterous performance from Tom Hanks as the King’s evil manager, Colonel Tom Parker, pitched somewhere between Foghorn Leghorn and a Bond villain. Framing the story through Parker forges an unexpected pathway into the life of the titular superstar, who is used and abused by his portly puppet master in pursuit of the greatest show on earth (and the making of a ton of cash).
As usual Luhrmann literalises, turning Suspicious Minds into an on-the-nose comment on the fraught relationship between Elvis (sensationally played by Austin Butler) and the Colonel.
By taking an unusual route, the director avoids some of the biopic genre’s greatest pitfalls: thankfully, there are no goofy lightbulb moments attempting to simplify the creative process. It’s long and exhausting, the film’s energy coming and going in waves – but when it peaks, Elvis delivers an unusual haunting intensity that will reverberate after the credits roll.
Luhrmann’s two-part Netflix series, themed around disco culture and the rise of hip-hop in 1970s New York, kicked off with a 90-minute episode directed by Luhrmann before he passed the baton on to other directors. Unlike many Luhrmann joints, The Get Down doesn’t feel rushed or frantic; in fact, it feels almost measured, or at least bearing a more developed sense of time and place. And yes literal Luhrmann strikes again: in an early scene, when a performer raps the line “I see the light, it’s right there, at the tunnel”, he of course cuts to a bright light inside a tunnel.
The centerpiece is a nightclub and dance-off sequence (featuring some sweet moves from Yahya Abdul-Mateen II) that anchors a large chunk of the first episode. Human elements shine in ways they rarely do in Luhrmann productions, thanks to a fresh-faced cast including Justice Smith as young poet Zeke and Herizen F Guardiola as aspiring singer Mylene. You like these people, you want to spend time with them. The story is about dreaming big, making mistakes and growing up.
I recommend watching Luhrmann’s Shakespeare a̶d̶a̶p̶t̶a̶t̶i̶o̶n̶ extravaganza with the subtitles turned on, with the text size enlarged if possible. That way The Bard’s words become absorbed into the film’s visual fabric and better compete with its insane loudness. Introductory scenes deploying rapid fire imagery and displaying text inserts announcing the cast feel like a trailer for the film itself: one of humankind’s best-known and most loved doomed romances, reduced to the language of marketing shorthand.
But the broader experience actually hangs together bizarrely well, fusing the dense, archaic loquaciousness of Shakespeare’s writing with Luhrmann’s sensory-slamming chutzpah. This tale has been adapted ad nauseam, but the sets and production design feel wonderfully fresh – from the ruined theatre on the beach, to the cathedral full of candles and neon blue crucifixes, to the now classic first scene between the titular lovers, catching each other’s gaze through the glass of an aquarium.
As Orson Welles put it: “The enemy of art is the absence of limitations.” With his smallest budget by far, Luhrmann’s feature debut forced him to stay grounded in characterisation and human performance, directing his actors towards screeching cartoon qualities and bringing plenty of movement to the camera. At one point, a grandma tells Paul Mercurio’s ballroom dancer that he doesn’t know anything about rhythm, though the opposite applies to the film itself – beautifully edited by the great Billcock, all the way to an unforgettable finale involving Scott (Mercurio) and Fran (Tara Morice) competing at the Pan-Pacific Grand Prix Dancing Championship.
Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning
The film’s scratchy, homemade quality initially makes aspects of it feel unsettled, even a little awkward. But ultimately this works in its favour, bringing an appealing homely texture that slicker, more expensive films cannot convey. The famous Coca-Cola rooftop dance scene is one of cinema’s loveliest product placements; the emotions of the moment not just overpowering the advertisement, but turning it into something luminously beautiful.

Overlooked except for a scornful reference in Ulysses, Elizabeth and Lily ran a vibrant women-only arts and crafts enterprise
In Ireland, Elizabeth and Lily Yeats are remembered if at all as the “weird sisters” – a fleeting, scornful reference in James Joyce’s Ulysses.
The novel did not name them or elaborate on their alleged weirdness, just as a male-dominated view of Irish history overlooked them except as minor players in an artistic movement.
They ran an arts and craft enterprise, Cuala Press, from 1908 to 1940, but Elizabeth and Lily were chiefly known as the sisters of two famous brothers – the poet William Butler Yeats and the painter Jack Yeats. They lived in the shadow of their male siblings, and the jibe in Ulysses, before fading into obscurity.
Now, however, an academic project has shone a light on the sisters’ unrecognised role in reforging Irish identity in the 20th century – an idealised version of Ireland that enchanted Hollywood and which lives on in some tourism imagery.
After Ireland won independence from Britain in 1921 the Cuala Press bolstered fragile national confidence – and impressed foreigners – with vibrant images of a prosperous Dublin and thriving rural traditions. It was a rebuttal to racist British tropes of a land populated by feckless, simian-like hooligans.
“Their reach was pretty incredible,” said Angela Griffith, an art historian at Trinity College Dublin. “The material they produced was being sold in Ireland, the UK, the US. It was part of the zeitgeist.”
The Cuala Press employed only women and produced handcrafted books, cards and prints that won glowing reviews at exhibitions in Paris, London, Chicago and elsewhere, seeding a romanticised image of Irishness that verged on propaganda. It was echoed in films such as The Quiet Man, a 1952 romantic comedy directed by John Ford that starred John Wayne and Maureen O’Hara, and tourism brochures showing ruddy people in scenic settings.
Griffith and Billy Shortall, a colleague at the Irish Art Research Centre in Trinity College, are leading an effort to collect, conserve, digitise and publish Cuala Press images.
Drawing on an archive donated by the Yeats family and 111 hand-coloured prints donated by Vin Ryan, the founder of the Schooner Foundation, in 2017, the project put the first images online last month.
“They may seem quaint and chocolate-boxy now, but they were quite radical. They were challenging what came before,” Shortall said, referring to negative British portrayals of Irishness. “They were promoting the idea of Irish self-determination.”
The fledgling Irish state established a stable, sovereign country against the odds but the Cuala Press images elided social ills such as poverty and emigration.
The Yeats sisters did not openly champion sexual equality but gave a powerful example, said Griffith. “They employed and trained women, ran their own business and actively demonstrated their own agency.”
History, however, overlooked their contribution. A plaque at the Yeats family home in Chiswick, London, mentions only male members. Cuala Press commissioned mostly female artists but dictionaries and biographies tend to record only the males, said Griffith. To be branded “weird” in Joyce’s masterpiece would have undermined them, she said.
The sisters lapsed further into obscurity after the 1970s when rustic and religious images – such as the Virgin Mary ironing beside a ginger-haired Christ – felt anachronistic in a country keen to project a modern, cosmopolitan image. “The sisters became footnotes,” said Griffith.
Shortall and Griffith hope that putting Trinity College’s archive of images online will alert museums, galleries and private individuals around the world to the importance of any Cuala Press prints they may possess. “There is plenty more out there,” said Griffith.

Comedian says he was asked to explain context of gag to investigating officers, and will keep it in his show
The comedian Joe Lycett has said he was investigated by the police after an audience member made a complaint about a joke in one of his shows.
In a post on Instagram, he revealed that he was asked to explain the context of the gag and that the authorities have now closed the case.
Lycett, 33, said he hoped the joke amused the investigating officers and that it would stay in his standup routine for the remainder of his UK and Ireland tour.
Sharing a photo of the police’s message confirming the matter was closed, he wrote: “So someone came to my tour show a few weeks back and was offended by one of the jokes.
“And their perfectly understandable response to this was … to call the f****** police. To be fair to them the fuzz were very nice about it all but felt they had a duty to investigate.
“This involved me writing a statement explaining the context of the joke for them; I particularly enjoyed putting the words ‘giant donkey dick’ into a message to a police detective.
“Charmed, and hopefully amused, the rozzers have since closed the matter.”
He added: “You’ll be pleased to know that the joke – which I consider to be one of the best I’ve ever written – remains firmly and proudly in the show. The tour continues until September, unless I am jailed.”
The Birmingham-born comic, who has appeared on comedy shows including Taskmaster and QI, has been behind several public stunts in recent years.
He previously attempted to raise awareness of single-use plastics by storming off the set of Steph’s Packed Lunch – after the host pointed out a photo of him using a plastic bottle, despite him claiming to have given up using them.
Lycett also made headlines in March 2020 when he temporarily changed his name by deed poll to Hugo Boss, after the German luxury designer used trademark claims to target small businesses and charities who use “boss” in their branding.

Tim Burton’s kinetic and kinky sequel pushed the boundaries for the summer movie template helped by a standout movie star turn from Michelle Pfeiffer
Thirty years ago, audiences came out in droves to see an over-the-top political satire about the mayoral campaign of a disgusting sewer mutant – a movie that also doubled as an oddball romantic comedy about two weirdos with mask fetishes, trading blows and spit in a snowglobe metropolis. Hindsight has a way of turning every box-office sensation into a curious time capsule, letting us gawk at the strange attractions that used to put butts in seats. But through the lens of the modern blockbuster machine, and the reigning superhero-industrial complex that powers it, Batman Returns looks like a true anomaly, as weird and horny and maybe personal as mega-budget Hollywood spectacles get.
It’s certainly a more idiosyncratic movie than its predecessor, Tim Burton’s record-breaking popcorn sensation Batman, released to teeming, cheering crowds in the summer of 1989. To lure Burton back to the world of the caped crusader, Warner Bros had to offer him greater creative control over the sequel. The director exercised it from top to bottom. In place of the original’s art deco noir aesthetic, Batman Returns goes full baroque fairytale. When the camera swoops like a creature of the night through the twisted architecture of the Gotham Zoo, it’s clear we’re fully in Burtonville, previous home to wisecracking prankster apparitions and lonely hairdressing androids.
With Batman Returns, Burton turned Gotham into the biggest of big tops, terrorized by a gang of criminal carnies and populated by freaks on both sides of the hero/villain divide. That includes billionaire vigilante Bruce Wayne (Michael Keaton, slipping back into the cumbersome cape and cowl), ostensible hero of the movie, who at one point likens himself to Norman Bates or Ted Bundy, serial killers with split personalities or secret pastimes.
Bruce’s problems are doubled, his screen-time halved. Just about everyone agrees that Jack Nicholson’s Joker stole the first Batman. The second surrenders the spotlight to the rogues’ gallery immediately, depriving Keaton of any dialogue for the opening half-hour. The movie belongs more to Danny DeVito’s deformed, anguished Oswald Cobblepot, AKA the Penguin, and to Michelle Pfeiffer’s Selina Kyle, reborn into the vengeful, vamping Catwoman.
The other thing that drew Burton back was the involvement of the Heathers screenwriter Daniel Waters, who gave the material an arch, black-comic zinginess. The absurdist political angle of the plot was his idea. It’s an inspired gag, imagining that a creature as vulgar as the Penguin could steal the electorate’s heart. In the film’s funniest reveal, DeVito’s supervillain is interrupted mid-meal, chowing down messily on a raw fish, by the new staff of beaming operatives and volunteers applauding his candidacy. What seemed cynical in 1992 now looks rather touchingly naive. Imagine a politician dropping out of a race just because he got caught on tape disparaging his base.
Waters’ plot is lumpy, forcing an illogical allegiance between the villains. No matter – for Burton, it’s just an excuse to collide these outsized cartoon personalities, to build a vaudeville stage for three tortured, animal-themed outlaws. The director twists that classic Batman theme of the bad guys being warped reflections of the good guy to suit his own enduring love affair with misfits. DeVito, deliciously overacting under mounds and hours of daily prosthetic labor, makes the Penguin a sympathetic monster: horrifying in appearance, crass and corrupt in nature, but still a tragic figure. Burton loves him as only a father could. And he recognizes him as a kindred spirit to his archnemesis. Who is Cobblepot but Wayne without privilege, abandoned instead of orphaned? “You’re just jealous because I’m a genuine freak and you have to wear a mask,” he tells Batman. It’s a point the dark knight concedes.
Pfeiffer, meanwhile, who nabbed the role after Annette Bening got pregnant and vacated it, delivers one of the great movie star turns in all of comic-book cinema: a slinking embodiment of hell-hath-no-fury attitude, hissing venomous one-liners with aplomb and waging war on the powerful, sexist exploiters of Gotham. In both stylized performance and instantly iconic skin-tight, patchwork attire, she could have strutted straight out of the panels of the source material. Yet Pfeiffer also summons the raw desperation of a true identity crisis, which comes roaring to the surface during a great alter-ego, ballroom tango with the enemy in the film’s quiet before the climax.
If the political contest suggests a classic Preston Sturges comedy in superhero drag, there’s a touch of Ernst Lubitsch to the screwball romance between Keaton and Pfeiffer, circling each other in different forms of evening wear, concealing their double lives, secret identities and battle scars during a fireside canoodle. Batman Returns is easily the kinkiest big-screen treatment of these characters: the one that dares to see some S&M fantasy in people burying their svelte physiques under rubber and leather. It’s one reason parents were so incensed by the stranger sequel, and why McDonald’s nixed the Happy Meals line. The dialogue drips with innuendo. The Penguin, a cackling pervert, ravenously sniffs Catwoman’s boot and lusts after his interns.
Remarkably, the film has a class conscience, too. Its real villain is neither the Penguin nor Catwoman but Christopher Walken’s shock-wigged robber baron Max Shreck, named for the actor who played Nosferatu but plainly modeled on a younger Donald Trump. He is, of course, another distorted mirror image of Batman – a Bruce Wayne looking to prey on the people instead of protecting them. “The law doesn’t apply to men like him,” Pfeiffer’s Catwoman astutely says of her boss, the man who pushed her out of a window to complete her supervillain origin story. Years before Christopher Nolan sent Bane to occupy Wall Street, Burton more casually sent a jolt of class warfare through Gotham.
As an adaptation, Batman Returns plays as fast and loose as, well, the first Batman. Burton was quick to admit, in the memoir Burton on Burton, that he wasn’t much of a comic-book reader – a confession that underscored his disregard for canonical backstory and elements such as the character’s traditional aversion to killing. For some diehards, his Batman movies are heresy. Certainly, they hail from a less faithful or fan-pleasing era of comic-book blockbusters. Yet their exaggerated visual pleasures and splash-panel-sized performances have their own fidelity to the original medium, a kinship of pulp spirit. They reject realism, which might be the more suitable approach to the story of a guy who dresses up as a bat to clobber those with a similar flair for the dramatic.
What really marks Batman Returns as a product of a very different age of superhero spectaculars is the decisive victory of authorship Burton claims over his borrowed intellectual property. Joel Schumacher, Nolan, Zack Snyder, Todd Phillips – all these film-makers have found ways to put their own brand on the Batman mythos. But none of them so fully, successfully molded it into the shape of their own preoccupations and obsessions. Batman Returns is a Tim Burton movie first, a Batman movie second. And to watch it today, at a time when finding the directorial soul of a superhero movie often requires some true detective work, is to bask in the eccentricity of its achievement. The bat signal just can’t compete with the freak flag Burton flies over the Gotham skyline.

No stakes, no danger, nothing of substance: the show has atoned for many of the Star Wars prequels’ sins, but if it’s ever going to be exciting, the action needs to focus less on the ageing Jedi
There is a scene towards the end of Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith that encapsulates everything that went wrong with the prequel trilogy.
Anakin Skywalker, Force wunderkind turned emo Jedi slayer, and Obi-Wan Kenobi, his former chum and sensei, are engaged in a lightsaber duel, ostensibly to the death. This encounter is the culmination of three films’ worth of glacial-paced inevitability. A master who must kill his student. A student convinced he’s been betrayed by his mentor. There should be excitement; a crescendo of emotion and tragedy. But there isn’t. Instead, we get unconvincing CG lava sploshing hither and thither; peril-free jumping from one high thing to another high thing; and we get this:
Obi-Wan: “Anakin, chancellor Palpatine is evil!”
Anakin: “From my point of view, the Jedi are evil!”
But even guff as bad as that isn’t the biggest problem with the scene, or the prequels as a whole. The biggest problem was how riotously boring this fight was – and, by extension, all three films were – because we already knew the outcome. Fans had known it for decades. Watching it unfold in real time was like listening to an office bore tell you in pitiless detail about the intricacies of their commute.
The worst thing was, Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan and Hayden Christensen as Anakin were trying their best. The fault never lay with them. Which is why the news that both actors would reprise their roles for a Disney+ Obi-Wan series, set a decade after the events of Episode III, was so welcome. It could be a do-over. Maybe it could even make up for the prequels’ overuse of greasy and weightless CGI, the rhythmless editing, stodgy exposition, or the cast of characters with barely a single definable characteristic besides “that one has a bushier beard”.
Obi-Wan Kenobi the TV show has generally felt like the worthy prequel we never had. The scripts sound as if they were written by people who have, at some point in their lives, said words to other humans. As we’ve come to expect since The Mandalorian, the production design and effects are so sensational as to be barely noticeable. There are no more rubbish green-screen sets or unconvincing CG characters whose explosive deaths would give you a real, worrying thrill that you could only safely admit to a therapist. There is none of the Senate plodding that smothered the prequels beneath a fatberg of stultifying nonsense. It feels like the TV show had a checklist of every flaw the prequels had, and set about addressing them all. Apart from one, that is.
The one it failed to address was, sadly, the biggest; the problem that caused that lightsaber duel at the end of Revenge of the Sith to, somehow, be duller than a Fisher Price butterknife: like the prequels before it, Obi-Wan Kenobi isn’t even remotely gripping, exciting or moreish, because we already know exactly what is going to happen. And what is going to happen is this: nothing.
At no point – from their meetings, escapes, duels, captures and preposterous, trenchcoat-dependent rescues – has it felt like Obi-Wan, Leia or even Darth Vader were in any peril, because we know they weren’t. They all survive unscathed until Episode IV. Like the prequels, audiences are going into Obi-Wan Kenobi knowing who lives and who dies, making the whole thing feel like a very expensive, very handsome entry in an appendix. The prequel films were a slog for many reasons, but high on that list is that nothing occurred at any point that was remotely unexpected. Obi-Wan Kenobi, so far at least, is circling that same plughole of ennui. There are no stakes, no danger, nothing of substance for us to sink our teeth into, and a howling vacuum where there should be a mystery to unravel.
The way around this, obviously, is to introduce secondary characters about whose fates we are unaware. This is what The Clone Wars (the animated series set between Episodes II and III) did, and that succeeded in unspooling a superb, sprawling narrative out of it. This is how Better Call Saul went from Breaking Bad prequel to probably the best TV show ever made. Prequels and high-stakes excitement don’t have to be mutually exclusive, if the prequel in question is aware that it needs to do more than merely tell us how something we already know happened, happened. The Star Wars prequel films failed in that respect. As great as Obi-Wan Kenobi is in many ways, it hasn’t yet managed to do this. Characters exist solely to be in the orbit of the Obi-Wans, Darths and Leias about whose fates we know all too much, with (spoiler alert) figures like Indira Varma’s briefly interesting undercover rebel Tala Durith being introduced and bumped off before she could become a figure of genuine significance.
If, as rumoured, season two is in development, there is still (a new) hope. As counterintuitive as it might sound, a show called Obi-Wan Kenobi needs to barely be about Obi-Wan Kenobi, and lean into new players like Moses Ingram’s morally ambiguous Reva Sevander – now one of only two newly introduced characters of note, alongside O’Shea Jackson Jr’s Roken. The supporting cast desperately needs to grow, and we need to care about those new additions. If it doesn’t and we don’t, the whole show is just another expensive lightsaber duel near some naff CG lava that even the most committed Star Wars nerd (and I’m pointing two thumbs at my own Boba Fett T-shirt here) will find themselves struggling to care about. Come on, Obi-Wan Kenobi, you’re my only hope.

A HBO documentary looks to the past – a secret, women-run network of abortion providers in the late 1960s – as a window into the future of restricted reproductive rights in the US
Regardless of whether the supreme court fully overturns Roe v Wade later this month, as indicated by the majority draft opinion leaked in May, or merely allows it to be gutted at the state level, the US will continue its years-long march backwards on reproductive rights. Abortion access in the US in 2022 mirrors 1972, the year before the supreme court ensured a woman’s right to an abortion with Roe v Wade, and a time when a sparse patchwork of legalization in a few states forced many women to seek care from dubious illegal providers or dangerous at-home methods.
The Janes, a new HBO documentary on an underground network of abortion providers in Chicago in the years just before legalization, looks to this past as a window into America’s likely post-Roe future – a US without a woman’s right to choose that is less dystopia than memory. The 101-minute film, directed by Tia Lessin and Emma Pildes, traces the personal political evolutions of several members as well as the development of the group from collection of activists who connected women with safe abortion providers – male doctors, or men who claimed to be doctors – to performing the procedure themselves. The group eventually provided over 11,000 abortions, many to poor women who could not afford another option. The same women – poor, rural, people of color, often young – who are left behind now by the extreme measures passed by Republican state legislatures banning abortion as early as six weeks into pregnancy, before most women know they’re pregnant.
“This film is instructive about what this country looks like when women’s healthcare – basic healthcare – is criminalized,” Lessin told the Guardian. “Because what we know to be true is that when abortion is illegal, it doesn’t mean that women stop seeking abortions. It just means that they don’t get access to safe abortions.” As a former Chicago ER doctor notes in the film, his hospital’s septic abortion ward – a standard feature before Roe – admitted 15-20 women a day with injuries or infections, sometimes lethal, from attempted abortions.
That danger prompted Heather Booth, interviewed in the film, to find a doctor to provide a friend’s sister with an abortion as a college student in 1965. As word of mouth spread, Booth gathered several friends from the women’s movement to share the workload, which informally became the Janes. The network eventually included numerous safe houses, clandestine drivers, phone staff, pseudonymous flyers and, once they learned one of their top doctors did not have medical license (he also appears in the film and speaks frankly about his motivation: under the table money), training to do the procedures themselves.
“There are many ways in which this film gives us an example of what it looks like to be of help and of use. And unfortunately, we’re going to need more and more of that in the years to come,” said Lessin. “It’s sort of a kick in the ass and maybe a call to action. We shouldn’t be sitting on our hands and sighing about the state of this country. There’s always something to be done. And in this case, they decided to create this network.”
The film, which includes interviews with several former Janes and archival footage of late 60s protests in Chicago, is part of a collection of recent films revisiting the pre-legalization past as access eclipses in the US. Happening, a film from the French director Audrey Diwan, turns novelist Annie Ernaux’s memoir of searching for an illegal abortion in the 1960s into a thriller. The feature film Call Jane, starring Elizabeth Banks as a fictional Jane client-turned-member-turned-abortion provider and Sigourney Weaver as a dauntless organizer modeled in part on real-life leader Jody Parsons, premiered at Sundance earlier this year and will get a wide release this fall.
Call Jane, directed by Phyllis Nagy, enlisted Jane member and documentary participant Judith Arcana as a historical consultant. Arcana was among the seven Janes arrested by Chicago police in 1972 in a sting operation and charged with conspiracy to commit abortion, with the threat of 110 years in prison. “We were ordinary women trying to save people’s lives, but we were criminals,” Arcana says in the film. (The group’s lawyer, Jo-Anne Wolfson, stalled the trial until the Roe verdict dismissed their charges.) Arcana’s son, Daniel, began production on what would become the documentary in 2016, when Trump was elected and “the writing was on the wall,” said Emma Pildes, his sister and the film’s co-director.
The context in the late 1960s is different than now, but the reasons people seek abortions – in fear, confidence or, often, desperation – remain the same. She wasn’t ready. Rape. Lack of finances. Struggling to stay afloat with the kids she has. Medical risks. She simply doesn’t want to have a child. In one of the most poignant sequences of the film, several Janes hold up the index cards used to keep track of the calls, which were read aloud and passed around to members for follow-up. There are stacks of them, each an individual case with notes such as “afraid of pain”, “terrified”, “21, has one kid, $0” and “be cautious father is a cop.”
“They weren’t just cards, you know? They were people, and I knew they were women like me,” says Diane Stevens.
Each Jane also remembers the ones who got away or could not be reached, such as a 19-year-old Black woman who entered their safe house with an infection from a botched abortion and, when told she needed to go to the hospital, fled. The Janes later learned she died of septicemia. “We felt an enormous amount of guilt connected to this,” says Martha Scott, a former Jane, in the film. “Not that this was our doing, but she came through our hands, and we didn’t do enough.”
“We show really clearly in the film what happens when abortion is legal in one state and not legal in another,” Lessin said. “We saw who’s able to make the trip and who gets left behind. It’s very cut and dried. It’s along racial lines, it’s along economic lines – we saw it then and we’re seeing it right now, and we will see it on steroids in the coming years.”
The threat of anti-choice legislation is clear on the horizon; 13 states have so-called “trigger” bans ready to go into effect the day Roe is overturned, passed by conservative legislatures deeply out of step with more nuanced public opinion, which favors abortion access. Reproductive rights epitomizes the hardening of minority rule in the US; the issue is not changing public opinion but having a democracy which reflects it.
Asked, along those lines, if they hoped to reach anti-choice audiences, Pildes answered: “We don’t need to,” as most polls find between 85% to 90% of Americans think abortion should be legal in at least some circumstances. “It would be nice and certainly one of the things that we want to promote is dialogue. We want people to be having conversations about it for various reasons, not just to change hearts and minds but to de-stigmatize it and make people who have had abortions not feel like pariahs, shamed or that they’ve done something wrong.”
“We can’t control what people do with what we’ve done,” said Lessin. “Mostly I hope that, after the credits roll, they can feel the emotions around what it looks like when abortion is criminalized. That they can feel the anger that we felt, they can feel the commitment to prevent us from going back.”
The Janes premieres on HBO and HBO Max on 8 June, Foxtel and Binge in Australia on 9 June, and will air in the UK at a later date

Author Laura Kay is part of a new wave of authors releasing uplifting queer literature that casts its characters as the heroes of their lives – not the victims
“I have read some really fantastic fiction about queer women, but I have quite often felt that it leans towards the slightly gloomier side,” says author Laura Kay. For the London-based writer, it was natural that her debut novel, The Split, would be a romcom. “I really just wrote the story that I wanted to read,” she says. Published last year, the story follows Ally, who, after a savage break-up, moves to Sheffield – taking her ex-girlfriend’s cat, Malcolm, with her.
Only after The Split was published did Kay realise its significance. “Other people started reading it, and telling me, ‘Oh my God, this is the first time I’ve read this story about queer women,’” she says. Readers praised the novel for being refreshingly joyful and funny – including a happy ending, which is not that common for a book with an LGBTQ+ plot. Kay also deliberately avoided reference to any trauma surrounding Ally’s sexuality.
Published in April, Kay’s most recent book, Tell Me Everything, is another romcom, this time about therapist Natasha, who is still living with her ex-girlfriend. But Kay’s book is far from alone. This summer, a host of LGBTQ+ romcom novels are coming out (excuse the pun), crammed with blossoming romances and glittery escapism. “It feels like there’s sort of a shift,” says Kay. “I think that’s because the people that make the decisions are seeing that there’s an audience that are desperate to read queer romcoms.”
These titles include Lily Lindon’s recently published Double Booked, about a 26-year-old woman who realises that she is bisexual, and two queer coming-of-age novels: Cynthia So’s young adult novel If You Still Recognise Me and Henry Fry’s First Time for Everything. It’s a boom reflected in film and TV, too, notably with the release of Netflix’s Heartstopper, based on Alice Oseman’s graphic novel of the same name.
“Whenever I saw queer women represented, which was almost never, it always ended in tragedy,” says author Adiba Jaigirdar. “Even more than that, I never saw queer Muslim women represented or queer women of colour.” In a sign that this trend will continue, Jaigirdar releases her novel, Donut Fall in Love, next year. It sounds delightfully messy: Bangladeshi-Irish teen Shireen goes on a baking show with her ex-girlfriend and another girl on whom she develops a crush.
It follows Jaigirdar’s first two novels, The Henna Wars – which was included in TIME’s 100 Best Young Adult Books of All Time – and Hani and Ishu’s Guide to Fake Dating, both featuring heartwarming love stories between young queer Muslim women. Until now, people like Jaigirdar had “never been given the narrative of happiness,” she says.
Although not strictly a romcom, Ryan O’Connell’s uplifting Just By Looking at Him, published earlier this month, offers much-needed representation to LGBTQ+ people with disabilities – the main character being a gay man with cerebral palsy – while Florence Given’s Girlcrush, published in August, is described by the author as: “queer, hilarious and full of joy”. Matt Cain’s latest novel The Secret Life of Albert Entwistle follows Albert, a closeted 64-year-old postman, as he sets out to reconnect with his former boyfriend. Cain believes the increase in LGBTQ+ fiction is in part the result of “greater visibility”, which he says has “showed the general population that we’re just like them”.
He adds that “acceptance is so much higher now than it was when I was growing up in the 1980s, way higher than I ever expected it would be.”
The Secret Life of Albert Entwistle has connected with straight and LGBTQ+ readers alike, Cain says. “Queer fiction can be freeing for all kinds of people who’ve felt limited or rejected or shamed by society,” he says.
Largely because of the popularity of Netflix’s Bridgerton, there’s a new demand for queer regency romcoms. One such historical romance is Alexis Hall’s A Lady for a Duke , which has a transgender heroine. Meanwhile Lex Croucher’s Infamous, out in July, is described on the cover as “Booksmart meets Bridgerton”, and includes bisexual, lesbian and non-binary characters. Croucher’s previous novel Reputation was another regency-era romcom. “The publishing industry is coming to the realisation that there is an audience for this stuff, there is money to be made telling these stories,” Croucher says.
It was while reading Casey McQuiston’s 2019 novel Red, White and Royal Blue that, says Croucher, “made everything click into place” when it came to their own bisexuality. “I’ve seen for myself, in my own life, how much of an impact seeing those journeys reflected in fiction can have on a person,” they add. McQuiston’s hotly anticipated next book, I Kissed Shara Wheeler, a young-adult fiction romcom, came out in May.
For authors writing queer romcoms, though, there is the added complexity of deciding when to represent the traumas that many LGBTQ+ still face, such as discrimination and familial rejection. Indeed, authors quoted in this article stressed the importance of having books focusing on these issues, coexisting with the positive stories.
This was the case for Chencia C Higgins who, in her recent novel D’Vaughn and Kris Plan a Wedding, incorporates obstacles faced by character D’Vaughn who comes out to her religious family, while still ensuring that “my girls get their happily ever after”, she says. “Having queer romcoms exploding the way they’re doing has been so awesome,” Higgins says. “Queer people are out here, living and loving, and having a grand old time, and we need to see that in our books.”
Higgins is also giving much-needed representation of queer black women in a genre dominated by white authors. “For so many black queer women, they do not see themselves and they deserve to,” she says. The impact of her latest book is clear. “This is the kind of feelgood black LGBTQ romance I’ve been craving and the world could use more of,” reads one five-star online review.
Kay, meanwhile, has chosen to include some “struggles around queerness” in her next book, but says the “overall message is that there is joy and happiness to be found for everyone”. Yes, LGBTQ+ people may face additional barriers, but lots of us just want our happy ending, too – whatever form that may take.

For young actor Anson Boon, playing Johnny Rotten Danny Boyle’s Pistol is a dream come true. But what did punk teach him about himself?
Something is clearly wrong, I realise, as Anson Boon sips peppermint tea in a plant-filled café in east London, relishing one of the last moments of calm before his career blows up. The 22-year-old actor can soon be seen playing the punk icon Johnny Rotten in Pistol, Danny Boyle’s new six-part Sex Pistols biopic on Disney+. It’s the sort of role that will define how he’s seen for years to come: menacing, volatile, a little dangerous. And yet, how to put this? He’s so nice! So un-punkishly pleased to be here. The kind of boy my mum would love, all “Yes mate!” and “I love my pubs!” and “I’m moving up in the world” (in reference to the fact that his tea comes in an actual pot).
“I feel a bit like Hannah Montana sometimes,” he says, a reference to the Disney Channel sitcom in which Miley Cyrus played an ordinary school girl with a popstar alter ego. “Like, I get to do these cool things and go to photoshoots and fly to LA and stuff like that and that’s when I’m Hannah… Then I go back home to Peterborough and I’m back with my mates that I’ve been to school with and they’re all builders and plumbers and stuff and I love it.”
Which is not a comparison I can see endearing the young lad to Lydon, who has done everything in his power to stop the biopic from happening, including taking his former bandmates to court (and losing) and complaining that Disney has created a “middle-class fairytale”. But Boon, as it emerges, is very far from your typical middle class thespian, and there is something impressively self-willed about the way he has made himself one of the hottest young English actors around.
No one in his family or circle has ever done anything remotely like acting, he says. He’s wearing Comme des Garçons sneakers, a green military jacket and a hip Japanese T-shirt that his dad bought him (“I have a very cool dad”), together with his grandad’s signet ring and his nan’s chain. Family is clearly important to him. His mum was one of four siblings whose entire family lived in a single room in a house in Tottenham until they were relocated to a council house in Peterborough in the 1960s. “They were what you call an overspill family. You can kind of follow the M1 and the A10 north of London and all of the towns along the way are hubs of old working-class Londoners that went to start a new family in their new council house, back when you actually got a house.” The other side is from farming stock. Anson’s grandad is still growing potatoes at 85 (he employs Anson’s younger brother), while his dad runs a small business selling garage equipment, which employs various aunts and uncles, too. Boon’s principal passions outside acting are Tottenham Hotspur FC and “shit pubs”, in particular the Antwerp Arms near the Spurs ground. “It’s literally five doors down from the house with that one bedroom that my mum grew up in. Spurs bought shares in that pub to keep it afloat. That’s our club!”
What made him want to be an actor? “Honestly, I have no idea, mate!” He reckons it might have been watching Tom Hanks in Forrest Gump. Or Dirty Dancing. But he does know it’s what he’s always wanted to do – he’s always made people laugh by doing stupid impressions. His mum has a picture of the Hollywood sign that he drew when he was six. When I ask him who his heroes are now, he reels off Gary Oldman, Cillian Murphy, Matthew McConnaughey. But when he left his comprehensive school at 16 he had no connections in the acting world or really a single clue what he was doing.
He did, however, have the internet. He made his way into the industry by watching how-to videos that various casting agents had uploaded on to YouTube. “I asked for a proper camera to do auditions for Christmas when I was 17 and I bought myself some blue wallpaper because they say blue is flattering for self tapes,” he says. “I didn’t go to drama school, so I had it in my head that if I wanted people to take me seriously and if I wanted people to bring me in for serious auditions then I had to commit to looking serious about it.”
I tell them that, having interviewed a few next-big-things about the challenges of boarding school, and the burdens of having parents who are also actors, this is all refreshing. “Actually, my mum’s head of Apple TV,” he jokes. “Nah, it’s not that vibe! I mean I had a really nice childhood, and my parents are so great and so supportive. But I’m definitely aware of what it’s like to not grow up with those things.”
His first really decent role came in the late Roger Michell’s 2019 family ensemble drama, Blackbird, an experience that resulted in him, Susan Sarandon and Kate Winslet all getting matching tattoos (a blackbird, on his inner arm). “I was kind of like a sponge when I was 18, 19, working with these people, taking in all the best parts of their process.” Roles in Sam Mendes’s First World War drama 1917 and the play Master Harold and the Boys at the National Theatre followed, before he was invited to audition for an “Untitled Danny Boyle Series” midway through the first Covid lockdown.
He made it through the first round of general auditions before he was asked to film himself again, this time for the role of John Lydon. He got his mum to film him recreating Lydon’s own audition for the band: an improvisation on Alice Cooper’s I’m Eighteen in front of Sex Pistols guitarist Steve Jones and manager Malcolm McLaren in Vivienne Westwood’s boutique. “That scene is so pivotal because it’s like now or never, this is the chance,” says Boon. “My parents were like: ‘Are you sure you want to go that hard for your audition?’ I said: ‘Do you know what? I feel like I’m either definitely going to get it or they’re going to say what the fuck?’”
And here began the stuff of boyhood dreams. Boon was airlifted out of lockdown for long discussions in the pub with Boyle, meetings with Steve Jones, Chrissy Hynde, Vivienne Westwood and the rest, plus three months of “bandcamp”. Rehearsals took place at the old ITV studio overlooking the Houses of Parliament on the Thames, where Boon and the rest of the band were required to learn the full Pistols set list to near professional standard because Boyle wanted all the music to be played live on set. “I think we formed a bit of a brotherhood for life,” Boon says.
The series, based on Lonely Boy, the 2016 memoir by Jones, looks to have the career-launching potential of Boyle’s 1996 classic Trainspotting, which propelled Ewan McGregor, Kelly Macdonald, Robert Carlyle and Johnny Lee Miller towards stardom. Here, Toby Wallace is magnetic as Jones, and you might recognise Thomas Brodie-Sangster, the kid from Love Actually, as manager McLaren (or “the most evil man in the world,” as Lydon once called him.)
The Sex Pistols story is already one of the most fabled in rock’n’roll: the filth, the fury, the C-word on ITV, that gig that inspired everyone in Manchester to form a band, the Silver Jubilee, the BBC ban, Sid and Nancy, death, disorder, defiance, etc. But the focus on Jones gives Pistol a less familiar centre of gravity, emphasising the child abuse, rejection and delinquency that gave rise to the band’s music. The script, by Baz Luhrmann’s long-term collaborator Craig Pearce, won’t delight every punk fan, but taken as a whole is a sincere attempt to chart punk’s seismic impact on British culture. The thing that the director wanted to impress most on his young cast was just how boring England was until the Sex Pistols came along. “I think it was perhaps the first thing he ever said to me after I was cast,” Boon says. “And he kept reminding us of that, just how dull it was [at the time], and just how outrageous this boy with bright orange spiky hair and a bright pink blazer with safety pins and Tic Tac lids stuck on to it really was.”
Boon and his castmates soon discovered that the idea that anyone can play punk is a myth. “I mean, the way John sings is not easy,” says Boon, who had no prior musical experience. But they all had a sense they were getting somewhere when Jordan (Pamela Rooke), the model and muse credited with creating the punk look, dropped by the rehearsal rooms one afternoon and asked them to play for her.
“That was like big nerves,” says Boon. “I said: ‘What song do you want us to play?’ She said Holidays in the Sun, which is one of the hardest ones. So we did it and her reaction was just like more than we could’ve hoped for. She said: ‘I feel like I’ve just watched them again.’” She thanked him with a present of a face mask made from vintage Vivienne Westwood fabric and a small acting note. “She said: ‘Just make sure you curl your toes in a bit more because John was a bit pigeon-toed.’” Rooke died earlier this year – the face mask means even more to him now.
It feels cruel to interrupt Boon’s reminiscences of what was clearly the time of his life to point out that the idea of a biopic of the Sex Pistols (to be screened on Disney+, no less) is something Lydon himself has taken as a grave personal insult. I read Boon out a few of the comments that Lydon has made since his failed attempt to stop the series left him facing financial ruin: “Disney has stolen the past”…“Middle-class fantasy”… “Rewriting history”… “It would be funny if it wasn’t tragic.” What’s Boon’s response to all that?
He has clearly anticipated the question and, at first, his answer seems prepared. “First of all, Danny comes from a working-class background,” he says. “To me he’s a true hero because he really wants to respect the voices of working-class people.” But then the emotion cracks through. “I love John,” he says. “I’m really sorry that John feels this way; we really wanted him to be involved. I would’ve loved to speak to him. I thought I was going to speak to him. But the fact that he wasn’t involved genuinely spurred me on to keep trying to respect his voice and chase authenticity in my performance.”
Boyle told each cast member that it was their job to know more about their character than anyone else, including him. So Boon spent every spare moment “running the John department” reading Lydon’s three memoirs, YouTubing all the Lydon interviews he could find (including the one where he outed Jimmy Savile as a paedophile in 1978, allegedly leading to him being banned by the BBC), as well as all the concert footage. “He never stutters: that’s one thing I noticed about him early on. He’s such a wordsmith, so intelligent and quick-witted. He always says he spent a lot of time in the library growing up.”
He had to remind himself, in the end, that he was making a drama as opposed to a documentary. “But what lets me sleep at night is the fact that I know that I actually really like this man. I am a huge fan of his. Nothing I ever did in my performance came from a place of anything other than respect and admiration.”
Boon recently read that Lydon intends to watch the series and he hopes that if he does, it will finally vindicate the whole thing. “I’ve left so many clues and hints that I hope he will see. I completely learned to be left-handed. I only ever ate foods I know he loved; I always drink his favourite beer. I made sure that every detail down to the last gig where possible was correct.” And if he still hates it? Well, so be it. Lydon didn’t get where he was by being nice. When he issued his most recent denouncement of the project, Boon texted his fellow cast member, Talulah Riley, who plays Vivienne Westwood: “Is it weird that this endears me to him even more? Like, he says all these hateful things and I love it because that is Johnny Rotten. That’s the guy I love and I admire.”
The world is about to open for Boon. But he has no intention of leaving his parents’ home in Peterborough any time soon: he’s too attached to his nights out in Flares with his mates; his Spurs; the freedom of ordinariness. He is currently single (“You’re not gonna get me on women!”). And, as it stands, his biggest extravagance is: “I like a really wanky, fruity IPA – I’m partial to one of them, yeah.”
He has left the next few months deliberately free. But the experience of being a Pistol is informing his approach. “I find myself saying no to things a lot less now. Life is so short. Who cares what people think about you? I think I was more uptight before this job. Now I just say yes – just don’t give a fuck. That’s what punk taught me.”
Pistol is now streaming on Disney+
Stylist Helen Seamons; fashion assistant Peter Bevan; production Alex Oley; grooming Petra Sellge at the Wall Group using Daimon Barber grooming range.

Broadway transfers of West End shows were out in front at this year’s celebration of the best of New York theatre
Broadway transfers of West End adaptations of The Lehman Trilogy and Company have dominated this year’s Tony awards, which were seen as a return to relative normal after Covid-impacted ceremonies.
It was a big night for British talent in New York, with the Broadway transfer of The Lehman Trilogy winning best play, best director and best actor in a play. “This play was written as a hymn to the city of New York but, like the Lehman brothers themselves, our show started thousands of miles away,” said playwright Ben Power, who adapted the show from Italian novelist and playwright Stefano Massini. His version made its debut at London’s National Theatre in 2018.
The play’s director, Sam Mendes, picked up his second Tony award, using his speech to herald “a season of such rampant creativity and diversity” and thanked his colleagues for “keeping this show alive during some pretty dark days”. Simon Russell Beale was also named best actor in a play, saying he felt “a little sheepish” that he won over his two nominated co-stars, Adrian Lester and Adam Godley. The Lehman Trilogy also won for scenic design and lighting of a play.
The Broadway transfer of Company, which originated in London’s West End, was named best revival of a musical. Patti LuPone, who won an Olivier for the role, beat out A Strange Loop’s L Morgan Lee, who was the first openly transgender actor to receive a Tony nomination, for best featured actress in a musical.
LuPone thanked “all of the Covid safety people”. In reference to a video that went viral last month in which an audience member at a post-show Q&A screamed that she paid LuPone’s salary after LuPone asked her to put her mask over her nose, she also thanked producer Chris Harper, “who pays my salary”.
Matt Doyle was also named best featured actor in a musical for Company, which also won for scenic design and directing of a musical. The musical’s creator, Stephen Sondheim, who died last year, featured in the ceremony’s In Memoriam section.
Pulitzer-winning musical A Strange Loop was named best musical, having led the night with 11 nominations. Its writer, Michael R Jackson, also won best book. “I’m so speechless, I should have written down a speech,” he joked before stressing the importance not just of representation but also “doing the very best work we can do”. The show tells the story of a Black queer man writing about a musical about a Black queer man.
The Michael Jackson musical MJ saw wins for Myles Frost for best lead actor in a musical as well as for lighting, sound design and choreography. Joaquina Kalukango was also named best lead actress in a musical for Paradise Square. She thanked her parents for “sacrificing everything” and “all of the nameless ancestors who have suffered”.
West Side Story Oscar-winner Ariana DeBose was host and called the ceremony “the first Tony awards since Broadway got its groove back”. A more diverse season than ever before, with plays from seven Black playwrights, DeBose joked that the “great white way is becoming more of a nickname than a how-to guide”.
Phylicia Rashad, who was the first Black actor to win best actress in a play for A Raisin in the Sun in 2004, won best featured actress in a play for her role in Skeleton Crew.
Richard Greenberg’s Take Me Out won for best revival of a play while Modern Family star Jesse Tyler Ferguson was named best featured actor in a play for his role, beating out co-stars Jesse Williams and Michael Oberholtzer.
Deirdre O’Connell was named best lead actress in a play for Dana H, a drama which saw her mime audio footage from playwright Lucas Hnath’s mother detailing a harrowing true story of kidnap. The show also won for sound design in a play.
The British musical Six, in which Henry VIII’s wives give a pop concert, won best original score (music and lyrics) for Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss, who first created it while students at Cambridge University. Six’s costume designer Gabriella Slade also won in her category.
Angela Lansbury was given the lifetime achievement award for her long and storied career on stage. The 96-year-old had previously won five Tony awards, for shows including Gypsy, Sweeney Todd and Blithe Spirit. She was unable to attend, but musical tribute was paid by the New York City Gay Men’s Chorus.
Last year’s Tony awards were affected by the truncated season, with just a handful of eligible shows. This year, 34 productions were able to be nominated and 29 of them managed to score at least one nod.
The pandemic continues to affect Broadway box office, with the 2021-2022 season raking in around US$845m (£688m), compared with the historic high of $1.8bn of 2018-2019.
Attendees this year who were sitting in the orchestra section were not required to wear masks but PCR testing was mandatory. Those sitting further from the stage had to remain masked for the duration.

The Pyramid stage’s youngest ever headliner looks entirely at home, giving an imperious, hugely engaging performance
It’s not just that Billie Eilish is, as she’s keen to point out, the youngest headliner in Glastonbury’s history … it’s that she’s the first mainstream pop star – as in the kind of pop star that tweenage girls scream at – to headline Glastonbury. A few years ago, the announcement of an artist like that filling the main Friday night slot on the Pyramid stage would probably have generated a degree of controversy. Some berk would have got up a petition about it. But in 2022, the appearance of Billie Eilish’s name at the top of the bill passed without comment.
Whether that’s evidence that Glastonbury’s audience is skewing younger, or that Glastonbury is becoming more pop-facing in the artists it books, or that Eilish is considered of a slightly different stripe to her peers, is an interesting question. Watching her bounce from the industrial electro pop of You Should See Me in a Crown, to the kitschy lounge stylings of Billie’s Bossa Nova, to the Beatles-y Getting Older, to the Dr Dre-influenced All the Good Girls Go to Hell, one is struck by the sense that she’s certainly more musically eclectic than most of her peers. And if you get the impression that festivals aren’t necessarily her natural habitat – “you guys are troupers, with your tents and shit”, she opines at one point – from the moment she appears, she looks entirely at home.
While many of the artists who appear on the Pyramid stage on Friday seem overawed by the size of the crowd they’ve attracted and the vociferousness of their response – at one point, it looks like Sam Fender is so struck by the moment he might start crying – Eilish looks anything but. There’s something imperious about her performance: it all feels appealingly confident. The set is essentially a truncated version of the show she’s been touring around arenas in recent months, and it comes complete with pop arena show staples including dividing the audience up and getting them to cheer in turn, a lot of talk about empowerment and loving yourself, and videos of the artist as a small child playing on the big screens. But it doesn’t lose anything in translation to a festival setting. If she asks the audience to crouch down and jump, they happily oblige. It’s heavy on slow-moving ballads, which is theoretically risky, but she never seems to lose the crowd.
Perhaps that’s because Eilish is a hugely engaging performer. Moreover she genuinely appears to be enjoying herself, at odds with her pouty gothic image and the plethora of songs on her last album – Happier Than Ever – that made being a teenage pop sensation when you’re barely out of her teens sound like a pretty miserable business. Her enthusiasm is infectious, her biggest hits – Bury a Friend, Bad Guy – pack an immense bass-heavy punch, while the ballad Your Power, introduced with a mention of the overturning of Roe Vs Wade as “a dark day for women”, has a spellbinding, eerie fragility. By the time she ends with Happier Than Ever’s slowly-building title track – its furiously angry crescendo given an extra layer of theatricality by the sheer quantity of pyrotechnics exploding over the stage – her performance doesn’t just seem like a musical shift for Glastonbury, but a triumph as well.

The director remembers her friend, Talawa theatre company co-founder and EastEnders star as a rare talent with phenomenal attention to detail
Mavis Chin came to England from Jamaica to take up acting. In those far off days there was no possibility of earning a living acting in her homeland so she studied shorthand and typewriting, saved every penny and finally arrived in England with the intention of going on the stage.
She did. During the long course of her career from a walk-on in The World of Suzie Wong to starring with Dame Edith Evans in the play The Adventures of the Black Girl in her Search for God in 1968, one could never second guess her revelatory takes on the characters she played.
She changed her names: Mavis became Mona, Chin became Hammond. These changes took place early in her stage career as one way of avoiding stereotypical casting. Mona Hammond had a rare talent. Her attention to detail was phenomenal. As Lady Bracknell in The Importance of Being Earnest, in 1989, she spent hours just getting the twist in the wrist right for her fan.
She dug so deeply into the characters she played that she became influenced by them in her daily life. Working over a lifetime with this remarkable actor was revelatory, inspiring, and as many with whom she worked found, challenging. One night I stood at the back of the auditorium checking on our King Lear production in 1994. When she came on I quite forgot it was Mona and became caught up in her dual personality portrayal of Shakespeare’s Fool. I was shaken to the core not to have recognised my friend in the role.
Mona was one of the founder members of Talawa theatre company in 1986. She was involved right from the start and was determined for it to succeed. She acted in many of the first productions of the company. This was her way of hitching her colours to the mast. There was her groundbreaking Lady Bracknell, but her slave woman in our second play, An Echo in the Bone (1986), was something that stays with you. The BBC “found” her in King Lear and whisked her away to EastEnders but that’s life.
Mona was good at giving gifts. She spent hours in junk shops, upmarket emporiums, everywhere to find the perfect “little something” to fit the occasion. She found small, out of the way Chinese restaurants to hide away from prying eyes and devote herself to the matter of eating, which she did with great relish yet still staying as thin as a rake.
Mona was a friend, a colleague and a most honest critic. Walk good girl.

Novaya Gazeta editor Dmitry Muratov will sell 23-carat gold medal in US on Monday, donating proceeds to charity
The editor of the Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta is auctioning his Nobel peace prize medal, with the proceeds to go to helping children displaced by the war in Ukraine.
Dmitry Muratov led one of the last major independent media outlets critical of Vladimir Putin’s government after others either closed or had their websites blocked after the invasion of Ukraine. In March, Novaya Gazeta announced it was suspending operations for the duration of the war after it became a crime to report anything on the conflict that veered from the government line.
Muratov was awarded the Nobel peace prize medal last October. He later announced he would donate the $500,000 prize money to charity “to give the children refugees a chance for a future”. His 23-carat gold Nobel medal will go on sale in New York at 7pm ET (midnight BST) on Monday, coinciding with World Refugee Day. All proceeds will go to Unicef, to help child refugees from Ukraine.
In a video released by Heritage Auctions, which is handling the sale, Muratov said he wanted the sale to be the “beginning of a flashmob, as an example to follow so people auction their valuable possessions to help Ukrainians”.
In an interview last month, Muratov said the auction was “an act of solidarity” with the 14 million Ukrainians displaced by the Russian invasion, which he called “a tragedy”.
“If we look at the number of refugees, we basically have world war three, not a local conflict,” he said. “This has been a mistake, and we need to end it.”
Novaya Gazeta, established in 1993 after the break-up of the Soviet Union, investigated corruption inside and outside Russia as well as the long wars in Chechnya. Muratov dedicated his award to the memory of six of the paper’s journalists who were murdered for their work.

In an expansive new biography, the acclaimed writer and director’s complexities are explored and contextualised
You can’t chart the whole of Nora Ephron with just the name-making hits that placed her atop the end-of-the-century romcom boom, but you can’t do so without them, either. The polymath writer’s best-known traits – her barbed wit, her particular taste mistaken by some for pickiness, her profound and enduring love of food – course through scripting gigs like When Harry Met Sally … as well as such directorial projects as Sleepless in Seattle and You’ve Got Mail. Lovelorn and loquacious, this is the Nora fans feel they know well enough to assume the first-name basis, a characterization that only covers one side of a many-splendored woman. Kristin Marguerite Doidge, the author of the newly released Nora Ephron: A Biography, hopes to expand the image of a singular talent for the blinker-visioned faithful and uninitiated alike.
“She wrote for five or six decades, and so everyone comes to her from a different angle,” Doidge tells the Guardian from her home in Los Angeles. “Some people might have seen Heartburn before anything else, or maybe you remember seeing This Is My Life with your grandma. Some people find her much later, when she was feeling bad about her neck. The general public tends to think of her as the romantic comedy queen, the lady who did You’ve Got Mail. That’s just one part of her, and what she stands for. A lot of the younger generation doesn’t even know Nora and her movies. I teach at a university, and when I say her name, I get a lot of blank stares. It’s crazy!”
Though Doidge can hardly blame them; it wasn’t so long ago that she considered herself an Ephron neophyte. “I came to her movies later,” she says. “I feel bad saying it, but I wasn’t a diehard. I never associated Nora with Silkwood prior to working on this book. Growing up in the 80s and 90s, I saw Sleepless in Seattle. I heard of When Harry Met Sally … but I wasn’t allowed to watch it! Too scandalous, never knew why at the time. And isn’t that telling, how the woman experiencing pleasure was seen as too much for a kid. As a kid, you don’t even really get the joke!”
Doidge came to kneel at the altar of Nora in 2014, as she searched for a subject capable of sustaining her master’s thesis. The unusual trajectory of Ephron’s career, which began with a groundbreaking tenure in journalism and didn’t reach the directing phase until her 50s, gave Doidge something she could connect to. She came to see Ephron’s fully formed, well-documented worldview as a lens through which she could look at today’s reality. “Around this time, I’d also become invested in this idea that research shows young people are getting married less and waiting longer to do it, and I was curious about why that’s happening,” she says. “I thought, ‘Huh, here’s a woman writing through the women’s rights movement and going on to make these earnest romantic comedies, what would she make of that?’”
Besides outlining a compact chronology of Ephron’s early years and the career she maintained to her deathbed, Doidge’s book highlights the contradictions of the soul contained within a cynical romantic as quick to belittle those close to her as she was to love them. Ephron was famed for her fierce intellect and unsparing sense of humor, and as is so often the case with funny people, the combination could alienate those in her crosshairs. Friends resented how their words or details of their lives had a funny way of ending up in her writing, a habit she never believed should require permission. As Doidge interviewed Ephron’s confidant Richard Cohen and talked her way through the many doors he opened for her, she came to understand this flinty personality as someone sincerely unconcerned with what other people thought about her.
“When I see her in old interviews, she seems so secure in her analyses,” Doidge says. “The interviewer says she was mean to such-and-such, and she says, ‘Well, you have a soft spot for her and I don’t.’ That was just how she saw it, and she wasn’t afraid to say so. If it was in service of making a point or getting a laugh, I think she didn’t mind hurting someone. Someone recently asked me about Joan Didion, and whether Nora came down on the wrong side of her movement. I think it’s crucial for us to realize and remember that these were women working in the context of a very different time. She was critical of her classmates at Wellesley for what she perceived as a lack of toughness, an unwillingness to fight for better conditions for women. I think she also found it silly that that was a thing at all. She had a complicated relationship with the concept of feminism.”
Along with Doidge, we gradually get a wider view of Ephron’s layered psychology and its formative pieces, a dotted line connecting a harsh, undesired youth to an adulthood spent melding levity with angst. Her lesser-known pictures – This Is My Life, Mixed Nuts, the adaptation of her own roman à clef novel Heartburn – give us what Doidge calls “the warmth we crave so badly” while crucially pairing it with a sober-eyed take on the unglamorous aspects of romance or family. We’re moved by the various flirtations of Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks because they’re imperfect and human in frank, even embarrassing ways more truthful than the done-to-death klutziness meant to humanize so many romcom heroines. She wanted her characters to be as multifaceted as the people she knew best, like her sister and regular co-writer Delia; they loved one another as much as siblings can, which is why they sometimes came to blows so bitter that they’d cut off communication for weeks at a time.
“For better or worse, she was the daughter of alcoholics,” Doidge explains. “That was a lifelong journey, understanding how someone you love and admire and look up to can also be falling apart, how to love someone who isn’t just one thing. You see that again with Carl [Bernstein], who she loved so deeply, the father of her babies, who also hurt her beyond what she could take. But she’d just brush herself and say ‘OK!’ and move on to figuring it out. The process of finding your person can sometimes look different than what we originally thought.”
She’s present in every silver-screen attraction in thrall to its own dysfunction, but Ephron’s influence stretches beyond estimation. Tom Hanks told Doidge that every movie he’s done since Saving Private Ryan has been informed in some way by one of the books his dear friend Nora gifted him. Ephron blazed a trail through Hollywood now followed by humorists like Tina Fey and Mindy Kaling; producers hoping to take a more decisive role in the architecture of industry power, such as Reese Witherspoon, also follow in her footsteps. Ephron’s mother always liked to say that “everything is copy,” a truism insofar as every year brings a batch of Ephron knock-offs with a fraction of the conviction and naked honesty she committed to every word. For her, however, the mantra referred to how art didn’t just imitate life but translate it, putting her struggles and joys right on to the page. Doidge sums it up tidily: “All her movies are nonfiction.”
Nora Ephron: A Biography is out now

Fans of movie explosions get another chance to spend time with the character that inspired Ronald Reagan
Forty years on, here’s a rerelease of the first movie in the Rambo series from 1982: the watchable if entirely preposterous exploitation-action picture in which star and co-writer Sylvester Stallone makes his first appearance as John Rambo, the decorated Green Beret, Vietnam veteran and commando übermensch in a permanent rage at the way he and his fellow soldiers were let down. It climaxes with an entirely bizarre speech from Rambo on the subject of his PTSD, delivered in Stallone’s unintelligible slurred drone: “Igghh sawfff bodyghhh partghhs everyghrhwhere…!”
This was actually the film that came before the one that made Rambo a real movie icon, Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985), where he has to go back to Vietnam for a fantasy replay of the war on the grounds that he is searching for urban-mythic “MIA POWs”. That was the movie that Ronald Reagan watched in the middle of the 1985 Beirut hostage crisis and famously said: “Boy, after seeing Rambo last night, I know what to do next time this happens.”
As the first story begins, John Rambo is back from ’Nam and sort of walking the earth, Caine-style, looking for an old comrade and stunned to hear he has died from cancer due to Agent Orange. The film certainly does not detain its audience with any pinko-liberal whining on the subject of how Agent Orange did a fair bit of damage to Vietnamese civilians, and not just Rambo’s brothers-in-arms. Then a swaggering bully of a local police chief (Brian Dennehy) unjustly picks Rambo up for vagrancy and takes him down to the station-house where he is beaten up. Rambo busts out of there, and is pursued to a remote gorge where this special forces hombre holds out against hundreds of beta-male cops and there’s only one person who can talk him down: Rambo’s old commanding officer, Colonel Trautman, played by Richard Crenna.
Devotees of old-school 80s action will enjoy this all over again, and I like to see the Pointless Action Explosions (Rambo torches an entire gas station here for the hell of it), and of course people getting thrown through stunt sugar-glass windows, which happened all the time in that era. But for me, Rambo never had the wit or the dramatic limberness of Bruce Willis’s John McClane in the Die Hard series.
Rambo: First Blood is released on 24 June in cinemas.

After 50 years, the prize has been scrapped. How did it change Britain’s literary landscape? And what happened at the awards when Margaret Drabble was seated next to Theresa May?
Margaret Drabble was a bright young star with five novels to her name in 1971, when she was talked into joining her old friend JB Priestley on the judging panel for a new book prize. “Jack told me that I should spend the fee (which came in wine) by choosing some very nice half-bottles to drink by myself, which I did,” she recalls.
Drabble argued for a biography of the playwright Henrik Ibsen, Priestley was keen on a novel by Gerda Charles, and their fellow judge, the critic Anthony Thwaite, championed a poetry collection by Geoffrey Hill. The glory of the new, brewery-sponsored awards was that all three could have prizes, so it all went swimmingly, with none of the squabbles that had already begun to bedevil the Booker, launched two years earlier. These arguments had included one over the literary quality of a certain Margaret Drabble, who (according to Booker judge Dame Rebecca West) would insist on lowering the tone by writing about the washing-up.
The USP of the Whitbreads, which morphed into the Costas 14 years before they were abruptly scrapped this month, was that they didn’t buy into that sort of literary snobbery. For 50 years, they spread a wide and egalitarian net across different genres, supporting bookshops as well as writers and publishers (later panels would include a bookseller). Drabble doesn’t remember much about that first awards ceremony, except that Hill was “quite grumpy”. The following year, poetry was dropped as a category, in favour of children’s fiction. It would take 15 years for it to be reinstated, as part of a roster that by then had grown to include first novels alongside novels, children’s fiction and biography.
Yet poetry, so often consigned to the literary ghetto, would come to be one of the great beneficiaries of the awards, winning nine of the 36 books of the year, an overarching category introduced in 1985 that brought the medieval epic Beowulf and Ovid’s Metamorphosis to the bookshelves of England in the late 1990s (thanks to those rockstars of rhyme Seamus Heaney and Ted Hughes). It was a lower-key collection – Hannah Lowe’s The Kids, inspired by life as a schoolteacher – that became the final overall winner this February.
“Winning the Costa book of the year has meant that collections which might normally have only sold hundreds of copies have gone on to sell tens of thousands, so that’s been wonderful in widening readership in the UK to people who might never have thought that poetry written in these times had anything to offer them,” says Neil Astley, editor of Bloodaxe Books, which published both Lowe and Helen Dunmore’s posthumous 2017 winner, Inside the Wave.
But it’s a sad economic reality that poetry’s gain was usually the book trade’s loss. The shadow of a sigh would pass through the room – originally a banqueting hall in Whitbread’s East End brewery, and latterly a moshpit in the West End – whenever a poet was announced overall winner. That’s because the industry knew it would make more money from a well-known novelist, a timely piece of non-fiction or an agenda-seizing debut.
But even the category winners could get a big boost from the award. Last year’s first novel winner, Open Water by Caleb Azumah Nelson, for example, was already lined up to be Waterstones’s book of the month when the Costa news came through, and the chain went on to sell 20,000 paperback copies. It is now one of Waterstones’ most successful books of the month ever, coming second only to another debut, Gail Honeyman’s 2017 bestseller Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine. The British Ghanaian writer’s classy story of troubled love already had booksellers on its side, but after its Costa win it became “huge”, says fiction category manager, Bea Carvalho. Many previous winners of the prize’s various categories are still on the shelves, points out Carvalho. “The great thing is that they tend to last.”
The Costas’ left-field successes are not, however, limited to first novels. The British Trinidadian writer Monique Roffey had slogged away for years, producing seven novels before The Mermaid of Black Conch hit the jackpot. “When it was shortlisted I was astonished, when it won novel of the year I was dumbfounded, and when it became book of the year I was flabbergasted. I still am,” says Roffey, who had crowdfunded her own publicity for the novel. “None of the mainstream publishers would touch me. I’d been around for long enough to know the score with small publishers: they put their heart and soul into editing you but have no money for promotion.”
What the Costas demonstrated, she says, “is the gap between what the publishing industry currently thinks and what is true … They think that middle-class readers who, like it or not, are the main book buyers, are never going to enjoy a novel written in creole by a white Trinidadian about a black mermaid, but that’s not true. The Costas mainstreamed a book that had been excluded.” An imprint of Penguin Random House is already lined up to take her next novel. “All those years of just keeping going in uncertainty and penury,” she sighs. While she knows literary fiction is never going to be a secure calling, the £30,000 prize gave her the luxury of taking a year out from her teaching job, and cutting down on the “busman’s holiday” circuit of masterclasses and public speaking engagements which make getting down to the next novel so hard.
Part of the value of awards is the buzz that they generate through a razzmatazz that peaks at the ceremony itself. Roffey was unfortunate in that her win fell into the social abyss of the Covid pandemic, so she missed out on the presence of celebrity judges such as model Jerry Hall, actor Hugh Grant and rower Matthew Pinsent that have been brought in for previous years to sprinkle stardust over the judging process. “I remember some very enjoyable awards dinners,” says Drabble, “though once I sat next to Theresa May, who didn’t seem all that interested in the books.”
Spouses Claire Tomalin and Michael Frayn found themselves on a particularly dizzy merry-go-round when they went head to head with his novel, Spies, and her biography of the 17th-century diarist Samuel Pepys. “I won by a hair’s breadth,” says Tomalin. “Our being rivals for the same prize generated a great deal of publicity: we were invited to pose for a photograph hitting each other over the head with our books (we declined). It was all a little bit embarrassing, but well worth that because it sold lots of copies of both our books.”
Frayn and Tomalin were well-established stars by the time of their face-off. Hard though it may be to imagine today, Philip Pullman was not, at the point when the final part of his now canonical His Dark Materials trilogy became the first children’s novel to be anointed 2001 book of the year. Pullman was 55 and had previously refused to allow his early books to be entered for any awards. Chair of judges Jon Snow said: “If I am honest, the wind was against Pullman at the very beginning. We did worry about giving such a literary prize to a children’s book, but then we thought of CS Lewis and that was that.”
“It made a huge difference to my reputation and sales,” says Pullman. “After the Whitbread I was sort of known about, whereas I hadn’t been before. The Carnegie medal I won for Northern Lights was a big thing in the children’s book world, which is neither known or very much cared about by the rest of the reading public; but the nature of the Whitbread/Costa award guaranteed that the news pages as well as the book pages took notice. Whoever set up the prize in that way did something very clever and very generous. It put the children’s book on a level with the other four category winners, and that said a great deal about the value of children’s literature.”
Pullman’s win was part of a new golden age for children’s books, when it started to be studied in universities and the YA market took off. By the time Mark Haddon followed him on to the podium in 2003, with a “crossover” debut The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time - published in both adult and YA imprints – nobody blinked an eye. It was, said chair of judges Joan Bakewell, “quite exceptional in the way Haddon is able to express the voice of the child and to get into the boy’s language. It is extraordinary because of the limitations he has put on himself. None of the judges has known anything like it.”
In 2012, the novelist Joan Brady – who in 1993 had become the first woman to win book of the year – ranted about the corporatisation of literary awards. “Canada has the Governor General’s literary awards. The US has the National Book awards. Australia has its Premiers’ awards. France has Academy prizes. Germany, the German book prize. Don’t UK writers deserve national recognition, too?” she wrote. It’s in some ways a fair point – commercial sponsors are fickle and subject to their own fluctuating fortunes – but it’s less likely than ever to cut through in today’s austerity politics. Sometimes you don’t know what you’ve got till it’s gone.

As the hit show appears in its third iteration, jump down the rabbit hole with an 80s romcom, a power ballad, a London spy, a very English scandal and a cucumber
“Don’t read your reviews‘; weigh them,” Andy Warhol is reputed to have said. AnotherOne way to judge a film or TV show is by how many remakes it prompts: Russell T Davies’s Channel 4 series Queer as Folk is gaining fast on A Star is Born. The 1999 drama about gay men in Manchester became a US version set in Pittsburgh; now another round (StarzPlay, 1 July) centres on New Orleans’ diverse queer community. Devin Way, Jesse James Keitel, CG and Fin Argus are among the cast.
Also in a recurring role is Kim Cattrall, clearly not opposed to all TV reboots. Long before Sex and the City, Cattrall was in Mannequin, an 80s romcom about a window dresser at a New York store who falls in love with a mannequin that comes to life after closing time. It was accompanied by Starship’s Nothing’s Gonna Stop Us Now, written by Diane Warren and Albert Hammond.
His son, Albert Hammond Jr, is the Strokes’ guitarist. Their story, and that of the 2000s rock revival, is retold in Meet Me in the Bathroom, a book and documentary. In it, James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem has a life-changing conversion to dance music and having fun, aided by ecstasy and Northern Irish producer/DJ David Holmes.
Central to Holmes’s oeuvre has been his jazzy, funk-infused scores for Steven Soderbergh films. Elsewhere, he collaborated with Keefus Cianca on the score for the 2015 BBC series London Spy, featuring Ben Whishaw and Edward Holcroft in a love story twisted into an espionage thriller.
Whishaw appeared alongside Hugh Grant in the BBC’s A Very English Scandal, written by Russell T Davies, whose handprints have been across British TV for two decades. Years on from Queer as Folk, he returned to Manchester (and C4) with Cucumber, while last year’s Aids crisis drama It’s a Sin was an international hit.
Dance The original series had Cruz 101 in Manchester’s Gay Village standing in for Babylon. It’s still going strong.
Read Jeremy Atherton Lin’s Gay Bar: Why We Went Out, published last year, was described by Colm Tóibín as “​​a brilliantly written and incisive account of gay life in Los Angeles, San Francisco and London”.

The Michael Jackson musical, A Strange Loop and The Lehman Trilogy led the nominations this year. The show at Radio City Music Hall in New York has also featured a lifetime achievement award for 96-year-old Lansbury and a performance by Billy Crystal
Mon 13 Jun 2022 03.22 BST
Last modified on Mon 13 Jun 2022 08.08 BST
Photograph: Bryan Bedder/Getty Images for Tony Awards Productions
Photograph: Bryan Bedder/Getty Images for Tony Awards Productions
Photograph: Jenny Anderson/Getty Images for Tony Awards Productions
Photograph: CBS Photo Archive/CBS/Getty Images
Photograph: Theo Wargo/Getty Images for Tony Awards Productions
Photograph: CBS Photo Archive/CBS/Getty Images
Photograph: Kevin Mazur/Getty Images for Tony Awards Productions
Photograph: Theo Wargo/Getty Images for Tony Awards Productions
Photograph: Theo Wargo/Getty Images for Tony Awards Productions
Photograph: Theo Wargo/Getty Images for Tony Awards Productions

Written with warmth and candour, the actor’s new memoir chronicles her alcoholism and MS diagnosis – alongside tales of dressing up with Carrie Fisher
At the age of 3o, Selma Blair saw a fortune teller. She was a successful Hollywood actor – famous for her role in 1999’s Cruel Intentions, and about to set off for Prague to film Hellboy – but privately she was depressed, binge-drinking, and prone to periods of overwhelming despair. Seeing a psychic was in many ways a search for reassurance: about a body whose pain she didn’t understand (Blair would later be diagnosed with multiple sclerosis), the scars of repeated sexual assault, and alcoholism that had almost killed her.
This is not the Selma Blair we know from the covers of Vanity Fair and Vogue, or the quirky roles that made her name. But it is one beautifully laid bare in her memoir, Mean Baby – named after the fact her perpetual frown as a newborn was said to make neighbourhood kids scream when they saw her. “From the very beginning I was misunderstood,” she writes. Growing up in Michigan with three sisters, Blair’s mother (described as her “first great love”) was the defining figure in her life and a complex presence: formidable, glamorous, fiercely loyal, and sometimes cruel.
The passages recounting her childhood are particularly strong, managing to evoke the sense of a highly spirited, funny, but troubled young soul. Blair was seven years old when she started drinking. By college, she was downing spirits – self-medication for undiagnosed MS symptoms and inner sadness. After a breakup, she took a bottle of pills followed by tequila. The efforts to resuscitate her were so intense that they broke her nose.
Written in vignettes and sharply observed, the sometimes harrowing subject matter never weighs Mean Baby down. At times, you feel like you shouldn’t be having quite as much fun as you are but Blair has a self-awareness, wit and charm that makes her sound like a competition winner despite the difficulties she’s faced. Dressing up in Princess Leia costumes with Carrie Fisher. Acne advice from Claire Danes. Rehab with Britney Spears. This is not a misery memoir – I laughed out loud more than I cried.
The final part of the story, in which Blair is diagnosed with MS, is told as openly and unmawkishly as the rest. After decades of being dismissed by doctors as “emotional” and now sober and a mother, she underwent an MRI which found six MS lesions on her brain.
Given what she’s endured, Blair would be entitled to some anger. But she greets her health problems with humour and stoicism: she sometimes wets her pants, but she tells us she’s lucky as she has more pants. And we’re lucky to be along for the ride.
Mean Baby: A Memoir of Growing Up by Selma Blair is published by Little, Brown (£18.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.

A HBO documentary looks to the past – a secret, women-run network of abortion providers in the late 1960s – as a window into the future of restricted reproductive rights in the US
Regardless of whether the supreme court fully overturns Roe v Wade later this month, as indicated by the majority draft opinion leaked in May, or merely allows it to be gutted at the state level, the US will continue its years-long march backwards on reproductive rights. Abortion access in the US in 2022 mirrors 1972, the year before the supreme court ensured a woman’s right to an abortion with Roe v Wade, and a time when a sparse patchwork of legalization in a few states forced many women to seek care from dubious illegal providers or dangerous at-home methods.
The Janes, a new HBO documentary on an underground network of abortion providers in Chicago in the years just before legalization, looks to this past as a window into America’s likely post-Roe future – a US without a woman’s right to choose that is less dystopia than memory. The 101-minute film, directed by Tia Lessin and Emma Pildes, traces the personal political evolutions of several members as well as the development of the group from collection of activists who connected women with safe abortion providers – male doctors, or men who claimed to be doctors – to performing the procedure themselves. The group eventually provided over 11,000 abortions, many to poor women who could not afford another option. The same women – poor, rural, people of color, often young – who are left behind now by the extreme measures passed by Republican state legislatures banning abortion as early as six weeks into pregnancy, before most women know they’re pregnant.
“This film is instructive about what this country looks like when women’s healthcare – basic healthcare – is criminalized,” Lessin told the Guardian. “Because what we know to be true is that when abortion is illegal, it doesn’t mean that women stop seeking abortions. It just means that they don’t get access to safe abortions.” As a former Chicago ER doctor notes in the film, his hospital’s septic abortion ward – a standard feature before Roe – admitted 15-20 women a day with injuries or infections, sometimes lethal, from attempted abortions.
That danger prompted Heather Booth, interviewed in the film, to find a doctor to provide a friend’s sister with an abortion as a college student in 1965. As word of mouth spread, Booth gathered several friends from the women’s movement to share the workload, which informally became the Janes. The network eventually included numerous safe houses, clandestine drivers, phone staff, pseudonymous flyers and, once they learned one of their top doctors did not have medical license (he also appears in the film and speaks frankly about his motivation: under the table money), training to do the procedures themselves.
“There are many ways in which this film gives us an example of what it looks like to be of help and of use. And unfortunately, we’re going to need more and more of that in the years to come,” said Lessin. “It’s sort of a kick in the ass and maybe a call to action. We shouldn’t be sitting on our hands and sighing about the state of this country. There’s always something to be done. And in this case, they decided to create this network.”
The film, which includes interviews with several former Janes and archival footage of late 60s protests in Chicago, is part of a collection of recent films revisiting the pre-legalization past as access eclipses in the US. Happening, a film from the French director Audrey Diwan, turns novelist Annie Ernaux’s memoir of searching for an illegal abortion in the 1960s into a thriller. The feature film Call Jane, starring Elizabeth Banks as a fictional Jane client-turned-member-turned-abortion provider and Sigourney Weaver as a dauntless organizer modeled in part on real-life leader Jody Parsons, premiered at Sundance earlier this year and will get a wide release this fall.
Call Jane, directed by Phyllis Nagy, enlisted Jane member and documentary participant Judith Arcana as a historical consultant. Arcana was among the seven Janes arrested by Chicago police in 1972 in a sting operation and charged with conspiracy to commit abortion, with the threat of 110 years in prison. “We were ordinary women trying to save people’s lives, but we were criminals,” Arcana says in the film. (The group’s lawyer, Jo-Anne Wolfson, stalled the trial until the Roe verdict dismissed their charges.) Arcana’s son, Daniel, began production on what would become the documentary in 2016, when Trump was elected and “the writing was on the wall,” said Emma Pildes, his sister and the film’s co-director.
The context in the late 1960s is different than now, but the reasons people seek abortions – in fear, confidence or, often, desperation – remain the same. She wasn’t ready. Rape. Lack of finances. Struggling to stay afloat with the kids she has. Medical risks. She simply doesn’t want to have a child. In one of the most poignant sequences of the film, several Janes hold up the index cards used to keep track of the calls, which were read aloud and passed around to members for follow-up. There are stacks of them, each an individual case with notes such as “afraid of pain”, “terrified”, “21, has one kid, $0” and “be cautious father is a cop.”
“They weren’t just cards, you know? They were people, and I knew they were women like me,” says Diane Stevens.
Each Jane also remembers the ones who got away or could not be reached, such as a 19-year-old Black woman who entered their safe house with an infection from a botched abortion and, when told she needed to go to the hospital, fled. The Janes later learned she died of septicemia. “We felt an enormous amount of guilt connected to this,” says Martha Scott, a former Jane, in the film. “Not that this was our doing, but she came through our hands, and we didn’t do enough.”
“We show really clearly in the film what happens when abortion is legal in one state and not legal in another,” Lessin said. “We saw who’s able to make the trip and who gets left behind. It’s very cut and dried. It’s along racial lines, it’s along economic lines – we saw it then and we’re seeing it right now, and we will see it on steroids in the coming years.”
The threat of anti-choice legislation is clear on the horizon; 13 states have so-called “trigger” bans ready to go into effect the day Roe is overturned, passed by conservative legislatures deeply out of step with more nuanced public opinion, which favors abortion access. Reproductive rights epitomizes the hardening of minority rule in the US; the issue is not changing public opinion but having a democracy which reflects it.
Asked, along those lines, if they hoped to reach anti-choice audiences, Pildes answered: “We don’t need to,” as most polls find between 85% to 90% of Americans think abortion should be legal in at least some circumstances. “It would be nice and certainly one of the things that we want to promote is dialogue. We want people to be having conversations about it for various reasons, not just to change hearts and minds but to de-stigmatize it and make people who have had abortions not feel like pariahs, shamed or that they’ve done something wrong.”
“We can’t control what people do with what we’ve done,” said Lessin. “Mostly I hope that, after the credits roll, they can feel the emotions around what it looks like when abortion is criminalized. That they can feel the anger that we felt, they can feel the commitment to prevent us from going back.”
The Janes premieres on HBO and HBO Max on 8 June, Foxtel and Binge in Australia on 9 June, and will air in the UK at a later date

The author of LA Confidential and Black Dahlia on falling in love with a murder victim, not owning a computer and his new true-crime podcast series
James Ellroy, 74, is a crime writer known for his hard-boiled noir novels and true crime essays. Feted for his “LA quartet” of novels, which includes The Black Dahlia and LA Confidential, and his “Underworld USA” series examining US political corruption, many of Ellroy’s obsessions (murder, crime, politics, masculinity) have been influenced by the unsolved 1958 murder of his mother, Geneva Hilliker. Recently, he released two books from his “Second LA Quartet” – Perfidia (2014) and The Storm (2019) – which begin with Pearl Harbour and take place during the second world war. Ellroy has a new podcast, James Ellroy’s Hollywood Death Trip, which features him reading several of his true-crime essays.
Let’s start with the podcast. You chose five stories including Stephanie from Destination: Morgue!, and Clash by Night from your Hollywood Reporter piece on the killing of Sal Mineo. Why those?They’re crime, and they all take place in Hollywood. Couple of things. I’ve got a bass baritone voice, I’ve got a punchy voice, I can read dramatically. I’ve got a rat-a-tat journalistic style. And one can make the case that my mother’s unsolved 1958 murder, when I was 10 years old, is what got me hooked on crime... The podcast has been a joy, but as much as I dig this series, it’s nothing but a stalking horse for the full and unexpurgated version of my 1995 novel American Tabloid about John Kennedy’s reign. And that will go 12 hours with me narrating, and noted actors reading the dialogue.
So this series is a taster for that?Yes, a taster. The opening act. I like to say that movies and TV shows are out, and podcasts are in. Podcasts are the perfect transposition of the novel to another form. Time is no factor. There is no censorship. It is writing, 100% transposed. That’s a kick to me.
What was your idea of podcasts before you started on this one? Do you have any favourites?No, I don’t listen to anything. I don’t have a computer, I don’t have a cell phone. I’ve written all my books by hand.
Can we talk about Stephanie, which features in the podcast?That is my favourite of all my crime pieces. I went to high school just a few high schools to the northeast of Stephanie Gorman. I was born in ’48, and she was born in ’49. And, if one can use that term to describe a murder file, hers is the best file I’ve ever read.
In your telling of Stephanie’s still-unsolved murder you write, “the act creates the disorder”, and, “the killer is crucial and irrelevant”.If you were to take the man who killed Stephanie Gorman in the summer of 1965, if you were to get him under the hot lights, you would find out that he was nothing but a human blob of delusion. He wouldn’t know why he did it. I doubt if it was much premeditated. He might have seen her going in and out of that house, in that very middle-class neighbourhood, and developed a yen for her. And then, one day, he knocked, she opened the door, and he reacted.
One of the things that can be difficult with true crime is that it’s often women that are killed, and yet they are lost in the telling of the crime. What’s your position on that?I’m very interested in the victim’s character. To me, the question is always, “Who was she?”… It was 2001 when I wrote the Stephanie piece for GQ, and there had been a reopening of the case, and the detective, Tim Marcia and I, we visited her old high school. Stephanie was a uniquely lovely girl. She exuded character. Tim and I were just gaga for her. And we saw some old school yearbooks with Stephanie’s picture in them. I’d seen the death pictures before, and some family photographs. But I’d never seen live shots of Stephanie on the tennis team, or Stephanie in her history class before. We saw those pictures, and Tim and I just lost it, crying like animals. I said to Tim, “I love her.” He said, “Yeah, I can get it.”
In the past, you’ve spoken about Bill Clinton, and his moral degeneracy in how he treated Monica Lewinsky. How did America’s last two presidents impact on you?I’ve been out of the world for a very long time. I didn’t follow the Trump presidency, I haven’t followed the Biden presidency, I don’t watch TV aside from boxing. The world that I depict in my books –of powerful men – there are hapless young women who want to be part of the scene. Men will lie, and do virtually anything to impress women. It’s the nature of the beast.
And also, perhaps, to impress other powerful men.Yes. Which is some twisted shit.
Why don’t you get involved any more?My books are enormously complex and require a solid year of planning before I write the first word of the text. And if I read only to the era I’m writing about, I’ve got everything I need at home. I exercise a lot, I’ve got an elliptical machine in my office. After this interview I’m going to jump on that. I have a boom box and I play classical music CDs, so I’ll listen to a piece of music and exercise. Blow my endorphins into the sky? Yes.
The first time I interviewed you, you were living in Kansas, the second time, you were in LA. Now you’re in Denver. I understand you’ve got back together with your ex-wife, Helen Knode?Yes, yes, back with Helen, and very happy for six years. Monogamy was never our problem. It was always cohabitation. Cohabitation is horrible. So now I live in apartment 208 and Helen lives in Apartment 200.
Do you still have dogs? You had a bull terrier called BarkoBarko the bull terrier, Margaret the bull terrier, Dudley the bull terrier. Very British dogs. But no, no dogs now. Because I’m older. I’m just all broken up with how dogs predecease you.
Do you still own a lot of guns?When I had the house in Kansas City, I had a lot of guns. And I had a library and everything. But here I think I’m down to two. They stay in the apartment. What’s my position on gun control? I don’t think about it. The thing is with psychopaths, if they want to get their hands on a gun, they’re going to get it by hook or by crook.
I was thinking more of mad young kids who think, “I hate everybody”. If it wasn’t so easy for them to get guns, they could just hate everybody and not harm them.That’s a very good point. With me, though, call me shallow, but I don’t give a lot of thought to those issues.
You joined AA in the 1970s, so early that cocaine wasn’t even around.Yes, it was so long ago that I’ve never used cocaine. Cocaine became a big deal in LA in the 1980s. When I joined AA it was good for hot tub parties. There was a place called Hot Tub Fever where people used to go. Take a date to Hot Tub Fever and have your own room with a hot tub in it. I don’t think it exists any more.
How are you feeling about getting older?I’m trying to have a strong third act. I’m in competition with the late Philip Roth. What sounds like a good lifespan would be 88, or 89, or 90 even, which gives me plenty of time to finish this novel I’m writing right now, and the two concluding books of the “Second LA Quartet”, and maybe another book. And do some podcasts. There’s no way that you can rationalise 74 as middle-aged. This wild ride ain’t for ever. But I’m not particularly afraid.
James Ellroy’s Hollywood Death Trip, produced by Audio Up, is available exclusively on Amazon Audible

Despite its roots in India, the sector is not diverse, and women report ‘wall of silence’ about studios’ lack of inclusiveness
When Sue Forde returned to practising yoga in a studio earlier this year, for the first time since the pandemic, it was with a sense of trepidation. Because it meant she was, once again, usually the only black woman in the room.
“I’ve had my body pointed to as ‘an African body’,” said Forde, from Hackney, east London. “Recently, in a class, this discussion sprang up about whether black women have a bigger tendency to a pelvic tilt. You think: ‘Oh, please don’t bring this into the yoga room.’”
Forde is one of a growing number of black and minority ethnic yoga teachers and practitioners who are challenging racism in British yoga organisations. Many said they have experienced inappropriate touching of, and comments about, their bodies and hair in classes, as well as crass racial stereotypes, such as Indians being ‘naturally bendy’, and ignorance of yoga’s sacred texts, including the Bhagavad Gita.
Last autumn, Forde was among several members of the renowned Iyengar Yoga London in Maida Vale who raised concerns about racism at the centre. A meeting in September to discuss equality and diversity at the institute heard about “women of colour who had visited IYMV once or twice and not returned as they felt unwelcome and uncomfortable”. Forde, who has not since returned to the studio, also told the group that it was “not reflecting the diversity that is on the streets around it”.
Despite its roots in India, the sector, which, along with pilates, is worth more than £900m, is not diverse. In a report about yoga practice in the UK in BMJ Open in 2020 87% of practitioners who responded to the survey were women, and 91% were white. This reflected the findings of an ethnicity audit by the British Wheel of Yoga in 2016, which found that 86% of its members were white British, 2.8% were British Asians, and 0.5% were Black British.
In a book published this week, yoga teacher trainer Stacie Graham argues that in Europe and North America, yoga’s traditions have been misappropriated and commodified as fitness.
In Yoga As Resistance, which Graham wrote as a guide to making yoga more inclusive, she noted that social media representations of the practice are dominated by images of white women who are “very skinny, bendy and blonde”.
Graham, who has led anti-racism workshops for yoga studios including Triyoga, said whenever she asked studio managers why their membership did not reflect the ethnic diversity of the local area, their answers were often based on inaccurate racial stereotypes “about what ‘those people’ do”.
Together with three other yoga teachers of colour, Graham has set up Radical Darshan, an anti-racist teacher training course in London. It covers the harmful impact of British colonialism on India and how that led to modern western-style yoga, focused on exercise rather than spirituality.
One of the other course leaders, Kallie Schut, who also runs decolonised yoga group Rebel Yoga Tribe, said many UK yoga organisations were exploiting India’s cultural heritage while failing to appoint south Asian teachers.
She recalled a class where a white teacher “who’d just come back from an ashram in India was wearing Indian clothes, and all the accoutrements, in a class full of white people”.
“It felt like it was almost a parody of being south Asian,” said Schut, from south-east London. She added that such experiences in white-led yoga spaces were traumatising for people of colour, and she was no longer willing to practise in them.
Amanda Evans from Brighton said she had quit teaching yoga in commercial studios because some white students had walked out of classes when they saw a black or brown teacher. “It happened to me a couple of times and with south Asian teachers I know as well,” she said.
Other yoga teachers of colour said they had stopped providing anti-racism work for white-led yoga organisations in recent years because they had not carried out meaningful reform.
Sophia Ansari, a Cardiff-based yoga teacher and therapist, who has run workshops on decolonising the yoga curriculum for trustees of the British Wheel of Yoga, said she had distanced herself from the industry because “they’re doing a disservice to yoga”.
“I felt like I was getting nowhere with studio owners after challenging them for the last two years,” said Ansari. “There is a wall of silence, always. I had to withdraw from it because it’s exhausting.”
Dorothy Hosein, chief executive of British Wheel of Yoga, said the training body had recently set up an equality, diversity and inclusion working group to discuss how to change the culture of the organisation.
Hosein, who is white, said the organisation’s new board, which is elected annually, was all white. She added: “We haven’t got diversity in our demographics, and there’s a lot of work to do.”
Alan Reynolds, manager of Iyengar Yoga London, said he accepted that people of colour were underrepresented in classes. He added that the institute had several teachers of colour and had recently formed a diversity advisory group to address how it could become more inclusive.
This article was amended on 22 June 2022. The 2020 report was published in BMJ Open, not the British Medical Journal, and the figures relate to those who completed the survey, rather than the findings of the survey. Related information was added from a British Wheel of Yoga audit in 2016.

First of public Capitol attack hearings delivered precision and panache – and a narrative arc designed for maximum effect
It was one of the more unexpected takeaways of the night: in the age of six-second videos and frenetic social media posts around the clock, primetime set-piece television can still land a punch.
The first of the public hearings from the US congressional committee investigating the insurrection at the US Capitol in Washington by extremist supporters of Donald Trump on 6 January last year was delivered with all the choreographed panache of an old-school TV spectacular or the Super Bowl.
The broadcast was precision-timed (ending one minute short of two hours), tightly scripted and with a narrative arc designed for maximum emotional and political effect. According to the Nielsen ratings firm, it drew 20m viewers – roughly equivalent to a presidential primary debate, and more than the 5.2m that the 2015 primetime Benghazi hearing featuring testimony from 2016 Trump rival Hillary Clinton.
It mixed never-before-seen footage, evocative witnesses and succinct delivery of pertinent, headline-grabbing quotes in a setting where politicians are often better known for rambling and repetitive speeches.
Fifty years ago, the Senate Watergate committee made TV history with its raw, spontaneously chaotic but revelatory hearings into Richard Nixon’s election subversion.
On Thursday night, by contrast, the treatment of Trump’s election subversion was polished and pre-conceived, with the committee chair, Mississippi Democratic congressman Bennie Thompson, and vice-chair, Wyoming Republican Liz Cheney, the daughter of former vice-president Dick Cheney, reading off an autocue.
So carefully were the proceedings orchestrated that they could have come across as bland and overproduced.
But by the time the two leading panel members had laid out their case against Trump’s meticulously planned coup attempt, and after the nation had been assailed by harrowing footage of the January 6 violence and testimony by a female police officer describing being caught up in a “war scene”, it was anything but.
Peter Baker of the New York Times concluded that in the entire 246-year history of the US since the declaration of independence, “there was surely never a more damning indictment presented against an American president”.
The committee has five more hearings to go this month, after more than a year of investigation behind closed doors, as it tries to build a case alleging that Trump orchestrated a criminal conspiracy to overturn his election defeat and, on that January 6, incited a far-right mob to try to stop the official congressional certification of Democrat Joe Biden’s victory.
The next four are in the mornings with the last one, on 23 June, again scheduled for primetime, 8pm in Washington.
Thursday evening’s made-for-TV conception was the work of James Goldston, an experienced TV executive and former president of ABC News. His brief from the committee was to keep the event contained and focused, targeted at drawing and holding the attention of millions of Americans.
Under his direction, even the most visceral of the material unveiled at the hearing was finely produced. Previously unseen video from the British documentary-maker Nick Quested left nobody in doubt about the violence of that day.
Police officers were shown falling to the ground and stabbed with staves as the insurrectionists, egged on by Trump and led by the extremist Proud Boys, pummeled their way into a tunnel within the Capitol compound. Caroline Edwards, the Capitol police officer, described slipping in people’s blood – not the first time in the evening that Shakespearean imagery was invoked.
The hearing was primetime TV at its most impactful. Not that social media was neglected.
Before the hearing began Zoe Lofgren, one of the Democrats on the nine-member committee, told the Guardian that the panel was determined to bring social media on board “and make sure we are finding people where they are”.
Devastating snippets drawn from the depositions of Trump’s daughter, Ivanka Trump, and her husband Jared Kushner, were clearly devised two ways – potent on television, viral online.
The clip of Ivanka in which she said she accepted the assessment of the former attorney general Bill Barr that there had been no evidence of fraud sufficient to overturn the election lasted 11 seconds – perfect for CNN, Twitter and TikTok alike.
Kushner’s haughty comment to the committee that he interpreted as “whining” threats from White House lawyers to resign in the face of Trump’s potentially illegal actions could be boiled down to an even more shareable three seconds.
Such painstaking formulation is not a guarantee of success. The committee’s main goal is to show the American people how Trump attempted to subvert democracy and to persuade voters that action must now be taken to prevent a repeat performance in 2024.
Tell that to Fox News. While the hearing was going on, it turned its airspace over to Tucker Carlson, who duly used his primetime show to denounce the proceedings as propaganda.
Carlson had his own pithy social media pitch. “They are lying, and we’re not going to help them do it,” he said.

‘Gentleminions’ being turned away from showings of the latest Despicable Me spinoff should be nectar for the ailing industry
Nobody really knew what the state of cinema would be post-Covid. Would audiences stay at home through fear? Would streaming kill off the theatrical experience for good? Or would cinema itself take on a whole new form; a bold and exciting incarnation characterised by hundreds of teenagers dressing up in suits and relentlessly screaming nonsense at the screen, to the tangible chagrin of everyone else in attendance?
It’s too early to say for sure but, judging by the reaction to the recently released Minions: The Rise of Gru, it’s definitely the latter. In fact, so many young people are attending Minions screenings in formalwear in order to honk full-volume gibberish at the screen that cinemas have started to turn people away.
This might require some explanation. This weekend, as the movie hit cinemas, a few select TikTok users started filming themselves watching the film in their smartest outfits. These brave pioneers – Gentleminions, they call themselves – quickly sparked a rush of imitators. One user filmed a group of well-dressed Gentleminions applauding each other like wedding attendees as they left a screening. Another asked her entire family to dress up, on the pretence that she was taking them out for the night of their lives, only to then show them all sullenly sitting through the sequel to a spinoff of the Despicable Me films.
You would think that this sort of behaviour would be like nectar to the ailing cinema industry. In terms of sheer word of mouth, the Gentleminions have done more ground level publicity for Minions 2 than its studio has ever achieved. The Gentleminion fad has transcended film. It has become a true cultural event, like the spontaneous gatherings that took place after David Bowie’s death, or Binley Mega Chippy.
But this isn’t the case. Cinemas are reporting that the Gentleminions are, in fact, a terrible menace, exhibiting such dreadful behaviour – namely throwing objects at the screen while incessantly talking like Minions – that they are having to issue thousands of pounds’ worth of refunds to appalled non-Gentleminions in attendance.
According to the BBC, a cinema in Cornwall posted a notice banning “children wearing suits” from screenings. Odeon cinemas have erected signs noting that “any groups of guests in formal attire will be refused entry” to the film. Two teenagers in white shirts were initially turned away from a showing in Mansfield, until their parents turned up with jumpers for them to wear.
Some of the criticism is valid. For instance, the argument that young children might have their first cinema trip spoiled by what basically amounts to a social media flashmob seems fairly sound. However, it is my firm belief that the Gentleminions movement should be embraced wholeheartedly.
The cause of the fad is down to one of two reasons. The first is potentially sincere. The last Despicable Me film – Despicable Me 3 – came out five years ago. The children who watched that film are now teenagers, and they’re responding to the return of the series with what seems like genuine joy. What’s more, Rise of Gru was one of those films that was booted down the schedule by Covid. Trailers for the film have existed for years now, and merchandise long ago leaked into shops. The postponement was so abrupt, in fact, that during lockdown several supermarkets were selling perishable Minions: The Rise of Gru food items. Perhaps, after such a long wait, an explosion of pent-up relief was bound to occur.
Then again, there is a chance that this is all ironic. The Gentleminions know that Minions: The Rise of Gru is a children’s film, and they’re attaching an overblown prestige to it in the same way that students of 25 years ago declared their love for the Teletubbies. However, this is also potentially incredibly lucrative. Look at The Room; a giant flop of a film that eventually turned a profit thanks to year-round screenings where audiences screamed and hooted and threw plastic cutlery at the screen.
This could well be the future of Minions: The Rise of Gru. If cinemas stop wildly overreacting to the Gentleminions, and start hosting dedicated Gentleminion screenings where dressing up and jabbering incoherently is actively encouraged, the film will still be in cinemas at Christmas. It could be in cinemas for years. It could become the biggest film of all time. This is what we all deserve.

Alex Holder’s Unprecedented shows ex-president perpetuating big lie about voter fraud – but his children are much less forthcoming
A documentary film scrutinised by the congressional January 6 committee exposes divisions between the former US president Donald Trump and his children over the deadly insurrection at the US Capitol.
Released to the public on Sunday, Unprecedented portrays Trump’s 2020 election campaign as a family affair and features interviews with him and his inner circle before, during and after the vote.
British film-maker Alex Holder gives plenty of airtime to the ex-president and his offspring lavishing praise on one another – material that is not likely to interest the committee – but also asks their views on the fateful events of January 6.
Trump reverts to his lies about widespread voter fraud: “Well, it was a sad day but it was a day where there was great anger in our country,” he says. “The people went to Washington primarily because they were angry with an election that they think was rigged.
“A very small portion, as you know, went down to the Capitol and then a very small portion of them went in. But I will tell you, they were angry from the standpoint of what happened in the election and because they’re smart and they see and they saw what happened. And I believe that was a big part of what happened on January 6.”
But when Holder then puts the same question to three of Trump’s children, they are less forthcoming. His son Eric says: “Yeah, let’s skip the 6th.” Son Don Jr and daughter Ivanka also decline to comment on the incendiary subject, as does vice-president Mike Pence.
Ivanka’s silence is perhaps the least surprising. The film recalls how, at a campaign rally in Georgia on 4 January, Ivanka swerved past the election fraud conspiracy, allowing Don Jr to seize the opportunity to outflank her and impress his father. The January 6 committee has also heard Ivanka testify that she accepted attorney general William Barr’s assessment that the election was free and fair.
Ivanka is less forthright in Unprecedented when she carefully states: “As the president has said, every single vote needs to be counted and needs to be heard. And he campaigned for the voiceless.”
Author and journalist Philip Rucker comments in the film: “She was very uncomfortable with the president’s lie after the election but she would never utter anything herself to establish that disagreement.”
Holder recently testified to the House of Representatives panel investigating the January 6 attack for around four hours behind closed doors about his approximately 100 hours of footage. He turned over segments of the footage demanded in a subpoena requiring his cooperation.
The film-maker has also been subpoenaed to testify in a Georgia investigation into whether Trump and others illegally tried to influence the 2020 election in the state.
Holder conducted three sit-down interviews with Trump, and the film is punctuated by out-takes of the president expressing concern about camera angles, lighting and objects spoiling the shot (“Can we get the orange out please? It’s very orangey”). Trump is also seen proudly watching videos of his children on the campaign trail.
The interview with Pence – whom Trump pressured to overturn the election result, even though he had no such power – took place on 12 January.
Pence is seen reacting to an email which the documentary says is a congressional draft resolution demanding that he invoke the 25th amendment of the constitution to remove Trump from office. Pence’s office has insisted it was in fact confirmation that his letter had been sent to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi rejecting her request to invoke the 25th amendment.
During the interview, Pence says: “I’m always hopeful about America. I always believe that America’s best days are yet to come. I still believe that.”
Earlier, the vice-president recalls happier times when he and his family were invited to Trump’s golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey, to discuss becoming his running mate in 2016. “I did play golf,” he says. “Not the way he does.”
By January 6 2021, Trump was assailing Pence via Twitter and, the House committee has heard, raising no objection to the notion of his deputy being hanged by the mob. The documentary features Trump saying: “I think I treat people well, unless they don’t treat me well, in which case you go to war.”
It shows the Trump clan inside a bubble where they speak at huge rallies, are told by aides that the president is on course for re-election and come to think that defeat is unthinkable. At one point Ivanka remarks: “I’ve been in four states in the last two days and the energy and excitement for the president surpasses that in 2016.”
Speaking to the Guardian earlier this month, Holder said he went into the interviews with Trump and his children with open-ended questions and a deferential approach to avoid the exchanges coming off as confrontational.
At one point Holder asks Ivanka: “What’s your first memory of your father?” She replies: “He used to sing to me when I was little, and nobody knew this except me and him until my mom caught him on the baby monitor, which I cannot imagine him doing now.”
Holder then asks Trump if he remembers that story. He replies: “I do, sure, I used to sing to all my kids a little bit. When I say sing, not sing with any ideas for myself to go to Carnegie Hall someday. Just, you know, I love my kids. I’ve been, I think, a very good father. It’s been very important to me.”
In another segment, Ivanka comments: “Well, arguably, nobody takes more incoming than the president. I mean, most people would be under their desk in a fetal position sucking their thumb crying. And most politicians don’t have the strength or the conviction to withstand that pushback. This president does and I think our whole family does.”
Her husband, Jared Kushner, also speaks in glowing terms about his father-in-law.
But the three-part documentary, streaming on Discovery+, also contains raw footage of the Capitol attack recorded by Holder’s director of photography, Michael Crommett, and multiple critical voices from academics, authors and journalists.
Princeton University’s Eddie Glaude, a professor of African American studies, comments about January 6: “If the kindling is just sitting there and no one throws the match on it, it’s just going to sit there. Trump threw the match so he’s responsible. All of the folks around him are responsible because they threw the damn match.”

The director remembers her friend, Talawa theatre company co-founder and EastEnders star as a rare talent with phenomenal attention to detail
Mavis Chin came to England from Jamaica to take up acting. In those far off days there was no possibility of earning a living acting in her homeland so she studied shorthand and typewriting, saved every penny and finally arrived in England with the intention of going on the stage.
She did. During the long course of her career from a walk-on in The World of Suzie Wong to starring with Dame Edith Evans in the play The Adventures of the Black Girl in her Search for God in 1968, one could never second guess her revelatory takes on the characters she played.
She changed her names: Mavis became Mona, Chin became Hammond. These changes took place early in her stage career as one way of avoiding stereotypical casting. Mona Hammond had a rare talent. Her attention to detail was phenomenal. As Lady Bracknell in The Importance of Being Earnest, in 1989, she spent hours just getting the twist in the wrist right for her fan.
She dug so deeply into the characters she played that she became influenced by them in her daily life. Working over a lifetime with this remarkable actor was revelatory, inspiring, and as many with whom she worked found, challenging. One night I stood at the back of the auditorium checking on our King Lear production in 1994. When she came on I quite forgot it was Mona and became caught up in her dual personality portrayal of Shakespeare’s Fool. I was shaken to the core not to have recognised my friend in the role.
Mona was one of the founder members of Talawa theatre company in 1986. She was involved right from the start and was determined for it to succeed. She acted in many of the first productions of the company. This was her way of hitching her colours to the mast. There was her groundbreaking Lady Bracknell, but her slave woman in our second play, An Echo in the Bone (1986), was something that stays with you. The BBC “found” her in King Lear and whisked her away to EastEnders but that’s life.
Mona was good at giving gifts. She spent hours in junk shops, upmarket emporiums, everywhere to find the perfect “little something” to fit the occasion. She found small, out of the way Chinese restaurants to hide away from prying eyes and devote herself to the matter of eating, which she did with great relish yet still staying as thin as a rake.
Mona was a friend, a colleague and a most honest critic. Walk good girl.

A black film-maker is using ground-penetrating radar to find 28 potential sites of unmarked graves and headstones
On a quiet weekday afternoon, James Russell knelt down in a grassy field and planted a tiny Canadian flag. When he stood up and looked around, 27 other little flags fluttered in the wind.
The site – in Niagara-on-the-Lake, on the edge of the Ontario, New York border – is a relatively nondescript parcel of land between a Subway restaurant and a white clapboard bungalow.
But nearly two centuries ago, it was the location of a Baptist church and a centre of activity for one of Canada’s earliest black communities.
At least two dozen black people are buried here: those fleeing the US through the Underground Railroad, enslaved people brought over by Loyalists during the American Revolution, black soldiers who joined the Loyalists in battle against the US, and some free people of colour who escaped an increasingly hostile American nation in the making.
But their graves are not marked, and their names are not known.
Russell argues that it’s only right to give these people a dignified burial, and their descendants a place to lay flowers. That’s why he is self-funding the use of ground-penetrating radar to locate the graves and headstones of those interred at the burial ground.
“It’s always bothered me that this just looks like a soccer field,” said Russell, a film-maker who has spent the last 37 years visiting Niagara-on-the-Lake from his home in Toronto.
“Finally, last November I said: ‘You know, no one’s going to fix this unless I fix it myself.’”
So far, the radar has found 28 potential sites. Nearly 20 more have been found by a local man who uses dousing to find graves.
“Every one of those folks have family, have grandkids or great, great-grandkids who would like to know where their ancestors are buried,” he said.
“I think it’s my responsibility, as a black person in Canada who understands the importance of not only respecting the living, but respecting the dead as well.”
Norm Arsenault, a Niagara-on-the-Lake town councillor, said he supported Russell’s work. “I’m glad to see somebody’s taking it up, because frankly, that’s just a graveyard that’s been ignored for, I don’t know, 150 years? Probably longer,” he said.
Across Canada, Indigenous communities are using ground-penetrating radar and other tools to uncover the final resting places of thousands of children who attended residential schools – institutions designed to rip children from their families and assimilate them, often through the use of violence.
In 2021, the former site of the Kamloops Indian Residential School made international news after the potential graves of more than 200 people were discovered.
Since then, hundreds more graves have been identified at the sites of former residential schools.
Uncovering the former inhabitants of historic black communities in Canada, however, has not yet been given the same urgency.
For generations, Canada has not adequately honoured its historic black communities, said Dr Afua Cooper, a historian, author and professor at Dalhousie University. She pointed to a lack of meaningful acknowledgment at the site of Priceville, Ont., where black pioneers lived in the 1800s, and at Fort Erie just south of Niagara-on-the-Lake, which was home to 18th- and 19th-century black settlements.
“For me, it speaks to the bigger issue of how invisible black history is in this country. Visible but invisible at the same time,” said Cooper.
“The history has been literally been covered up. So whether it’s that cemetery at Niagara-on-the-Lake, or it’s Africville [in Nova Scotia] or it’s Amber Valley in Alberta, what you have is this marginalization of black history,” she said.
Local historian Ron Dale said that the cemetery at Niagara-on-the-Lake was likely abandoned when black people in the area moved away in search of work.
He also warned that there is no guarantee that the buried headstones will be legible once they are excavated. He has given Russell some names of black Baptists he found in census records from the mid-1800s, in hopes that he can use them to help identify some of the names.
Lezlie Harper, a tour guide at Niagara Unbound with ancestors buried in Fort Erie, hopes what Russell is doing to help unearth black history in Canada catches on.
“We may find some amazing information about the people who were buried there,” said Harper. “Everybody says: ‘Oh, you can’t find the information.’ Yes, you can – it’s just different, and it takes time. But there’s all kinds of information out there about black folks who were here before. It’s just a matter of digging it out.”

As a kid growing up in Aberdeen, she rebelled against singing. Now she’s proving sensational in the classic Weimar musical – but finds its present-day parallels chilling
Let’s get one thing straight: although Amy Lennox sings and is Scottish, she is not related to Annie Lennox. She is, however, used to people making the assumption. She laughs, remembering a breakfast radio appearance from 2016 on which the host kept referring to Annie, thinking it was her mum.
“I was half-asleep,” she says. “Then the penny dropped and – on live radio – I said: ‘Oh my God! You think my mum’s Annie Lennox.’ And the producers behind the glass went – she throws a hand up over her mouth and opens her eyes wide. “Everyone was flapping. I thought, ‘I’m going to let you sit on this. You deserve it.’” She laughs again. Sure, both Lennoxes are from Aberdeen. But Amy’s journey – from belting out Christina Aguilera and Whitney Houston songs in her bedroom to the West End – had nothing to do with nepotism.
There is one legacy she has to live up to, though: she is following Jessie Buckley’s Olivier-winning turn as Cabaret showgirl Sally Bowles in Rebecca Frecknall’s dynamic staging of the classic 1960s musical. Buckley and her Emcee, played by Eddie Redmayne, stepped aside in March for Lennox and Fra Fee, who is from Northern Ireland. Lennox wouldn’t normally step into a role first cast for another actor. “I don’t want to be put in a stifling position where I’m being told, ‘Stand here, do it like this’ – rather than originating a musical. It’s not how I work. It doesn’t get the best of anyone. I was always adamant about that.” A breath. “And then I thought, ‘Well, this does feel different.’”
Lennox is outspoken, chatty, fond of a giggle and sharing an opinion. We’re sitting in the bowels of London’s Playhouse theatre, to talk about how Frecknall (“Frecks” to Lennox) managed to persuade the star to take a recasting and propel her further into the spotlight. Lennox may not yet be a big name. But for the past 14 years she’s been in musicals, plays and on TV (she bowed out of Holby City earlier this year). Her cheeky, lascivious Bowles is like a jolt of electricity, and no doubt a sign of great things to come. How daunting was it to take over from Buckley? “Do you know what? I didn’t really have much time to think about it.” Her casting was confirmed, she says, and then “we started the following week. It was so fast.”
Lennox and Fee previously shared a stage in Belfast for 2015’s The Last Five Years, a two-hander musical charting the breakdown of a relationship. Cabaret was a completely different experience, given that Bowles and the Emcee barely interact. “We hardly saw each other in the rehearsal period,” she says. “It was very, very odd. I’d bump into Fra – and we were like passing ships. Bumping into him in Pret, I’d be like, ‘How was your week?’”
They’re both leads, though. It’s just that each speaks to a particular aspect of the story’s descent towards antisemitism and authoritarianism. Fra’s Emcee lulls you into a false sense of security, before slapping you across the face – look, Nazis! – and unravelling the freewheeling, booze-soaked world you’d come to understand. Lennox’s Bowles, meanwhile, blows through like a hurricane. She’s preening and cooing one moment, dressed in pink frou-frou taffeta for Don’t Tell Mama, then roaring through the title song the next, dishevelled and looking swamped in a man’s suit.
Off stage, I can see hints of Bowles’s frenetic drive in Lennox: the way she cracks herself up, gushes about her colleagues, and describes the breathlessness of her part. At the end of every performance, she says, “I just get spat out. It’s like a wipeout from flumes. Just” – she makes the sound of something shooting from a tube – “out! You’re done. I’m not having to conjure it because the show itself takes me there. It’s relentless.”
Lennox has built her stamina up over years, after falling in love with musicals at the age of 11. She remembers watching a TV documentary. “Proper stagey kids from London,” she says. They were maybe auditioning for Annie (she makes a retching sound). “And I thought, ‘Oh, what’s this?’” She wasn’t a child with pushy stage parents, though. Her mum was a solicitor, her dad the head of IT and communications for an oil firm. She had rebelled against ballet (mum’s idea) and singing (dad’s) before finding her way to musicals.
“You don’t get that local opportunity that kids down in the south-east of England take for granted – because they’re so close to this hub that we’re in now.” She motions to the West End above our heads. “I didn’t have any of that.” In Aberdeen, it all felt “so far away that you don’t really have links”. Envy propelled her, though. After seeing those children on TV, and then failing an audition for the school musical, she joined a local am-dram group and was soon honing her acting and singing.
“I auditioned for the National Youth Music Theatre loads of times. I got recalled. Never got in. My poor dad would fly with me down to London. And I never got in. It was always because I would get to a song and panic.” Over time, she learned to take charge of her voice, landing Liesl in The Sound of Music at the London Palladium right out of drama school in Guildford. She’s since received an Olivier nomination for her Lauren in 2015’s Kinky Boots, plus stage credits in 9 to 5 The Musical, Lazarus, Legally Blonde and others.
When she started out, Lennox was often told she wasn’t playing roles “big enough”, as if only an exaggerated performance would resonate. But in one of her quieter moments in Cabaret, her Bowles expresses an apathy about her situation – sleepwalking into horror – that strikes a brutal chord today. “Politics,” her Sally asks, “what’s that to do with me?” “It’s bonkers. I don’t think [Cabaret’s writers John Kander and Fred Ebb] ever intended for it to feel so valid now. We like to think, as human beings in this society, we’re constantly moving forward, striving for excellence and this and that. But we’re not! If anything, we’re just driving ourselves towards absolute disaster and we all know it,” Lennox says.
She alludes to everything from deluded strongmen to the war in Ukraine, from reproductive rights for women to the general acceptance of a future more bleak than the recent past. “It’s like Groundhog Day – and there are quite a few moments in the show that do that,” she says. “There was a prop newspaper we were using and it said, ‘Russian invasion imminent’. And you go: ‘Oh God. Oh God. What the hell’s going on?’ We’ve got another Hitler over there. Some man that’s ” She stops herself. “I’d be interested to know how much more of an edge this show has because of what’s going on in Ukraine and in Russia. It’s just chilling. Absolutely chilling.”
Beyond the show’s depiction of fascism’s creeping rise, we discuss theatre’s post-lockdown stumble back into the light. Shortly before we speak, some of the cast of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s high-budget Cinderella found out that their jobs were to be cut short, some via social media. “I think that’s deplorable,” says Lennox. “We’ve all been pushed to our limits [by the pandemic]. I don’t know the ins and outs of what happened. But didn’t someone consider, for a moment, the repercussions of the way it was dealt with?” (The Really Useful Group said it had made “every effort” to ensure cast members were notified of the the closure.)
She takes a breath, emerging sunnier. “It’s a crazy old thankless existence for so many people. I’m grateful. I feel like I’ve got the best job in the West End. Maybe even the world.” She laughs again. Bowles has taken over her life for the past couple of months – so much so that, on some days, Lennox has to refrain from speaking to preserve her voice, which makes for silent commutes back to Ramsgate from London with her husband, actor Tom Andrew Hargreaves.
There’s now a sign on her dressing room door, made by her colleagues after she’d been really tired at the start of her run. “You know the line when I’ve got my gin and I say, ‘I’m just not speaking today.’” She laughs. “I’ve got an ‘I’m just not speaking today’ sign on my door. I’ve only done that once. I’ve only not spoken once.” She laughs again. “It’s very hard. I’m not very good at it.”
Cabaret at the Kit Kat Club is booking at the Playhouse theatre, London, until 19 November.

Essiedu has described in interview with the Guardian how teacher at Guildhall school used racial slur
A prestigious drama school has apologised for the “appalling” racism experienced by the actors Paapa Essiedu and Michaela Coel while they were students there.
In an interview for the Guardian’s Saturday magazine, Essiedu described how a teacher taking part in an improvisation used a racial slur. “Suddenly she shouted: ‘Hey you, N-word, what have you got behind you?’” he said, choosing not to repeat the word. Essiedu and Coel were the only two black students in the group. Essiedu was told by the same teacher that he did not enunciate clearly and that he spoke as if his mouth was “full of chocolate cake”.
A renowned Shakespearean actor, Essiedu became the Royal Shakespeare Company’s first black Hamlet in 2016. He was speaking to the Guardian to promote his new role starring in Sky’s The Lazarus Project.
A spokesperson for the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, ranked as one of the top 10 performing arts institutions in the world, said: “Guildhall School apologises unreservedly for the racism experienced by Paapa Essiedu, Michaela Coel and other alumni whilst they were studying at the school. The experiences he shares were appalling and unacceptable.
“We have since undertaken a sustained programme of action to address and dismantle longstanding systemic racism within the acting programme, including commissioning an external report into historic racism and a comprehensive and ongoing process of staff training and reflection.”
The racial slur was used in an improvisation in which the teacher played a prison officer looking for drugs among prisoners, played by students. Essiedu said the incident was so horrifying that neither he nor Coel knew how to respond.
“That was a real ‘time stops’ moment. It was like, surely this can’t be happening. We were so shocked we just stayed in the improvisation, so we were like: ‘No we haven’t got anything behind us.’ We were shellshocked by what had happened and shocked that it had come out of the mouth of a teacher.”
Coel previously referred to the incident in the MacTaggart lecture she delivered at the Edinburgh TV festival in 2018.
Essiedu, who played Kwame in Coel’s groundbreaking Emmy- and Bafta-winning TV drama I May Destroy You, said the comment was “loaded in a million different ways” and he was appalled that a teacher could treat students in her care in such a way. “It so clearly shows a lack of respect and understanding of what the experience is of someone who is in that position, in that skin, in that institution.”
British drama schools have come under scrutiny in recent years. This year a report from the Diversity School Initiative, which was set up in 2016 with the aim of improving representation and inclusion in British drama schools – including ArtsEd, Mountview, Lamda, Bristol Old Vic and Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts – detailed widespread claims of overt racism and casting bias.
In 2020, Rada, which severed its partnership with the diversity initiative, was accused of failing to address student concerns around “race, class, disability and sexual harassment”.
The principal of the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama, Gavin Henderson, resigned in 2020 after students raised concerns about “systemic racism” at the college. In 2018, Henderson had said he felt quotas to address the imbalance of black and minority ethnic students studying at the school risked diluting the quality of students.
In his Guardian interview, Essiedu, who graduated from Guildhall in 2012, said the syllabus focused entirely on white dramatists. “I remember doing restoration comedies such as Man of Mode about the aristocratic class – slave owners, basically. These plays ask a very different question of a black or brown actor whose ancestry might have been negatively impacted by those particular people than they do of actors who don’t have that same historical context.”
Rather than questioning whether he felt uncomfortable performing such plays, he was criticised for his performance. “It was like, oh, that person is doing it right and you’re not doing it right. They reduced it to the idea that they were doing it right because they’re better at acting than you whereas there was a whole raft of other things at play.”
Guildhall School told the Guardian: “We have also undertaken a significant redevelopment of our acting curriculum, including a departmental staff restructure, so that our teaching and learning culture prioritises inclusivity, representation and wellbeing. We understand that this work is long-term and will require sustained commitment to build a culture that is inclusive and equitable for everyone.”
Essiedu said he was on good terms with the school, and in 2020 he directed Guildhall students in the Ruby Thomas play Either.
Read the full interview with Paapa Essiedu in the Guardian’s Saturday magazine and online tomorrow.

There are so many examples of the arts being used to unite and galvanise people. Here it is being deployed as a tool of division
For most of my 25 years as a journalist, “the arts” have usually been seen as a calming antidote to life’s harsher moments. In newspapers and on websites, culture often functions as a way to introduce visual interest to – and tonal relief from – the parade of awfulness we know as “the news”.
This unspoken ideological assumption can be irritating if, like me, you happen to think that the arts and culture are a fundamental part of human existence. Then again, in the wider world too, they are generally understood to be bound up with human expression and fulfilment – but not thought to be the stuff of life or death.
Now this is changing. At this moment in history, it would be hard to make the argument that culture and the arts are merely decorative. You wouldn’t want to try to say that to the Ukrainians I met this year at the Venice Biennale. The Russian pavilion at the event stands empty: the artists and curators recused themselves before they were asked not to come. But the Ukrainians were determined to show up. Pavlo Makov, the official Ukrainian artist, had been sleeping in a bunker in Kharkiv before he decided to make the perilous journey, driving elderly relatives to safety and exile in Vienna en route. “Russia’s idea … is to eliminate Ukrainian culture. If it has no culture, Ukraine does not exist,” he told me. “I felt that Ukraine has to be represented.”
Culture, in this sense, is absolutely central to the war. For Ukrainians, it is also a means of resistance: back in Kyiv, the national military history museum has already mounted an exhibition of captured Russian military hardware and recreated a bunker in which besieged citizens had sheltered for a month. The president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, a former comedian and television producer, has wasted no opportunity to use cultural events to spread his message: he was beamed into the opening of another exhibition of Ukrainian art in Venice, and to the Cannes film festival. In what might be the closest modern analogue to the prophet Joel’s line about beating ploughshares into swords, the Ukrainian winners of the Eurovision song contest sold their trophy to fund military drones.
Culture really does become a matter of life and death, then, when a society is under pressure. This can be for good or for ill: how narrative is shaped can, of course, be damaging – or dishonest. Before the war in the former Yugoslavia, politicised Serbian historians fomented ultra-nationalist feeling. But during the conflict, in 1993, Susan Sontag and Haris Pašović’s production of Waiting for Godot in Sarajevo became both an act of defiance against the violence of the siege and a powerful metaphor for the city’s plight. Look to any troubled or repressive society and you’ll see culture weaponised, or made a target. Shostakovich’s career’s was almost destroyed by a review, widely thought to bear Stalin’s own fingerprints, of his opera Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk. The Nazis confiscated “degenerate art”, promoting an anti-modern aesthetic that valorised militarism and obedience to the regime. Islamic State destroyed archeological remains at Nimrud, Nineveh and Palmyra. Uyghur language, poetry, storytelling and music are being eradicated by repressive laws and Chinese re-education camps. These are, obviously, extreme cases. But illuminating ones.
A polity in which politicians wade in and mess about with culture is one that is malfunctioning. Which brings us to Britain. It is undeniable that culture and the arts have become “newsworthy” recently, in a way that they weren’t for many of my years as a journalist: think of the toppling of the statue of slaver Edward Colston, or the arguments over the direction being taken by the National Trust, or the awful scenes of Nazi-saluting, far-right protestors “protecting” the Cenotaph from Black Lives Matters protesters. This is because society has become more fractured – and, crucially, because the Westminster government has become more malignly interventionist, finding it useful to foment rather than de-escalate such moments of tension. (It’s noteworthy how many of these disturbing events have been, specifically, English; culture policy is, of course, devolved.) These moments are symptoms of something rotten in the state. At the same time they demonstrate, in a truly perverse way, how important culture really is.
The culture war waged by the right may by now have passed its dizzying peak. Oliver Dowden, who seemed sincerely to believe that there was a “woke” army intent on tearing down the fabric of society, is no longer in charge of the DCMS. Munira Mirza has departed No 10, and with her, or so it seems for the moment, the determination to block, wherever possible, appointments to the boards of cultural organisations of anyone with ideologically unacceptable views. Moderate voices in the party are beginning to express themselves more forcibly; there are plenty of Tories who think the culture war is ridiculous and dishonest.
Nevertheless, we have entered a more chaotic phase, in which surreal, late-period Johnsonism, as well as inventing the repugnant notion of sending asylum seekers to Rwanda, has dreamed up the bizarre spectre of Nadine Dorries as culture secretary. As one senior figure in the arts said to me, a toddler might as well be in charge of a chainsaw. It all fits together: we are in a zone of every kind of incoherence, moral and otherwise. Unfortunately, Dorries’s targets are two great cultural institutions, the BBC and Channel 4. Fortunately, there is some hope that Boris Johnson will destroy himself and his cronies before too much damage is done. Either way, fasten your seatbelts, it’s going to be a bumpy night.
Charlotte Higgins is the Guardian’s chief culture writer
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a letter of up to 300 words to be considered for publication, email it to us at guardian.letters@theguardian.com

In a message at the climax of celebrations, monarch acknowledges her fragility but commits to continue her reign
The Queen crowned her historic platinum jubilee celebrations with a last-minute appearance on the balcony of Buckingham Palace on Sunday, bringing to a close four days of festivities that revealed not only the contents of her handbag, but a nation’s undiminished appetite for a party.
The 96-year-old monarch waved to cheering crowds gathered in the Mall for the carnival climax of the four-day bank holiday weekend.
She was accompanied only by those closest to the throne, a tableau of the future of Britain’s monarchy, with the Prince of Wales, the Duchess of Cornwall, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and their children; an image incorporating three future kings, and two future queens.
This was the people’s day of the jubilee, as thousands of street parties were held across the UK. In London it did not, as threatened, rain on the Queen’s parade, as a carnival extraordinaire featured a two mile-long pageant dedicated to the only monarch most of us have ever known.
It was initially uncertain whether the Queen, whose mobility issues had caused her to miss so much of the jubilee, would be fit enough to attend. The first indication came when the royal standard was raised above Buckingham Palace at 4.30pm, meaning she had arrived.
Later, in a written message of thanks to the nation, she seemed to acknowledge her fragility, but committed to continue as monarch, saying: “When it comes to how to mark 70 years as your Queen, there is no guidebook to follow. It really is a first. But I have been humbled and deeply touched that so many people have taken to the streets to celebrate my platinum jubilee.
“While I may not have attended every event in person, my heart has been with you all; and I remain committed to serving you to the best of my ability, supported by my family.
“I have been inspired by the kindness, joy and kinship that has been so evident in recent days, and I hope this renewed sense of togetherness will be felt for many years to come.”
Along the route from Whitehall to Buckingham Palace, retracing her coronation procession, more than 6,000 participants – celebrities, costumed performers and colourful characters on extravagant floats – paraded through central London.
The procession, telling the story of the Queen’s seven-decade reign, was led by the gold state coach, more than 250 years old and a poignant symbol of the coronation.
The monarch appeared as a hologram, projected on its windows in archive footage of her as a young sovereign waving to crowds.
The pageant marked the end of a four-day, flag-waving orgy of patriotism; military ceremonials; crowds thronging the Mall; beacons and bunting; Buckingham Palace transformed by light shows and a spectacular drone display.
An average of 11.2 million TV viewers – reaching a peak of 13.4 million – tuned in to watch Saturday’s Platinum Party at the Palace and the unveiling of the biggest secret of all, the Queen demonstrating her capacity to still surprise, and her superb comic timing, in a small cameo having tea with Paddington Bear, and revealing – after seven decades – the marmaladey contents of her famous handbag.
Earlier on Sunday, Charles, who had paid tribute to “Her Majesty – Mummy”, and Camilla joined a Big Jubilee Lunch at The Oval, in south London.
His hope was that the spirit of togetherness, engendered over the weekend, would endure, telling guest Sarah Friar, CEO of neighbourhood app Nextdoor: “When it comes to Monday, are we going to go back to all the bickering again? Let’s hope we don’t do that.” Gemma Snow, from the Eden Project, who also spoke to Charles, said he talked about “keeping that togetherness going”.
There were royals aplenty in the royal box, but the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, who flew in from California last week with children Archie, three, and Lilibet, one, were not present. Absent from the palace balcony on Thursday, the couple have only been seen in public on one occasion when they appeared with other members of the royal family at Friday’s service of thanksgiving.
The final carnival act of the jubilee took place around the Queen Victoria Memorial outside Buckingham Palace, as the £15m pageant concluded in a finale with Ed Sheeran performing his hit Perfect, followed by a mass rendition of the national anthem.
A roll call of British stars, from TV, film, music and sport from each era of the Queen’s reign had travelled the route in eight open-top buses. They included Idris Elba, Alan Titchmarsh, Sir Cliff Richard, fashion royalty Kate Moss and Naomi Campbell, as well as the puppet Basil Brush.
There were dames in vintage cars, including Joan Collins, Darcey Bussell, Prue Leith, Twiggy and Zandra Rhodes. A peloton of 300 cyclists, on vintage bikes, was led by Sir Chris Hoy, Dame Laura Kenny and husband Sir Jason Kenny. A nod to Britain’s history was provided by parades of classic motorbikes, scooters, Morris Minors and vintage Land Rovers, with dancers performing the Lambeth Walk.
A fleet of Aston Martins represented James Bond. There were hippies, hula-hoopers, energetic space hoppers, Daleks, ice-cream vans, a towering cake with corgi toppers, and giant puppets – all accompanied by a cacophony of musical hits from decades past.
More than 85,000 Big Jubilee lunches were held, according to organisers.
In reality, it was a jubilee without its leading lady for much of the time, as she missed the thanksgiving service, the Epsom Derby and the pop concert. The Queen was on public view in person for just over 27 minutes throughout the weekend.

This effervescent subculture has been struggling since the 90s, but a passionate group of diehard aficionados and musicians are determined to keep the party going
Vittorio Piovani is a barber in Traversetolo, a village in central Italy. Every Sunday, he dons an elegant suit, shines his shoes, curls his long moustache and goes dancing at a club in a nearby town, like many other weekend clubbers. Except Piovani is a 75-year-old grandfather of three, living for a scene that gives him a deep-rooted sense of community and belonging.
Piovani is a diehard fan of liscio, an Italian music genre and dancing scene, with dedicated venues called balere, and a fandom that is generally over 50 (more often, over 65). In its own way, it is a glamorous, wild and countercultural corner of European clubbing. The music is effervescent – with a lot of accordion – and the aesthetic is unmistakable: band members wear satin dresses and bell-bottom suits, with lots of shiny fabric and sequins; patrons dress up as if they were attending a wedding. “Liscio has everything: a bit of waltz, a bit of polka, a bit of tango and a bit of slow-dance,” Piovani says inside the club, Redas.
Decades ago, liscio dominated central Italy, especially the region of Emilia-Romagna, but it has gone into a slow decline and now some fear that Covid might have put the final nail in the coffin. Dance halls were closed, on-and-off, for almost two years, before they were allowed to fully reopen when Italy lifted its state of emergency laws this spring. Some of them had shut down for good; others have reopened, but changed genre.
When I visit on a Sunday afternoon, Redas is full and about 150 people are lined up even before the venue is open. “Here we are – for the most part elderly people,” says Ornella, a retired clerk in her 70s. She has been a liscio aficionada since she was young, when the local Communist party organised summer festivals that included liscio dances. Claudia, 69, a cook, comes twice a week, on Thursday evenings and Sundays, because “ballroom dancing is good for my health and takes away my melancholy”.
Many of the people at Redas have a special relationship with the Lucchi-Venturi orchestra, who are playing tonight: “Of course we also hear other orchestras, but this one is special for us, it’s like there’s no distance between musicians and the audience,” says Letizia, who follows the orchestra around Italy with her husband, Massimo. When the band celebrated its 25th anniversary, right before the pandemic, the couple attended a three-day dancing party at a Lake Como hotel.
The orchestra’s namesake and accordionist, Barbara Lucchi, is a celebrity – in the 1980s she was a frequent guest on TV. Together with her husband, Massimo Venturi, also an accordionist, she leads a band of eight members, for the moment cut down to four. In the 1990s, her orchestra was playing 300 concerts each year, which had fallen to about 130 before Covid hit: “It was a complete disaster, during and after the pandemic,” she says. “Liscio artists were hit the worst.”
True, all live music was hit by lockdowns and restrictions, but liscio suffered particularly badly because its audience was more vulnerable to the virus and more cautious about returning. “We had many losses; members of our public have died,” says Lucchi. “Even now, not everyone feels like coming back, and those who do are dancing less often.” Moreover, liscio is about dancing in couples and is incompatible with social distancing.
Liscio, looked down on by Italian mainstream culture because it’s perceived as provincial, low-class and far too camp, has a strongly local and working-class dimension. Its roots are in peasant dancing fairs at the dawn of the 20th century, when Carlo Brighi, a violinist who played with Arturo Toscanini, adapted central European dances, such as the waltz, polka and mazurka, to an Italian taste. But the genre as it is known today was born in the aftermath of the second world war, when violinist and composer Secondo Casadei added modern elements such as saxophone, drums and vocalists, and became a national star. His 1950s hit Romagna mia is still a classic.
Liscio was the only dance native to Italy that survived the import of American genres, such as swing and boogie-woogie, says music critic Giulia Cavaliere. Its success, she explains, was in its romantic appeal: “It’s about dancing and eroticism. The balere were places where women dressed up to attract a companion, and where dance was a precursor to a kiss.” But there’s also an element of class redemption: “For the whole week, you are a farmer or a factory worker, but at the weekend you dress up, and for two days you have a different social role.”
Liscio further boomed in the 1960s and 70s, with orchestras such as Vera Romagna, Vittorio Borghesi, and Castellina e Pasi getting big tours. The star of that era was Raoul Casadei, Secondo’s nephew, who died last year aged 83. Remembered as “il re del Liscio,” Casadei was an icon of the 70s, even beyond the liscio circles, with his concerts aired on TV, and such a powerful household name that other orchestras randomly took the Casadei name to trick the public into believing there was some kind of connection.
But since the 1990s, liscio has suffered a steady, if slow, decline – too distinct to renew itself without losing its aficionados, but perceived as passé by younger Italians. “Back in the day, the clubs were always full and so many orchestras could find good work. Now, a big crowd comes only if big names are playing,” says Venturi. “This used to be a good job, even if you played in a smaller orchestra, but that’s no longer the case.” The economic crisis has prompted some orchestras to cut down on costs, even resorting to karaoke backing tracks, while others simply switch to more profitable genres such as Latin American dance.
“Liscio is becoming lower quality, more repetitive,” laments Moreno Conficconi, a clarinettist, vocalist and arranger who recently founded, with singer Mauro Ferrara and jazz performer Mirco Mariani, a music project called Extraliscio aiming at modernising the style, gleefully contaminating it with punk and electronica.
To liscio fans, Conficconi is a legend: he started to play in 1972 and served as head of orchestra to Raoul Casadei, who gave him the nickname of “il biondo,” by which he still goes today (even if he was never blond). But his fellow Extraliscio crew come from different backgrounds and – given liscio’s low cultural standing – they got some raised eyebrows. Mariani says that, when other jazz musicians learned he was doing a liscio project, “they were so surprised that they thought I must be having some affair with a liscio girl. To them it was just second-class music”.
Extraliscio now enjoy some prestige and have been invited to San Remo, Italy’s most prestigious music festival, but Cavaliere, the critic, doubts that that prestige will extend to the entire genre and says that its decline has deep roots. “Liscio revolved around small communities that gathered in squares and balere, but today young people don’t have that connection to their micro-community – they want to break away from it.” Conficconi, says that Covid acted “like a guillotine”, to hundreds of orchestras, and when clubs could finally reopen they didn’t get the public that they had hoped for, while Venturi says liscio is going to eventually die: “You don’t find any young person in a balera; the world changes.” But Conficconi says hope is not lost: “It’s a music that brings people together; people have found love dancing liscio. It can’t just disappear.”
Back at Redas Lucchi announces: “Now we’re doing the polka challenge!” The crowd erupts in cheers: they dance, chat and drink for hours, still having the time of their lives.

The Pyramid stage’s youngest ever headliner looks entirely at home, giving an imperious, hugely engaging performance
It’s not just that Billie Eilish is, as she’s keen to point out, the youngest headliner in Glastonbury’s history … it’s that she’s the first mainstream pop star – as in the kind of pop star that tweenage girls scream at – to headline Glastonbury. A few years ago, the announcement of an artist like that filling the main Friday night slot on the Pyramid stage would probably have generated a degree of controversy. Some berk would have got up a petition about it. But in 2022, the appearance of Billie Eilish’s name at the top of the bill passed without comment.
Whether that’s evidence that Glastonbury’s audience is skewing younger, or that Glastonbury is becoming more pop-facing in the artists it books, or that Eilish is considered of a slightly different stripe to her peers, is an interesting question. Watching her bounce from the industrial electro pop of You Should See Me in a Crown, to the kitschy lounge stylings of Billie’s Bossa Nova, to the Beatles-y Getting Older, to the Dr Dre-influenced All the Good Girls Go to Hell, one is struck by the sense that she’s certainly more musically eclectic than most of her peers. And if you get the impression that festivals aren’t necessarily her natural habitat – “you guys are troupers, with your tents and shit”, she opines at one point – from the moment she appears, she looks entirely at home.
While many of the artists who appear on the Pyramid stage on Friday seem overawed by the size of the crowd they’ve attracted and the vociferousness of their response – at one point, it looks like Sam Fender is so struck by the moment he might start crying – Eilish looks anything but. There’s something imperious about her performance: it all feels appealingly confident. The set is essentially a truncated version of the show she’s been touring around arenas in recent months, and it comes complete with pop arena show staples including dividing the audience up and getting them to cheer in turn, a lot of talk about empowerment and loving yourself, and videos of the artist as a small child playing on the big screens. But it doesn’t lose anything in translation to a festival setting. If she asks the audience to crouch down and jump, they happily oblige. It’s heavy on slow-moving ballads, which is theoretically risky, but she never seems to lose the crowd.
Perhaps that’s because Eilish is a hugely engaging performer. Moreover she genuinely appears to be enjoying herself, at odds with her pouty gothic image and the plethora of songs on her last album – Happier Than Ever – that made being a teenage pop sensation when you’re barely out of her teens sound like a pretty miserable business. Her enthusiasm is infectious, her biggest hits – Bury a Friend, Bad Guy – pack an immense bass-heavy punch, while the ballad Your Power, introduced with a mention of the overturning of Roe Vs Wade as “a dark day for women”, has a spellbinding, eerie fragility. By the time she ends with Happier Than Ever’s slowly-building title track – its furiously angry crescendo given an extra layer of theatricality by the sheer quantity of pyrotechnics exploding over the stage – her performance doesn’t just seem like a musical shift for Glastonbury, but a triumph as well.

I couldn’t imagine myself outside of cartoonish stereotypes like Apu from the Simpsons and Sacha Baron Cohen’s Borat
When Rami Malek speaks Arabic, he searches frantically for words. He speaks like an eight-year-old trying to repair the root of a dying tree. He speaks like a cellphone losing signal in a long tunnel. He speaks like me.
I started watching Mr Robot by mistake. Back in 2017, it was an obscure niche show on a network no one had ever heard of. It was weird and punk and anti-capitalist before TikTok had turned all the Zoomers into Marxists. It seemed too good to be true; a high-budget production in the aftermath of the Arab spring and Occupy Wall Street, proselytising about toxic consumerism and toxic masculinity, preaching to a choir of disillusioned millennials whose future was stolen by their property investor parents who pulled up the ladder before any of them had a chance to dream. It was a show about loneliness and mental illness and drug dependency, years before the glossy hedonism of Euphoria, but retaining a beating sincerity that was intoxicating and wounded.
It was only a matter of time before kids on the internet ripped Elliot’s monologue from the pilot episode about how capitalism destroyed every genuine notion we still held on to, and how America was an empire built on lies and the bones of third-world children. Then the rest of us started paying attention.
The show’s attitudes were all due to the understated genius of Sam Esmail, an Egyptian-American kid from the suburban ghetto of New Jersey, who had dreamt the full world of Mr Robot in its absolute form and pitched the show as a contained five-season arc. There was not a note out of place.
Sam was the nerdy perfectionist maestro the internet had been waiting for. But it was Rami Malek’s heart-wrenching introversion that grounded the show’s daring premise.
I never noticed just how Egyptian he looked until I saw his twin brother, slightly chubbier and unshaven, standing next to him outside the Oscars. Rami was just a cleaned-up version of a makwagy (the man who irons your clothes for you for a couple of pounds, usually on an ironing board outside your apartment block, then brings it up to you at the end of the weekend), with all the intensity of an Egyptian and the quiet of a first-gen immigrant kid thrown into the jaws of primary- school social life with no grasp of English. Yes, I’m projecting, and yes, that’s the point. It hurts to finally find representation on screen in your late twenties.
I didn’t have an Elliot when I was tumbling through high school. I had Osama bin Laden and the obnoxious and hairy tour guide from the first Mummy film played by Persian-British actor Omid Djalili. I rewatched it again recently and was aghast at the nonchalance of its racism. How was this normal for us growing up? How did we not flinch at the cheap jokes, the sea of robed and dusty Arab farmers yelling nonsensically, frothing at the mouth for blood? This is all I had growing up, and I often wonder what damage it did to my self-esteem, to the potential I saw for myself in the world.
Who could I become if I couldn’t imagine myself outside these cartoonish stereotypes?
For Malek, it took years of playing background White-passing characters in sitcoms and indie films. His most prominent role before then was as Ahkmenrah in Night at the Museum. At least he was Egyptian, right?
But then he was sidelined in the sequel in favour of cultural chameleon and Brown-whisperer Hank Azaria, who spent decades defending his obscene and lazy role as Apu from The Simpsons. He helped introduce high-school bullies everywhere to a cheap foreign accent they could imitate for guaranteed laughs at the expense of the poor foreign kid at the back of the class. Soon he was joined by Sacha Baron Cohen’s Borat, a caricature which somehow lives on as a respected and canonised example of comic genius and not a profoundly racist lowbrow punch-down. Cohen has carved his entire career on such gags, from his one-dimensional faux satirical appropriation of Black culture in Ali G, to his exhausting and redundant piss-take of the Arab world in The Dictator. All his material recycles familiar and tired stereotypes, which he lathers over his skin and dances, plucking cheap laughs at the expense of cultures that never feature in his films or speak with any agency.
I watched the Borat sequel with squinted eyes, trying to figure out why a film like this could still be celebrated. Maybe there was some hidden layer that I couldn’t grasp. An inside joke that everyone else was getting but me. But I could not find it. And yet Cohen has been lauded as an intellectual for shedding light on western antisemitism and homophobia, despite dragging other silenced people through the mud to do it. His films allow us to laugh at racist jokes the way we secretly want to, without feeling guilty. We feel superior to the dumb White Americans he fools into exposing their prejudices, while never being challenged about our own.
The problematic conversation around diversity and representation in film was summed up in a viral interview clip between Matt Damon and Effie Brown from 2015, in which Damon pushed back against the notion that power in Hollywood is concentrated in the hands of White directors, writers and producers, saying that because there were now plenty of actors of colour on screen, it wasn’t necessary also to have people behind the camera who weren’t White. It was easy for celebrities to champion inclusion, but when their own privileges were highlighted, many of them got defensive.
When Ridley Scott picked an all-White cast in his interpretation of the biblical story of Moses in Exodus: Gods and Kings, he justified it by saying there was no way he could finance a film by casting “Mohamed so-and-so”, and that those complaining should “get a life”. Christian Bale played Moses – opposite Joel Edgerton in a tan as the pharaoh and Sigourney Weaver as the pharaoh’s wife. When he was asked why a film that takes place in Egypt failed to employ anyone of Egyptian, north African or Arab descent, he responded: ‘If people start supporting those films … then financiers in the market will follow.’
Media mogul Rupert Murdoch jumped in: ‘Since when are Egyptians not White? All I know are.’
Despite the rich history of film in Egypt, which served for almost a century as the cultural and entertainment heart of the Middle East, it was too inconvenient to hire Egyptian actors to play main roles, or any role for that matter, in a story ultimately about Egyptian history and mythology. A few years later, Israeli actor and former IDF soldier Gal Gadot was announced in a starring role in an upcoming adaptation of Cleopatra. It was billed as a “feminist film”, told from the perspective of the ignored female voice in historical narrative. Without a hint of irony, my own people’s history was sidelined once again. Another group of White producers frolicking through other people’s cultures, clipping flowers from the shrub, and leaving the roots to rot.
Am I bitter? You bet. Am I surprised? Nope.
This is an edited extract from How to be a Bad Muslim and Other Essays by Mohamed Hassan (Penguin, NZ$35.00)

Heatwaves becoming more frequent and are beginning earlier, according to Spanish meteorological office
Spain is in the grip of its first heatwave of the year, with temperatures in parts of the west and south expected to reach 44C (111.2F).
Heatwaves – defined as at least three consecutive days of temperatures above the average recorded for July and August from 1971-2000 – are becoming more frequent and are beginning earlier, according Aemet, the Spanish meteorological office. “We are facing unusually high temperatures for June,” said Rubén del Campo, an Aemet spokesperson.
The heatwave, the result of the anti-cyclone Alex and a mass of very hot air over north Africa, is expected to last at least until Tuesday and is the third earliest on record. The last time a heatwave arrived this early was in 1981.
It follows the hottest May on record, with temperatures last month three degrees above average.
Aemet calculates that global heating means Spain’s summer begins between 20 and 40 days earlier than it did 50 years ago. There have been 10 June heatwaves since 1975, five of them since 2011 and, assuming this one lasts three days, over the past 12 years there will have been a heatwave in June every two years.
Last year was Spain’s hottest and driest on record, with temperatures hitting an all-time high of 47.4C in Montoro in the southern province of Córdoba. Overall, across the country the average temperature was 0.5C above the average for 1981-2010. And 2021 was not a one-off but the latest in a series of hot years.
“For the first time we’ve seen eight consecutive years with above-average temperatures,” Del Campo said. “There is a clear trend towards things getting hotter.”
These hot years have not been matched by cold ones. Over the past 10 years, only 14 exceptionally cold days have been recorded, compared with 146 exceptionally hot ones.
With little time to acclimatise to what would normally be midsummer temperatures, people are at greater risk of heatstroke, dizziness and headaches. It will also be harder to sleep, with night-time temperatures of 25C – officially “torrid nights”, according to Aemet – or in some areas 30C, known as “infernal nights”.
A study carried out last year in cities in Spain, Portugal, France and Italy revealed a link between mortality and high night-time temperatures.
Spain’s department of health has warned people to stay indoors as much as possible and to avoid exercise during the hottest part of the day. People are also urged to drink plenty of water and avoid alcohol.

He’s US TV royalty, Barbra Streisand’s other half, and has some seriously impressive hobbies – but even at 81, the Lightyear star still suffers from ‘collywobbles’
James Brolin and I meet in a restaurant in Malibu, just down the road from his home, to share a loaf of delicious courgette bread and talk about his role in Lightyear, the latest Toy Story offshoot – except, it turns out, Brolin isn’t allowed to discuss the movie yet. To have the ostensible object of conversation taken off the table would be, in most interviews, something of a disadvantage. But with Brolin, 81, it is a most fortuitous development because there is so much else to discuss.
“This one time, Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman and my dentist – who had a great Ferrari – and I drove race cars on the track. Gene was the fastest, but he drove the most cars off the road,” is one typical snatch of conversation from Brolin. “The only airplane I own right now is the one I finished building during the pandemic,” is another. Who wouldn’t want to spend a day chewing the fat and courgette bread with him?
In the UK, Brolin is probably best known for being the father of Josh Brolin and the husband of a little-known singer called Barbra Streisand, and he is more than fine with that, proudly mentioning both within the first 10 minutes of our conversation. This is a relief, because I worried beforehand how soon would be too soon to bring up La Streisand. So when he casually explains that we’re meeting in a restaurant instead of his home because “Barbra and I are having the barn painted”, I make a small excited squeak, then apologise and promise not to squeal every time he mentions his wife. “Don’t worry, I totally understand,” he replies with a genial and proud smile. Taking this as an invitation to break my promise, I burble what a thrill it was to see her perform live in London a few years ago.
“Were you there, too?” he asks. “I was filming everything backstage. And when I looked out at the crowds all watching her I thought: ‘Oh wow!’” In the US, Brolin is TV royalty of long standing. He starred in the hit medical series Marcus Welby, MD (1969-1976), for which he won two Golden Globes and an Emmy, and in primetime soap opera Hotel (1983-1988). He’s sort of like a US David Jason, but with a storied movie career too, which runs from the original Westworld film to Steven Soderbergh’s Traffic, and his low and rich rumble has made him a favourite for voiceovers – for Lightyear he is voicing the role of Buzz’s archenemy, Emperor Zurg.
Brolin was, and remains, strapping and dashing (Streisand ain’t no fool), so much so that he played Clark Gable in the 1976 film Gable and Lombard, and was picked by Cubby Broccoli to be the next Bond when Roger Moore, then 56 years old, said he didn’t want to make Octopussy. Tragically, the world was denied Brolin’s Bond because, at the last minute, Moore changed his mind.
“I loved doing the tests for that movie with Vijay [Amritraj] and the snake,” he says. “I came to London, I became Cubby’s best friend, we went to all the great clubs, found a flat for me, and the movie people said to me: ‘Get to work with the stuntmen, get some style going here, and go home and get your stuff and get ready to move here for a year.’” Spoiler! Did Brolin ever say to him: “Hey, you stole my part”? “No, but that was interesting, yah,” he says in his languid, somewhat folksy way. “Was Roger just playing a game with the producers? I don’t know. He was pretty old by then. I think he thought: ‘I’m going to go off and do other movies’ – but then there weren’t any. Now, do you know about the rest of my career?”
I thought I did, and had my questions all cued up about what it was like to work with Charlton Heston (in Skyjacked) and Rod Steiger (in The Amityville Horror). But Brolin means his other careers, which include working in the lumber business, raising cattle and horses, flying planes, racing cars … all of which he did while acting. Brolin is very much a Hollywood star of the old school, back when actors lived genuinely exciting lives, as opposed to curating their content on Instagram. When he lived out on his ranch, he used to fly himself to meetings in LA, and if he has a few hours in an afternoon he still likes to take to the skies.
Does Streisand ever join him? “Oh no. She’ll say: ‘Jim, I’m not going with you!’” he says, doing a pretty good imitation of her.
Brolin was born and raised in southern California, the son of a building contractor and a housewife. As a deeply shy teenager, he harboured no youthful dreams of being an actor, instead working as a valet and in garages, perfecting his knowledge of cars. Plus, he surfed a bit, “but I was never a really good surfer,” he says, “not like Josh. He came fourth in the state of California!”
Despite his reticence, his good looks were noticed and when he was 18 he was asked on the street if he’d appear in a commercial. He agreed, on the condition that it wouldn’t be a speaking part. Soon after that, his old schoolfriend Ryan O’Neal, “who had always been kind of a ruffian, getting into fights, although I have to watch my words”, was cast in the TV show Empire, and he suggested that Brolin speak with his agent.
By 1960, he was under contract at Fox, which still operated under the old studio system, where young actors were taught to dance, do ballet and fence, “all that 1940s stuff,” he says. Brolin forced himself to overcome his shyness in the acting classes. “But on the first day of any shoot, I still get – and I don’t know if this is a real word – the collywobbles,” he admits. Collywobbles would have been understandable during one of his first jobs, when he was cast as Marlon Brando’s son in Mutiny on the Bounty. Alas, the part was later cut from the film, but Brolin still got to spend a year in Tahiti with Brando. “I must say, it was a hell of a year,” he says with, surely, some understatement.
Did he hang out with Brando?
“I did a little bit. He was in his late 30s and I was 19, but I didn’t feel threatened by him. He was a manipulator, but I loved him. I even got invited a couple times to dinner at his house. It was a lot of late nights and a lot of Tahitian dancing, which is very difficult. So everybody was in great shape – well, except for the booze,” he says.
After almost a decade of bit parts here and there, he was cast in Marcus Welby, MD, as the handsome, motorcycle-riding Dr Kiley – a precursor, in many ways, to George Clooney’s similarly star-making role on ER. But unlike Clooney, Brolin was a married man with two sons, Josh and Jess. Was he able to be a good father despite being a celebrity? “I think so, although nothing compared to Josh. He is so attentive! Every moment they’re off and running on another adventure,” he says, again self-deprecating to boost his son.
It’s a striking reversal from the competitive dynamic of most father-son acting duos; Kirk Douglas, for example, was devastated when women started walking past him to meet his son Michael. Has Brolin ever felt competitive with Josh? “Oh no, I learn from him. But if I say to him: ‘If you need any help, let me know,’ then the wall comes down and it’s: ‘I want to do it myself.’ And that’s fine, that’s the father-son syndrome,” he says.
Brolin Sr had a steady career as a leading man in the 1970s and 80s in films such as Night of the Juggler and High Risk, all the while keeping all his other careers going, including car racing. He was asked to be in a race that was part of the famous Grand Prix of Long Beach, where celebrities race against professionals, and competed as a professional. “And I beat the celebrities, which was a big thing for me,” he says. In the 80s, the family moved from the ranch to the now very ritzy area of Montecito, into a house that Brolin built. Sadly, they later sold it. Its last owners recently parted with it for $39m. “If only I’d kept it! But that’s everybody’s story, isn’t it?” he says.
Well, not everyone’s, probably, but how many houses does Brolin have now? “We have three houses on our property,” he says in a tone that suggests this is very much the tip of a property iceberg. So he and Streisand have three houses next to one another? “Yes, there’s the house where we live, the centre house is a guest house and for music recording, and there’s the house that she uses for storing all the stuff she’s been collecting.”
What does she collect? “Anything: rare furniture, jewellery, whatever she thinks is beautiful. And usually it turns out a great artist made it,” he says, proud as punch.
Before Streisand and her three houses came along, Brolin was married to the US actor Jan Smithers, the mother of his daughter Molly. She was his second wife, having previously been married to Jane Agee, the mother of his two sons. He and Smithers divorced after a decade. “I learned about handling Barbra from my previous marriages, and we’ve been terrific. It’s been 25 years now. The other day we were in the market, walking around, holding hands and looking at ice-creams, and this guy came up to us and pointed to one of the rag papers that said we’re getting a huge divorce! Well, it keeps those papers alive,” he says.
The two met when a mutual friend called Brolin’s manager and asked if he would be interested in a date with Streisand. “I’d seen her twice before, at a luncheon and at the Oscars, and went: ‘Whoa!’ She was different from what I expected, because we all have preconceptions about people. So I said: ‘Yes, absolutely interested,’” he says. The same mutual friend invited them to a dinner party, but Brolin had made the rookie error of recently shaving off most of his hair, as he’d decided to stop dyeing the grey and go natural. Streisand walked behind him as he sat down for dinner, put her hand on his head and said: “Who fucked up your hair?” “And that was it – I fell in love,” he says, enjoying the memory.
Brolin, like every sane human, is clearly a little in awe of Streisand: “The way she designs a house! She’s so good at saying: ‘Do this, I want to see it tomorrow,’ and the guys get on with it, they know how she works. And afterwards you go: ‘Whoa, she made something I did not envision!’” Did she allow him to design any part of their houses? “She allowed me to design my area. But then she would say: ‘You don’t want the door there!’”
At the time of our interview, Streisand’s 80th birthday is mere weeks away. Is she hard to buy presents for? Brolin looks surprised at the question. “Oh no. She recently said: ‘My birthday is coming up but I know what I want, and I want it now,’ and I said: ‘OK, get it,’ and she got a Cartier watch,” he says. See? Easy.
Tragically, I must now rush to the airport. Brolin is anxious that I might get hungry on the flight, so he carefully wraps up the remains of our courgette loaf and puts it in my bag. He gives me a big hug goodbye before driving off, and it’s like being embraced by a gentlemanly bear. Lucky Barbra.
Lightyear is in cinemas from 17 June.

Dom Phillips, whose death in the Amazon has shocked many, was a frequent contributor to the Guardian. Here are some of his outstanding pieces of journalism
Over some of the most tumultuous years in Brazil, Dom Phillips bore witness to the politics of his adopted home and to the fate of the Amazon rainforest. Travelling into the forest is a slow and laborious process, yet Phillips returned again and again.
Phillips wrote regularly for the Guardian and other publications. Here, we have collected some of his most outstanding pieces of journalism.
Phillips met indigenous expert Bruno Pereira for the first time in 2018 when they travelled to the Javari valley where armed poachers were plundering the rivers.
For more than a decade after the reserve was set up in 1998, its 16 uncontacted Indigenous tribes were among the best protected in Brazil. Yet today it is invaded on multiple fronts, leaving its isolated groups – who hunt with bows and arrows or blow-pipes, and avoid contact with modern society – at risk. Contact with outsiders can be deadly for these groups, who lack immunity to diseases like flu.
“The vulnerability of these peoples is growing,” Beto Marubo, a Javari Indigenous leader, told the United Nations permanent forum on indigenous issues in New York in April. “There is no effective protection.”
The gigantic Amazon and the Indigenous tribes that live there were a focus for Phillips from early on, as this piece for the Washington Post also shows.
The S11D seam alone is over five miles long. “It is the biggest seam, the biggest reserve that Vale has. In the future it is a platform for growth for the company,” Sebe said.
But it will also consume a part of Brazil’s past. Archaeologists say that caves in the area hold clues to Amazon habitations that were unknown until the 1980s.
Evidence from those caves suggests that nomadic peoples lived in the Amazon up to 9,000 years ago, cultivating manioc and the acai fruit.
“They managed to cultivate the forest without knocking it down,” said Marcos Magalhães, an archaeologist from the Emílio Goeldi museum in Para’s state capital, Belem, who has studied caves in the area. “The Amazon was the Garden of Eden.”
Meanwhile, as the prospect of the election of Jair Bolsonaro to the Brazilian presidency grew more realistic, Phillips tracked the anxieties of environmentalists.
Polls show that Jair Bolsonaro, the far-right former army captain, has 78% support in Rondônia, leaving his leftist rival Fernando Haddad in the dust.
In the Amazon, Bolsonaro has promised progress instead of protection.
And his radical proposals – to neuter federal environment agencies, give the green light to destructive hydroelectric dams, freeze the demarcation of new indigenous reserves and open up existing ones to mining – chime with voters here, including those breaking environmental laws.
In an April interview with Brazil’s Estado de S. Paulo newspaper, Bolsonaro said Brazil should clear more forest land to produce food for a growing world population.
Environmentalists, he said, “hope that I don’t become president”.
Once Bolsonaro came into power in January 2019, Phillips carried on reporting as everything environmentalists had feared came to pass.
The Indigenous people at the assembly already felt threatened by Bolsonaro’s rhetoric. Some communities remember the devastation caused by artisanal gold miners called garimpeiros, others the domination by powerful rice farmers. Then in January, a sudden, ill-explained visit by regional Bolsonaro allies raised suspicions that plans were already afoot.
“We are not fighting the farmer, a little garimpeiro. We are fighting the government,” Edinho de Souza, the CIR’s vice-coordinator from the Macuxi tribe, told the meeting. “We won’t let this land be destroyed.”
In the summer of 2019, fires scorched the Amazon rainforest, shocking the world.
Brazil’s far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, who has been widely criticised for failing to respond quickly to the crisis, issued a decree on Thursday banning fires in the Amazon for 60 days – a move environmentalists described as largely symbolic.
The fires are often used to clear pasture and deforested areas in the Amazon during dry winter months, but there have been 28,000 this month – more than any August since 2010.
In 2019 Phillips covered the collapse of the Brumadinho dam, one of Brazil’s worst environmental disasters.
Fernando Coelho, who was working at a nearby ore treatment unit, was asked to find sand and gravel for the repair. He then followed the night’s events on his radio.
“The supervisor found the mud leaking,” he said. “They called for my father, because he had worked his whole life with dams and mines.”
By 4pm the following day, workers had been brought in to fix it and the area had been sealed off. “They did the repair and said there was no problem,” he said.
Coelho broke into tears as he remembered his father warning him to steer clear of the dam. “That’s going to burst at any time,” he recalled him saying.
At the same time, Phillips was digging deep into the power of different sectors in Brazil and the effect they were having on the fate of the rainforest – keeping the Guardian’s legal team busy. He wrote about the gold industry.
“I know it is illegal,” says Bernardo Gomes, 59, sitting by the frame of a bar. Formerly a worker at mining giant Vale, Gomes says his time at the company taught him how to protect the environment. “Today, unfortunately, I am helping to destroy it,” he says, explaining that a nearby patch of dead trees was suffocated by mud sucked out of the nearby mining pit.
Some of his companions decline to talk, including a young woman who arrives carrying a bottle of whiskey and a speaker playing pop music. “Want a photo? Naked?” she jokes.
Phillips travelled in and out of the Amazon to investigate the impact of the vast Brazilian meat industry on the forest.
First, landgrabbers and loggers remove the most valuable trees, leaving some cover to make it harder for satellites to spot the damage. The remaining trees are then felled, left to dry and burned – hence the fires. Later grass is sown, and cattle put on the deforested land to consolidate possession.
This is “the classic cycle we have seen in recent years”, said Greenpeace Brazil’s senior forest campaigner, Adriana Charoux. If the farmer feels confident enough about his ownership of the land, the next stage is soya, she added.
In collaboration with the Bureau of Investigative Journalism and Repórter Brasil, Phillips exposed links to illegal deforestation in the supply chains of the world’s largest meat company, JBS. The company went on to reorganise its monitoring systems and make a pledge to net zero.
This time, the apparent link between an indirect supplier and JBS was inadvertently revealed by one of its own employees. In July last year, a truck driver took photographs of himself in his JBS uniform, and of his JBS truck, by a sign marked “Fazenda Estrela do Aripuanã – 15km” at the southern end of the Amazon rainforest. Fazenda Estrela do Aripuanã is a farm near the town of Aripuanã, in the north-west of Mato Grosso state, operated by Ronaldo Venceslau Rodrigues da Cunha. His company, according to its website, currently breeds and fattens 102,000 cattle across 16 sites spanning some 72,000 hectares of pasture.
In 2021, Phillips stepped back from freelance journalism to concentrate on writing a book about his beloved Amazon. The book would focus on Amazonian development and study, attempting to work out which projects worked over the long term, and which make the rainforest and the people who live there poorer. It was during his last reporting trip for the book that he and Pereira disappeared.

From skateboarding to reggae, from carnivals to police brutality, Ové blazed a trail through cinema. As the director picks up a title, actor Lennie James pays tribute to his mentor, friend and inspiration
Later this week, my friend and mentor Horace Ové will head to Buck House to be made a knight of the British empire. Those of us who know Horace rejoice at this richly deserved honour. We are also amused by the deep irony. For the very empire that will anoint him is the same one that Horace – throughout his six-decade career as a pioneering film-maker, writer, painter and photographer – has held a mirror to and been a fierce critic of. It is all so very Horace.
Known as the godfather of black British film-making, having directed the first black British feature – Pressure – in 1976, Horace was also the first to document the arrival (and importance) of reggae to the UK with 1971’s Reggae. Shortly after, King Carnival told the story of the Trinidad carnival, while 1978’s Skateboard Kings chronicled the birth of the new sport.
If Horace has a style, it would sit somewhere in the reportage school. He is a documentarian at his core. His camera rarely intrudes. He sets it up to bear witness. He wants his subjects to speak for themselves, to reveal the complexities of their lives. “I’m interested in people that are trapped,” he once said. “The trap that we are all in and how we try to get out of it.”
In his depictions of this battle, Horace has been resolute and fearless. Pressure is the story of a Windrush family trying to come to terms with life in Britain. Told primarily through Tony, the first member of his immigrant family to be born in the UK, the film showed the forces at play on black boys stepping into manhood in 1970s Britain. So searingly authentic was the film, it was effectively banned for almost three years. The scene at issue portrayed police brutality and Horace wouldn’t cut or re-edit it for its funder, the British Film Institute. He waited it out and fought for his vision. He won.
As a photographer, Horace chronicled the growth of black British consciousness and political awakening in 1970s and 80s London. He was in the room, an active participant, a voice around the table alongside Stokely Carmichael, Darcus Howe, Michael X, John Lennon and others. With cameras rolling, or his trusted Nikon SLR slung between his neck and armpit, Horace, more than almost anyone else, has documented the black British experience from the front line. His photography is always active: there is nothing passive in the situations he captures or the faces he shoots. His search, he says, is for “the reality of a moment in a person’s life”.
There is no truer example of this than Horace’s shot of Michael X – a major voice in the British black power movement – and his entourage walking along a platform at Paddington station. Horace captures them in step and in formation around Michael X, all clad head to toe in black and wearing dark glasses. You can feel their swagger, the defiance in their walk, their pride and their strength. Also, in the faces of the white man and boy watching them pass, Horace shows the fear they engendered.
I first met Horace when he cast me in The Orchid House, his 1991 adaptation of Phyllis Shand Allfrey’s Caribbean saga for Channel 4. Told through the eyes of Lally, the family nanny, the series captured the decline of a once wealthy white family in Dominica between the first and second world wars, and the black people who interacted with them. The job was a profound one for me. It was my first major TV role out of drama school and the longest time I had spent in the West Indies. I had become a young father just four weeks before we started shooting and Horace took me under his wing. I don’t know why. Maybe it was our shared Trinidadian heritage. Maybe he could just see what I needed.
Horace directs like he is hosting a party. That’s what I remember most about working with him, the laughter and the long hours. His notes come as if he is sharing a joke or telling you where the good rum is. I remember shooting a scene where my character was speaking to a crowd about the need for Dominican workers to unionise. Horace’s note after a few takes was a question: “You ever take the floor with your boys at a dance?” I knew what he meant. He knew I would.
Horace has been my Obi-Wan for over 30 years. I rely on his guidance so much that when I need to have a chat with myself, the other voice in my head sounds a lot like his. Over the years, I have met a good few people making strides in film, TV and theatre in Britain, who sought out Horace and sat at his feet. So many of us consider him our inspiration. He was one of the first to crack through the glass ceiling and he did so with others in mind. Whether we follow the same path he laid out for us or not, when we look down, his footprints are there. Arise Sir Horace, a true knight.

Creativity has been Matt Ottley’s salvation – but for the artist, composer and children’s book author, it has come at a terrible price
Up a steep road to the top of a ridge, all the mundane falls away.
From here, between the surrounding hills of the Northern Rivers region of NSW, the great heft of Wollumbin Mt Warning is revealed – its forested flanks a blue haze, its rock face summit glistening in the sun. Wedge-tailed eagles ride the thermals above, and rainforest redolent with wildlife runs in every direction.
It is to this place, Uki in the Tweed shire, that Matt Ottley retreated more than 10 years ago. The musician, artist and children’s book author lives surrounded by a raucous avian chorus. In this house – his refuge – he has found peace from the pain of his past.
Ottley has always had a heightened sensitivity to the hurt and beauty of the world. It’s something he shares with the young protagonist in his latest release, The Tree of Ecstasy and Unbearable Sadness. It’s a monumental project comprising not just the book but an accompanying symphonic score on CD, which was performed by a Czech orchestra, and a 50-minute animation created from the book’s 74 paintings and illustrations which is screening in small theatres around the country.
The story follows a boy who, like Ottley, sees things differently. “His gift showed him things so beautiful they made him cry. But it also tormented him with the pain of others that made him feel numb,” it reads. The narrative unfolds around the metaphor of a tree growing inside him: its flower is ecstasy, its fruit is sadness. It was inspired by Ottley’s bipolar disorder, which he was diagnosed with in his 40s.
“The tree really came out of one of my own psychotic experiences where I thought I had something growing inside me,” he says. “It was a plant that was sort of floral in nature. That’s what I wanted to express.”
In the book, the tree morphs into a flying cow, a reptile, then a blue bird, which flies across mountains and oceans into a world of “beauty and wonder”. All of the stages of the journey represent the stages of psychosis – such as in an ancient city, when it encounters an egocentric sovereign with the huge bulbous body of an insect.
“She is the sort of infantile self at the heart of psychosis,” Ottley says. “When you are in that state the other doesn’t exist. The world has become so warped and you’re trying to navigate your way in it.”
Flying over valleys and hills, the boy travels through the stages of fragility and revelation into darkness and tempest – until he comes back into the world and himself with “quietude” and hope.
As we sit on his terrace overlooking the natural vista, freshly baked muffins are placed on the table by Ottley’s partner, Tina Wilson. Ottley is a gentle man, delicate and kind of beatific with long white hair. One of the country’s most popular author-illustrators, he has worked on more than 40 titles – among them last year’s prime minister’s literary award-winning kids book How To Make A Bird, written by Meg McKinlay.
But he says the scope of his creativity has come at a terrible price. It wasn’t until his mid-40s that Ottley was properly diagnosed and treated for type 1 bipolar disorder. By then, he had suffered countless frightening periods of mania and depression, psychotic episodes that would end in psyche wards, and two suicide attempts.
“I have had some very high level creative abilities that are a result of being bipolar – but it is a huge price to pay for that,” Ottley said. “If you could have access to a magic button that would turn this illness off, most people would say no because of the creativity. But I would says yes.
“If I could relive my life without any of the creativity, if I could turn this illness off and live a quiet life, with a quiet mind, I would.”
He used to hide his illness, living a life of secrecy and shame. As a teenager he “would just go to ground or go to my room and ride it out. Until I was in my 40s, I just felt so alone with it.”
Ottley spent the first 11 years of his life in Papua New Guinea at a time when the country was becoming increasingly dangerous for Australians. When he was nine he was sexually assaulted by a man, a trauma he believes may have triggered a genetic predisposition to bipolar disorder.
“The way it’s explained to me is that you basically inherit a number of genes that – when they are switched on – you start to experience the illness. It can be trauma that switches those genes on.”
In the following decades, whatever he tried, his illness would be waiting to grab him and drag him down. He would become unwell, crash and burn and run. He failed school – “I just couldn’t do it” – and followed his father and brother into the bush to work as a stockman, but says he “was not good at that sort of work”. He studied at Julian Ashton art school, became unwell, went bush again. Returning to the bush became “a pattern”. He studied music at Wollongong University, but couldn’t complete that either. “I actually don’t have any educational qualifications,” he says.
Ottley also has synaesthesia, a neurological condition. “Sound starts to become very colourful and I see lots of shapes, and start becoming hypersensitive to sound and light.” In a rehearsal with musicians he can tell if someone is a bit off-key, “because it is the wrong colour”.
The Tree of Ecstasy and Unbearable Sadness had its genesis in two periods of illness. During a severe episode in 2010, Ottley lost the ability to understand speech. But music was “crystal clear,” he says, “so I started writing music”.
“The sound I was hearing was 97 instruments. I wanted a string family of 50 players, a bass clarinet, a bassoon.” This would become the overture to the symphonic soundtrack to the book, with tumultuous crescendos falling to wailing laments; recorded by the Brno Philharmonic Orchestra and the 40-voice Czech Philharmonic Choir of Brno, it is the sound of psychosis.
“If you start creating an orchestral sound in your head and you’re becoming unwell and you tip into psychosis, you can actually hear it like it’s out there. It’s a 68-part fugue that is meant to represent the clamour of noise in a person’s head, whether it is multiple voices or any other kind of auditory hallucination that is happening, and just becomes unbearable and you just want it to stop.”
A couple of years later, keeping a recovery journal after another serious episode, he wrote the poem which would become the text of The Tree of Ecstasy. “It just sort of dropped out of the universe.”
Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning
The music took two years to compose, and the 74 artworks took three years to paint. Together it is a towering work for adults and children; a luminous, intense and ultimately beautiful journey through the stages of psychosis, and out the other side. “I wanted to create a metaphorical experience that goes straight to the emotional centres, to give people a visceral experience of what it feels like,” Ottley says.
“I think the arts are a direct conduit to our deeper emotional thinking that bypasses logical, superficial thinking, and can get right at the heart of what we feel about something.”
Ottley’s aim is to destigmatise mental illness, to illuminate the experience of those who don’t live with bipolar disorder and advocate for those who do. “Probably the message is that it cannot be about judgment,” he says. “I think all things can be achieved through empathy. I encourage people not to feel humiliated about those aspects of their life, or the thoughts they have around self-harm or harming others. To be really, really open from a very early stage about these things. Because of the deep shame that surrounds these things people just remain closed until it is too late.
“You can get a diagnosis, you can get treatment. Go out into the world and find the people you need to talk to, and ask for their forgiveness for your behaviours, and forgive yourself as well. The condition doesn’t go away, but life goes on and you can find peace.”
Creativity has always been Ottley’s salvation – “I could always turn to that” – but it is the love of his partner and friends that has brought him to relative tranquility.
Likewise, his book ends with his protagonist hearing the distant voices of those who loved him calling him back.
“I am here” he called. And so he came back into the world. And still the Tree of Ecstasy and Unbearable Sadness was within him. And still it grew flowers. And still it bore fruit.
The Tree of Ecstasy and Unbearable Sadness it out now through Dirt Lane Press. The animation will be screened on 23 June at the University of Sydney, on 18 and 21 August at the National Portrait Gallery in Canberra, and on 21 and 22 September at the State Library in Perth
In Australia, support is available at Beyond Blue on 1300 22 4636, Lifeline on 13 11 14, Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, and at MensLine on 1300 789 978. In the UK, the charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393 and ChildLine on 0800 1111. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255

The actor has announced he will speak live online to the director on 28 June
Alec Baldwin has announced he is to interview Woody Allen on Instagram Live on 28 June.
The actor made the announcement on his own Instagram account, with a note which sought to pre-empt criticism of the move.
“Let me preface this by stating that I have ZERO INTEREST in anyone’s judgments and sanctimonious posts here,” he wrote in the caption.
“I am OBVIOUSLY someone who has my own set of beliefs and COULD NOT CARE LESS about anyone else’s speculation. If you believe that a trial should be conducted by way of an HBO documentary, that’s your issue.”
Baldwin was referencing Allen v Farrow, Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering’s HBO miniseries, which explored the allegation of sexual abuse made against Allen by his adopted daughter Dylan Farrow in 1992.
The film, which was made with the involvement of Dylan, her brother Ronan and their mother, Mia, refocused attention on the case. Allen has always denied the allegation; two lengthy investigations closed with no charges being brought against him.
Allen continues to make films, although his four-picture Amazon deal was cancelled as a result of the backlash to the Farrows’ renewed calls for Allen to be shunned by the industry. Allen reached a settlement with Amazon in 2019, after suing them for $68m.
Baldwin has worked with Allen on Alice (1990), To Rome With Love (2012) and Blue Jasmine (2013). He has remained one of the director’s most dedicated defenders, along with Diane Keaton, Scarlett Johansson, Larry David, Javier Bardem and Jude Law.
Those who have expressed regret over working him include Kate Winslet, Rebecca Hall, Colin Firth and Timothée Chalamet.
Baldwin is himself the subject of multiple lawsuits over the accidental fatal shooting in October 2021 of cinematographer Halyna Hutchins on the set of Rust, a new western on which he is both lead actor and a producer.

Seals was lead vocalist of pair known for 1970s hits such as Summer Breeze and Diamond Girl
Jim Seals, of music duo Seals and Crofts, has died at the age of 80.
The lead vocalist of the pair, known for hits such as Summer Breeze and Diamond Girl, died on Monday. The cause of death is unknown.
“This is a hard one on so many levels as this is a musical era passing for me,” said musician and colleague John Ford Coley on Facebook. “And it will never pass this way again, as his song said. He belonged to a group that was one of a kind. I am very sad over this but I have some of the best memories of all of us together. Rest In Peace Jimmy.”
Together with Dash Crofts, Seals helped define soft rock in the 1970s. Their first major hit was Summer Breeze in 1972, selling over a million copies. The next year saw the release of Diamond Girl which was also a hit, making it to No 4 in the US.
There was controversy in 1974 with the release of the album Unborn Child, which included an anti-abortion song that was written shortly after Roe v Wade. It was banned by many radio stations, and concerts were picketed although the duo insisted it was not as political as many claimed, just that it asked people “don’t take life too lightly” before considering an abortion.
“It was our ignorance that we didn’t know that kind of thing was seething and boiling as a social issue,” Seals said years later. “On one hand we had people sending us thousands of roses, but on the other people were literally throwing rocks at us. If we’d known it was going to cause such disunity, we might have thought twice about doing it.”
The band continued with hits like Get Closer and I’ll Play For You before they took a hiatus in 1980 after being dropped by Warner Bros after their 11th studio album, The Longest Road.
There were two reunions, in 1991 and then in 2004 with the final album, Traces. Seals suffered a stroke in 2017.
“I just learned that James ‘Jimmy’ Seals has passed,” said his cousin Brady Seals, member of country band Little Texas. “My heart just breaks for his wife Ruby and their children. Please keep them in your prayers. What an incredible legacy he leaves behind.”
Seals is survived by his wife Ruby Jean and three children, Joshua, Juliette and Sutherland.

We'll send you First Edition every weekday
We'll send you First Thing every weekday
We'll send you Guardian Australia's Morning Mail every weekday
We'll send you Down to Earth every week.
We'll send you TechScape every week
We'll send you Animals Farmed every month
We'll send you The Rural Network every fortnight
We'll send you The Guardian Headlines UK every day
We'll send you The Guardian Headlines US every day
We'll send you The Guardian Headlines aus every day
We'll send you Australia Politic every weekday
We'll send you Global Dispatch every fortnight
We'll send you Business Today every weekday
We'll send you Fight to Vote every week
We'll send you the best of Guardian Opinion every weekday
We'll send you the best of Guardian Opinion US edition every weekday
We'll send you the best of Guardian Opinion Australia edition every weekday
We'll send you This is Europe every week
We'll send you The Week in Patriarchy every week
We'll send you First Dog on the Moon whenever a new cartoon is published
We'll send you Inside Saturday every weekend
We'll send you The Long Read every week
We'll send you Guardian Documentaries whenever a new film is available
We'll send you The Upside every week
We'll send you The Guide every week
We'll send you Film Weekly every Friday
We'll send you Sleeve Notes every week
We'll send you Bookmarks every week
We'll send you Hear Here every week
We'll send you Art Weekly every week
We'll send you Design Review every month
We'll send you Word of Mouth every week
We'll send you Fashion Statement every week
We'll send you Saved for Later every week
We'll send you Observer Food Monthly every month
We'll send you Winter Olympics 2022 Daily Briefing every day
We'll send you The Recap every week
We'll send you The Fiver every weekday
We'll send you The Breakdown every week
We'll send you The Spin every week
We'll send you Moving the Goalposts every week
We'll send you Guardian Australia Sport every day

For years Tsang Tsou-choi daubed his eccentric demands around Hong Kong, and the authorities raced to cover them up. But as the city’s protest movements bloomed, his words mysteriously reappeared
The secret message only appeared when the wall was drenched with rain. For weeks, I had been scouring Hong Kong for these misshapen Chinese characters, but the way they materialised out of nowhere was a shock. It was an unremarkable yellow-grey stone wall in the middle of Central, Hong Kong’s political and economic heart. The words were only revealed when the wall had been soaked; in this case after a downpour in July 2015, which left the wall darkened and damp. Suddenly it was possible to see spots where the dove-grey paint had flaked off, revealing traces of Chinese calligraphy. The writing, in clumsy, off-balance characters about 20cm high, was instantly recognisable for its lack of grace, elegance or learning.
I can’t remember the first time I saw characters like these. They were everywhere when I was growing up in Hong Kong in the 1970s and 80s, a feature of our city just as much as the bottle-green snub-nosed Star Ferry and the noisy trams. Their author was a fixture of the landscape as well: a filthy, toothless, often shirtless, rubbish collector with mental health issues. He called himself the King of Kowloon. Hopping on his crutches, with plastic bags swinging from the handles, his crablike, bow-legged silhouette was so distinctive that, if people saw him in the distance, they would cross the road to avoid him. As he passed, parents would shield their kids’ eyes from him and mutter, “Chi-sin a!” Crazy! He even became a playground taunt – “You’re the King of Kowloon!” – levelled at the slow kids, the weird ones, the poor ones, the outcasts.
His given name was Tsang Tsou-choi, and he had crossed the border to Hong Kong from mainland China at the age of 16. Tsang had since become convinced that Kowloon peninsula, the southernmost point of what is now mainland China, had belonged to his family and had been stolen from them by the British in the 19th century. He later extended his claims to the whole of Hong Kong.
It was in the 1950s that he started his graffiti protest against the loss of his land to the British. His denunciations took the form of tottering towers of crooked Chinese calligraphy in which he painstakingly wrote out his entire lineage, all 21 generations of it, pairing names with the places they had lost, and occasionally topping it all off with expletives like “Fuck the Queen!” He was careful in his choice of canvas, only writing on government property – walls, flyovers, electricity boxes, postboxes. His messages were almost always immediately washed away or painted over by an army of government cleaners with thin hand towels hanging from the backs of their hats for makeshift sunscreens. But overnight his words would be back again.
After Hong Kong was returned to Chinese rule in 1997, Tsang’s messaging continued. That was the year the King’s elevation to a cult figure began. Since then, he has been exhibited by some of the world’s top curators, with the smartest auction houses selling his wonky calligraphy, daubed on paper or wooden boards and T-shirts – even on a scooter, which sold for HK$1.8m (£200,000). He became a fashion icon, inspiring a Hong Kong designer to create a series of collections celebrating his work. And in 2003, the King of Kowloon even became the first Hongkonger to represent the city at the Venice Biennale. To the people of Hong Kong, Tsang has become something of a folk hero. Through his assertions of kingliness, he came to embody a Hong Kong identity distinct from either its British or its Chinese rulers, while his relentless, subversive messaging took politics to the street, providing a blueprint that was emulated decades later by protest movements roiling the city.
My obsession with the King of Kowloon started small. My initial intention was simply to write an article about him. Eight years later, I have written a book about him, as well as a PhD, and a six-part podcast. At first, I simply wanted to find out whether he had any legitimate claim to the land – he asserted that he had seen ancestral documents stating his clan’s ownership of the peninsula. But my mission was complicated by the fact that Tsang had died in 2007, and his family had always refused to talk to the media.
The King was a slippery subject. The more I looked, the less I seemed to find. Everyone knew him but no one seemed to have any concrete information about him. I began by tracking down people who’d spent time with him. I trekked out to housing estates and sipped tea with gallerists, went to musicians’ studios in obscure industrial buildings and artists’ workshops in Victorian abattoirs. When I asked about his mental state, some told me that “the King” – for those I spoke to always called him by his self-appointed title – was delusional. He had schizophrenia. He had multiple personality disorder. Others said he was perfectly sane and played mahjong regularly with his neighbours. He remained bafflingly unknowable.
The day I saw the characters on the wall in 2015 unlocked emotions that I had not known were there: nostalgia and an almost physical sense of loss. The words were so familiar, they had become an integral part of our cityscape, and it was only when I saw them in the wild that I realised just how much I missed them.
Every so often, in the years that followed, I would read about another piece of calligraphy appearing. In 2019, around the time when 2 million people took to the streets in the biggest demonstrations ever seen in Hong Kong, Tsang’s off-balance calligraphy appeared on a flyover pillar near the Central Peak Tram terminus, where paint strips had peeled away, revealing the characters underneath.
Then just two months ago, a large patch of the writing materialised under a railway bridge in Kowloon. This time the appearance of the calligraphy was clearly deliberate and had nothing to do with the weather: the topmost layer of grey paint had been chipped away to reveal the hidden characters underneath. It was vintage, unmistakable King of Kowloon calligraphy; only he wrote in that hand, and he always wrote the same things: screeds of names, invoking his family genealogy and the places they had lost. Hongkongers flocked to snap photographs of the miraculous calligraphy; it invoked that same nostalgic longing in them as it had in me.
The mystery was why and how the words had reappeared so suddenly, so many years after their author’s death.
The King of Kowloon’s transformation – from local crank to icon – began in the fervid months leading up to Hong Kong’s return to Chinese sovereignty. The atmosphere was a mixture of nostalgia and nervous hope, as Hongkongers began to explore their unique identity. Against that backdrop, the King of Kowloon – a subversive, individualistic, rebellious character – began to be seen as a personification of Hong Kong’s particular traits.
During this period, he was often accompanied by a well-known art curator, Lau Kin-wai, a bon vivant with a taste for showmanship. He brought Tsang Tsou-choi brushes and ink, and went out on his calligraphy expeditions with him to photograph his work. Lau, a celebrated figure in the art world, delivered lunch boxes to Tsang’s fetid flat, and even went so far as to strap his sandals on to his unwashed feet.
In April 1997, Lau organised a solo exhibition of work by the King of Kowloon. Since it was impossible to move Tsang’s normal canvas – the city itself – into a gallery, Lau gave Tsang smaller, more saleable objects to paint, such as paper lanterns, glass bottles, a copper and – prophetically – an umbrella. Tsang, delighted with the attention his work was getting, covered these pieces in his distinctive poor man’s characters. At the opening, the King clearly enjoyed the limelight, beaming as he was surrounded by reporters. As journalists called out questions about his art, and whether he expected to regain his family holdings, he shouted, “Fuck off!” and proclaimed himself owner of everything within eyeshot.
The exhibition catalogue aimed to place the King’s work within the canon of classical calligraphy. But the establishment did not agree. “He’s psychotic,” one professor of fine arts fumed to the Washington Post as the exhibition opened, “I don’t see any artistic value.”
The show was a sensation, a circus, the most scandalous exhibition in living memory. Not a single piece of art sold, but Lau did not care. Decades later he remembered the show as a triumph. “The exhibition was controversial,” he told me, smiling. “That was something I like to do. I like controversy.”
Tsang’s newfound fame did not change the way he lived, and he continued leaving his apartment every morning at 7am to paint on the streets. Although he had a wife and children, they did not live with him. He lived in an apartment in a public housing estate, and those who visited him found the experience traumatically memorable: every inch of wall space was filled with calligraphy, there was almost no furniture and the floor was covered with balled-up paper and running with cockroaches. The King lived off disability benefits, awarded after his legs had been crushed in an accident at work. There was a steady stream of collectors and fans at his doorstep, and they often paid for his work in lunchboxes of roast pork with beancurd, and cans of ice-cold Coke. The King, who never saw himself as an artist, seemed content with those arrangements. “I don’t care about money and fame,” he told one interviewer, “They should just give me back my throne.”
The reputation of the King of Kowloon gathered momentum through the handover year, as Britain prepared to divest itself of its last remaining colony. For 1997 fashion week – the last under the British administration – designer William Tang Tat-chi made his whole show a homage to the King of Kowloon. The collection was cool and quirky, with each piece covered with the King’s characteristic calligraphy. The pièce de résistance was a concrete-coloured, graffiti-covered asymmetric one-shoulder gown with a 20-metre train – Tang said he had found the fabric so beautiful that he couldn’t bring himself to cut it.
At this historic moment, the show made a bold statement about Hong Kong’s distinct identity. Tsang’s hasty, crowded calligraphy echoed the energy and density of Hong Kong’s streets, and the face of the model striding down the runway was steely with determination. It was a defining moment, the launch of a Hong Kong aesthetic that conveyed the island’s sense of itself: modern, hybrid, streetwise, confident.
When I met Tang in 2019, he was dressed in black, tall and astonishingly boyish for 60. When I asked him to sum up the impact of the collection, he smiled. It was, he asserted, the most – really the only – memorable collection in Hong Kong’s fashion history.
For Hongkongers, the show had deep historical resonances. William Tang Tat-chi is a descendant of the powerful Tang clan, which settled in Hong Kong in AD973. They were the original landowners who had been dispossessed and who had, in 1899, led the Six-Day war opposing the British takeover of the New Territories. “My family – the Tangs – have been here for 1,000 years,” Tang told me. “We should be the Kings of Kowloon.”
When I asked Tang to explain the significance of the collection, he struggled to put it into words. “People were laughing about it,” he told me, shaking his head, “They said: ‘Is the idea that you are using the King of Kowloon to talk about your family?’ I said: ‘Don’t make it that complicated. I’m not that kind of person.’”
For the King himself, the crooked characters may have simply expressed a narrow personal quest, but Hongkongers found the constancy of his message reassuring at a time of intense change, as well as representing a treasured collective memory. For those in the know, his characters invoked themes that had traditionally remained unspoken: a history of mass dispossession, the stinging humiliation of a once-powerful clan and a message that none of this had been forgotten. His loss of land may have been imagined, but to a people handed from one sovereign power to another, its metaphorical power still resonated.
After the handover, the King’s star continued to rise. He starred in a humorous TV ad for a cleaning fluid, which rebranded him as a cuddly mascot. He made cameo appearances in films shot in Hong Kong. His work was included in a touring exhibition called Cities On the Move curated by artworld superstars Hans Ulrich Obrist and Hou Hanru, and in 1999, his work travelled to Taiwan and the US, alongside that of Mao Zedong, in a show organised by one of Hong Kong’s most famous curators, Johnson Chang Tsong-zung. In 2001, he became the first Hongkonger to show at the prestigious Venice Biennale. In 2004, a wooden board painted by the King sold for HK$55,000. A lifestyle brand covered its products with his writing, marketing King of Kowloon underwear, bedding and slippers. But the King’s life did not change. Even though he had become a celebrity and something of a commodity, he continued to paint on the streets.
From 2004, Tsang’s work began to disappear from the streets. He was still living in his stinking 18th-floor apartment in a Kwun Tong public housing estate, surrounded by empty ink bottles and dried brushes. But in 2004, at the age of 83, he accidentally set the apartment on fire. His family took the opportunity to move him into a nursing home.
At first, he was distraught, since the home banned him from painting, owing to the mess and smell of the sticky black traditional calligraphy ink. Unable to paint, the King could not sleep at night. But soon a solution was found, by a young advertising executive called Joel Chung Ying-chai, who had taken over some of the work formerly done by Lau. Chung brought the King markers and paper to write on. But the King’s ideograms were becoming misshapen and confused, the lines looping unpredictably around each other. Sometimes, he forgot how to write the familiar characters and had to ask Chung for help.
In 2007, he was hospitalised three times for complaints including pulmonary edema. Chung visited him in hospital, bringing some yellow canvases and a lemon-yellow model of a terracotta warrior for the King to sign, for a charity auction. The King seemed cheerful, but his characters were meandering and misaligned. As he painted, he commented, “Hey! I’m not the King any more! I’m not doing it. I’m not!”
Chung was confused. He asked: “You’re not the King?”
The answer was good-natured but firm. “I’m not doing it. I’m not the King! Let someone else do it!”
Afterward, Chung realised that Tsang had signed the back of the terracotta warrior not with his usual “King of Kowloon” but with a scrawled “Tsang Tsou-choi.”
On 15 July 2007, Tsang died of a heart attack. It took more than 10 days for the news to emerge – Chung was busy working on a book about the King and not visiting every day, and Tsang’s family were embarrassed about the attention he attracted – but when it did, the King’s death was reported in newspapers across the political spectrum, even the Communist-sympathising Wen Wei Po. He was compared to Van Gogh and Picasso, celebrated for the simplicity of his lifestyle and his work ethic. Apple Daily, a pro-democracy newspaper that was shut down in 2021, printed a full-colour commemorative edition with a wraparound front page announcing “The King Is Dead!” This choice of language was deliberate, using a form of Chinese characters – 駕崩 – reserved for the death of a monarch. This lamentation echoed across the front pages. “The King is dead and everyone is missing him … The King is dead and his people are crying and wailing … The King is dead, his ink treasures were poetic masterpieces … The King is dead, who will succeed him?”
Tsang’s legacy at the time of his death was perhaps best summed up by his friend, the rap star MC Yan. (Tsang used to claim that the rapper, who wore his hair in a pigtail, was a time traveller from ancient China.) Yan told a reporter, “No matter if he’s a true or fake [king], he was very sure of his own identity, unlike Hong Kong people who don’t know if they’re from the east or the west.”
The King had only ever had one message – a consistent statement of his ancestry and sovereignty. It could be read as an assertion of identity and a repudiation of colonisation. For his admirers, this stood in contrast to the mealy-mouthed pronouncements of successive, unpopular China-appointed chief executives who, by their very job description, had been unable to speak either for themselves or for the people of Hong Kong. His supporters saw the King of Kowloon as the last free Hongkonger, with the autonomy to speak his mind.
Throughout his life, Tsang had never seen himself as an artist. But after his death, his work gained in value. Retrospectives were put on in Hong Kong, and a thick monograph about him was printed, in which Hans Ulrich Obrist called him a “poet whose page was the public space”.
But his importance was not so much as an artist as a pioneer of political graffiti. His messages of protest entered the city’s bloodstream. In 2014, when protesters filled the territory’s streets during the Umbrella Movement, they adopted the King’s methods.
That year, an estimated 1.2 million Hongkongers occupied three major thoroughfares for 79 days to demand more say in the choice of chief executive. Near the government headquarters in Admiralty, they feathered one wall with declarations scrawled on sorbet-coloured Post-it notes: “Fighting for Democracy!” “We love Hong Kong!” The King was an inspiration for the new generation of dissenters: he had taken politics to the street well before the Occupy movement appeared all over the world. “He was the original Occupier,” one young designer told me.
In 2019, China proposed an extradition law that would give Beijing the power to send suspected criminals to the mainland to be tried under the Chinese justice system. Hong Kong residents feared the proposed law would undermine the territory’s independent judicial system and took to the streets in their hundreds of thousands. This time the Post-it notes spread across overhead walkways and through underground tunnels, on shop windows and street signs, like a swarm released into the city. “Hong Kong is not China!” “We are Hong Kong!” “Home Kong!” These were not only walls of discontent, but also walls of community, walls of solidarity; over and over, the messages asserted a Hong Kong identity separate from China.
As the protests continued, the police responded with teargas and violence, arresting youngsters simply for wearing black, the colour of the movement. The protesters also stepped up their tactics, throwing stones and molotov cocktails at police. The protesters graduated from Post-it notes to graffiti sprayed directly on to roads, walls and tram shelters: “Fuck the police”, “Chinazi”, “If we burn, you burn with us”.
These slogans, like the King’s endless screeds, entered the same cycle of destruction and reclamation – though now, instead of one man and his paintbrush, it was happening at speed, and all across the territory at the same time. Hong Kong’s walls and pillars were now covered with newly painted grey squares hastily slapped over the protest slogans. As new graffiti kept appearing, these too were covered with a patchwork of white, black or dark grey rectangles. Sometimes, government contractors painted over the characters so carefully that they ended up emphasising each word. I saw the words “Hong Kong People!” looming from a tram stop so clearly, it seemed like the cleaners were joining the protest. It reminded me of the words of artist Jean-Michel Basquiat: “I cross out words so you will see them more.” It was a lesson Hong Kong’s authorities had failed to learn from the King.
In mid-2019, as I was covering the protest movement, I received a message from the King’s last helper, Joel Chung, inviting me to meet. I had wanted to see him after hearing peculiar accusations against him by Lau, the King’s first curator. The two men had a famously testy relationship. Lau had accused Chung of deliberately destroying pieces by the King. He also said Chung had spray-painted over a large piece of the King’s calligraphy with an image of skyscrapers and the words ART IS NOT EVERYTHING BUT WE NEED IT. Lau had been so disgusted that he’d lodged a police complaint.
Chung’s office was like a magical museum of childhood. Dangling from the ceiling were string bags full of red-and-white plastic balls, skipping ropes and old-fashioned wooden kite spools. Chung had established a Museum of Stationery, filled with cupboards of vintage fountain pens, novelty erasers, and wooden rulers inked with the names of generations of schoolchildren past.
Chung was an eccentric figure, with trademark thick black round spectacles. I carefully broached Lau’s accusations, asking if it was true that he’d destroyed some of the King’s calligraphy. In response, he cheerfully pulled up a video. The words “Seen; Disappeared” appeared on the screen, against a wall covered in the King’s faded calligraphy. As tense, haunting music played, tendrils of flame licked at a piece of paper covered with the King’s black characters. Feathery puffs of ash spiralled into the air as a second piece of calligraphy went up in flames. As I watched the video, my hands flew up to my head in horror. Chung seemed delighted by my reaction. He explained that he owned more than 500 pieces of the King’s work, and he’d decided he could sacrifice a couple of them to revive awareness of his legacy.
When I asked him if he’d destroyed the mural, Chung gleefully owned up to the crime. But that was only half the story, he told me. In fact, he’d taken measures to protect the King’s calligraphy by covering it with a layer of plastic wrap, and then painting on top of that. The “destruction” was a trompe l’oeil, he said with satisfaction. Lau was upset, he giggled, because hadn’t realised that the “destruction” was fake.
When I asked him about the magical appearance of the characters I had seen on the wet wall in Central, he let me into a secret. He had mixed special inks for the King which were unusually sticky, sometimes using a mixture of ink, acrylic and water, and sometimes turpentine and enamel paint. In Central, the King’s ink had been so sticky that the grey paint used by the authorities to cover it had stuck to the ink, and then somehow both layers had flaked off, leaving the outline of the characters underneath clearly visible.
As I took my leave, Chung walked me to the lift. It was an ancient cage-type elevator with horizontal double doors that joined in the middle, requiring someone to simultaneously pull them up and down to meet in the middle. “Are you in a hurry?” Chung asked, casually. “Have you got five minutes?” He jumped into the lift with me, and we descended. When we reached ground level, he picked up his pace. I was struggling to keep up as he cantered across a highway, dodging cars. When we reached the median strip, he clambered up a bank. In front of us, through some scrubby bushes, was the rounded pillar of a flyover.
I could hardly believe my eyes. The column was covered with the King’s words. Not the ghost words or the sun-damaged patches of writing I’d found in my searches, but thick black characters in excellent condition. The patch of writing was about one square metre – much larger than any other example of the King’s work in the wild. How on earth had it survived unnoticed?
This, it turned out, was part of Joel Chung’s secret mission. He explained that he’d accompanied the King when he was working. When the King first painted the pillar, Chung had noted its location on a spreadsheet. When the original work was covered up by a government contractor, he’d marked that down, too. Now he was methodically chipping away at the grey paint to expose the calligraphy underneath. It was slow and tedious work, and he’d already spent more than a week on this pillar. Once the whole work was visible, he’d cover it in a transparent oil to preserve it. Then, he’d paint over it with a fresh coat of grey paint, leaving no one any the wiser.
For a decade, working from his spreadsheet, Chung had been methodically uncovering the King’s hidden works one by one, restoring them, then painting over them again. He was creating a clandestine museum of the King’s work, known only to himself.
Three years later, some of these pieces are coming to light, as the uppermost layers flake off or are removed. At the same time, the King of Kowloon is having a revival. He was front and centre at the first exhibition held at Hong Kong’s new £620m M+ visual arts museum, which finally opened its doors in November 2021, four years behind schedule. He was also feted at the prestigious Art Basel in Hong Kong in May, where relics of the King such as his television and his kettle were exhibited alongside his artworks.
But the King’s work was not intended for rarefied art galleries; it was supposed to be out on the streets, where it could be seen by his people. Chung’s painstaking work is ensuring that this may still be possible for some time to come.
When I was young, people saw the King of Kowloon as a madman. But nowadays people whisper that maybe he was a shaman or a prophet whose words predicted a future of subjugation and loss. In 2020, after draconian national security legislation was imposed on Hong Kong, the very act of claiming the land or declaring sovereignty could be seen as an act of secession.
Since that legislation, the Hong Kong of old has been remade. Its legislature has been reshaped into a “patriots-only” body with election candidates requiring police vetting for patriotism, while dozens of democratic politicians are in jail on subversion charges. Its civil servants are forced to make oaths of allegiance. School curricula are being rewritten to emphasise “national security” rather than critical thinking. Civil society organisations have been disbanded, and marches outlawed, allegedly on Covid safety grounds.
The King of Kowloon’s preoccupations – sovereignty, territory, dispossession and loss – were prophetic. He was exploring these ideas at the same time as academics, philosophers, artists and musicians. After the national security legislation changed Hong Kong for ever, some of these artists and thinkers were imprisoned, some went into exile and some simply stopped talking. My pursuit of the King had led me to his courtiers, who turned out to be some of Hong Kong’s most influential minds, and so I became an archivist of disappearance.
One day, years before the protests, I visited a well-known Hong Kong artist who told me he considered Tsang his hero. I asked him what he’d learned from him. “Determination,” he replied, “as a person, not as an artist. Someone taking action for what he believes in, for years and years. I don’t see anyone that can compare with him.”
Another of the King’s followers told me what the King had taught him: “To be a Hong Kong person and tell the Hong Kong story to others.”
The questions that had been so central to me when I set out were no longer important. I still didn’t know if the King was mentally competent or not. I’d failed to confirm or deny the truth of his territorial claim. What mattered was not the substance of his claim, but how it gave a voice to sentiments we didn’t know until he voiced them for us.
Under the spell of his imagined sovereignty, he’d forced us to reckon with our own conflicted identity and measure ourselves against the self-governing entity that he presented. Today, our dreams have been outlawed, our anthems and slogans banned, our very thoughts choked off before they could form. Now we all are Kings of Kowloon, dispossessed of our ancestral lands, shorn of the very idea of ourselves, left with nothing but our loss.
Adapted from Indelible City: Dispossession and Defiance in Hong Kong by Louisa Lim, published by Text. Louisa Lim’s podcast, The King of Kowloon, is made by ABC.
Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.

The House select committee investigating the insurrection will examine several crucial stages in the lead up to the first breach of the Capitol
The House select committee investigating the January 6 Capitol attack is scheduled to hold its inaugural hearing on Thursday and according to the running order obtained by the Guardian, the panel will track the activities of the far-right Proud Boys group before and during the insurrection.
At the start of the hearing, the panel’s chairman Bennie Thompson and vice-chair Liz Cheney will make a series of opening arguments before outlining a general roadmap of how each of the six Watergate-style hearings are expected to unfold.
For the second hour, Thompson and Cheney will hand control of the hearing to Tim Heaphy, the chief investigative counsel for the select committee, who will lead the questioning of two witnesses and walk through the key moments of the Capitol attack.
The select committee is expected to start the questioning with testimony from Nick Quested, a British documentary film-maker who was embedded with the far-right Proud Boys group in the days and weeks leading up to January 6 and caught their activities on camera.
Quested, appearing pursuant to a subpoena, is likely to deliver his own opening remarks and testify about how the Proud Boys planned their January 6 operation in detail in the weeks before the Capitol attack, narrating and analysing the footage that he recorded.
By examining several crucial stages in the lead up to the first breach of the Capitol by the pro-Trump mob – such as the march to the Capitol from the Ellipse and a short stop at the Statue of Peace at the foot of Capitol Hill – the panel will show how the attack came to pass.
The select committee is then expected to focus on the moment that Joseph Biggs, a member of the Proud Boys charged with seditious conspiracy on Monday, had a brief exchange with a man in the crowd near the statue just before the march morphed into the Capitol attack.
Biggs’ exchange with that man, Ryan Samsel, is widely seen as the tipping point that precipitated the riot. Samsel, who has been charged with attacking police, then walks up alone to the barricade and confronts US Capitol Police officers before pushing it over.
The select committee will illustrate Quested’s testimony about how that incident unfolded by playing footage leading up to that moment and a photo Quested took of the moment that Samsel is about to confront and then push past the officers.
Heaphy is expected at that point to have the second witness, US Capitol Police officer Caroline Edwards, testify about her recollections of those key minutes during which she was assaulted by another man who had been speaking with the Proud Boy member.
The testimony by Edwards, who was the first officer injured in the attack, is expected to be harrowing. Edwards, the New York Times reported, was knocked backwards into concrete steps by the surging pro-Trump mob that overturned the bike rack-like barricade on to her.
Heaphy is expected to return to Quested to have him analyse other moments that he caught on camera as the Proud Boys led the charge up to the inaugural platform elected for Biden’s swearing-in weeks later, and then smashed a window in order to enter the Capitol.
But in a notable omission, the select committee is not expected to use Quested’s footage of Enrique Tarrio, the leader of the Proud Boys, meeting with Stewart Rhodes, the leader of the far-right Oath Keepers militia group, at a secret rendezvous the night before.
The justice department has cited that meeting, which took place in an underground parking garage near the Capitol, in seditious conspiracy indictments against Tarrio, Rhodes, and other members of both the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers groups.
Quested is considered the star witness in the select committee’s inaugural hearing, which will be covered live by most of the major US cable news networks, including MSNBC, CNN, CBS and ABC. Fox News will have its top-rated host Tucker Carlson deliver counter-programming.
The Emmy award-winning documentary film-maker spent much of the post 2020 election period filming Tarrio and the Proud Boys – with their permission – and has testified multiple times to the panel in closed-door depositions.
Quested had accompanied the Proud Boys to a number of pro-Trump rallies in Washington DC in November and December 2020, and was with the Proud Boys as some of its members stormed the Capitol. He also filmed Tarrio’s reaction to the riot later on January 6 in Baltimore, MD.

Jennifer Lopez’s Halftime is the latest film released by a female pop star that blurs the lines between documentary and fiction
Katy Perry, Lady Gaga, Beyoncé, Taylor Swift, Billie Eilish, Charlie XCX, Olivia Rodrigo: over the past decade, there has been a boom in documentaries about female pop stars. These glossy, behind-the-scenes films promise to share an unfiltered and authentic look at “the real them”, often centred around a tour or the recording of a new album. The rich lineage of the music doc is well-documented, but it has recently become a lucrative tool, one that serves as promotional material and supplementary art in the same breath.
Jennifer Lopez is the latest star to release a film. After more than three decades in show business, Halftime feels like a more intriguing prospect than some of the recent concert tie-ins to feature J-Lo’s juniors. The film, directed by Amanda Micheli, focuses primarily on the run-up to Lopez’s performance at the 2020 Super Bowl and covers Lopez narrowly missing out on an Oscar nomination for her lauded performance in Lorene Scafaria’s 2019 film Hustlers. Lopez’s reasons for releasing a documentary are understandable: her three-decade career has been mired by professional and personal criticism. “For my whole life I’ve been battling to be seen, to be heard, to be taken seriously,” she says in Halftime.
Women in music frequently face difficulty in being taken seriously as artists. Such documentaries give stars the opportunity to control their image and choose how much of themselves to share with audiences. Of course this trend isn’t restricted to women. Justin Bieber and One Direction’s mid-10s concert documentaries promised viewers a look at their idols as they had never seen them before. Fans piled into cinemas.
But for female musicians, particularly those working in the often belittled world of pop music, documentaries can be a powerful tool for regaining narrative control. When Katy Perry released Part of Me, the film that accompanied her mammoth, 124-date world tour, she was battling health problems and in the middle of a painful divorce from Russell Brand. These personal tribulations are captured alongside footage of Perry preparing for performances, emphasising the gruelling nature of her rigorous tour schedule. After the film’s release, many expressed admiration for Perry, and the film was praised for its candour.
Similarly, Lady Gaga’s Five Foot Two and Taylor Swift’s Miss Americana charted specific creative periods in their subjects’ lives. For Swift – long regarded as America’s sweetheart – it was a chance to set the record straight, after scandals involving Kanye West and Kim Kardashian, and repeated accusations that her muted stance on political issues emboldened her rightwing fans. Miss Americana covers family illness, Swift’s highly publicised sexual assault trial and her relationship with body dysmorphia. It is a clever piece of propaganda, regardless of its sincerity – Swift notes her immense privilege as one of the most beloved musical artists of the millennium, but also seems keen to situate herself as the girl-next-door who just happened to make it to the A-list.
For younger stars such as Billie Eilish, Olivia Rodrigo and Charlie XCX, a behind-the-scenes documentary can be a savvy introductory tool, as well as a way to offer die-hard fans carefully curated insights into their lives. XCX’s Alone Together documented the process of creating a collaborative album during the Covid-19 pandemic, highlighting her DIY origins as well as the power of online community. Billie Eilish’s The World’s a Little Blurry examines her rapid rise to fame, and captures the strangeness of being one of the most famous people on the planet when you’re barely an adult.
Inevitably, the content of these documentaries is carefully controlled. The nature of intimate access is that the subject will likely have some say in what is or isn’t included, and will strive to create a film that prioritises their public image over honesty or artistic flair. These films can often feel more like an extended PR exercise than an access-all-areas pass. Documentaries are often thought of as an extension of journalism, which ought to retain editorial independence even while granted intimate access. But when a filmmaker is hired specifically by a star to create a film about them, does this relationship become warped? In 2020, the Columbia Journalism Review published a piece about the celebrity documentary boom more widely, and suggested the documentary form was at odds with the content – these films do not exist to hold their subjects to account, or really interrogate the narrative they’re putting across. Perhaps we’re moving toward a new hybrid form – the “pop doc” is neither pure, independent documentary nor complete fiction.
Even if they are heavily stage-managed, there’s something valuable in these pop docs. It can be just as illuminating to notice what a subject chooses to leave out as that which they choose to include. Lopez doesn’t mention her relationship with Alex Rodriguez, whom she broke up with in April 2021. Halftime might serve to further her narrative as a self-made pop icon, but it’s also a savvy piece of pop culture mythology. And it’s enticing to watch a global superstars in their more vulnerable moments – so long as audiences remember they are always – in one sense or another – watching a performance.
Hannah Strong is digital editor at Little White Lies

Trintignant, the French actor closely associated with the European new waves of the 1960s and 70s, has died aged 91
• Peter Bradshaw on Jean-Louis Trintignant: an actor of charisma, depth and dark emotions
Fri 17 Jun 2022 19.12 BST
Photograph: Allstar Picture Library Limited./Alamy
Photograph: c Sony Pics/Everett/Rex Featur

How do you make songs children love and adults can stand? A new batch of children’s music artists think they’ve found out
It’s 8.27am and I’m ushering a toddler and a school child into the car, a baby strapped to my chest just to keep things interesting. From the driver’s seat of our sultana-strewn Kia Carnival, I switch from my “Breakfast Chill” Spotify playlist to “School Drop Pump Up” and We Don’t Talk About Bruno from Disney’s Encanto soundtrack bursts forth.
Everything about the morning routine – from the oats I pre-soaked the night before, to the toothbrushes that are kept near the back door to jog our hygiene memories – has been curated to facilitate a loose order to the unavoidable chaos that is a house full of kids under six. The playlists are no less vital to our morning success than remembering to wash my eldest’s sports uniform in time.
For a generation of parents who have spent the past two years with more child contact hours than we would have ever expected, children’s music has become omnipresent.
“I think the biggest difference in the way parents and kids consume music these days, even compared to a decade ago, is how portable, customisable and accessible it is,” says Paul Field, a music industry giant.
This difference has informed his new offering, the early childhood music brand Peachy Keen. Released via Apple Music’s independent music platform Platoon, the ambitious project launched this month with the debut album Animal Songs.
Recorded with some of the country’s top musicians and composed by his brother John (who penned over 300 Wiggles hits – their other brother, Anthony, is none other than the Blue Wiggle himself), Field says he wanted to offer a diverse range of sounds and concentrate on production quality (“when you hear strings on a track, it’s an actual string quartet”) rather than focusing on a specific style or genre.
“We’re just starting with the music first [as opposed to creating a band], because this way we can use a carousel of different musicians, singers and styles. I feel that brings quite a bit of variety to the sound.”
As far as industry pedigree goes, Field has good reason to bet on himself. During his 24-year management, the Wiggles topped Business Review Weekly’s list of highest-earning Australian entertainers for four years running, sold millions of albums and appeared on TV screens in over 100 countries.
Even discounting the stratospheric success of the Wiggles on the world stage, Australian children’s entertainment exports are overrepresented abroad.
“At the moment, we actually have more listeners in the US than here,” says the musician and comedian Matt Okine, one half of the kid’s entertainment duo Diver City; his partner is the musician and producer Kristy Lee Peters. He credits the all-important peer-recommendation algorithms on streaming platforms with this international success.
Music has, historically, been divided into age-dictated blocks; there’s children’s music and then there’s grown-up music, each walled off from the other. It is this tension, says Peters, that forms the origin story of Diver City.
“When you have kids, you listen to music over and over, and over and over and over and over again,” she laughs. “Coincidentally, Matt and I both had kids five days apart. We went away on a family holiday and started chatting about it, and the idea kind of came out of finding something that could bridge the gap between children’s music and music that adults would like or would at least be bearable.”
For every “bearable” piece of kid’s music, there is a famously unbearable alternative. Korean entertainment company PinkFong’s repetitive techno juggernaut Baby Shark, which became the most-viewed YouTube video of all time, is forcefully embedded into the amygdalae of parents the globe over.
And while annoying parents with the musical equivalent of a mosquito can be lucrative, there is fertile ground (and perhaps more longevity) in the possibility of making something they’ll enjoy alongside their kids.
“We’ve collaborated with a lot of artists grownups will recognise,” Okine, a Triple J alumni, says. “Which brings an added layer for parents.”
These artists include Ball Park Music’s Sam Cromack, Art Vs Science and Peking Duk, to name a few. The subject matter they explore ranges from the sublime inclusivity anthem Love Is Love (Rainbow Family) to the ridiculous Sad Spaghetti, written from the viewpoint of a lonely leftover strand of pasta. It lifts directly from the millennial parent’s playbook.
And indeed, the kid’s music scene in Australia seems suddenly full to the brim with artists who made it big creating music for grownups, became parents and then pivoted. Old-school 90s dance/rock favourites Regurgitator have created the kid’s offering Pogogo Show, reworking the lyrics of one of their NSFW classics to a kid-friendly I Sucked A Lollipop To Get Where I Am, alongside other tracks such as Mr Butt. The Little Stevies – hardly a household name in their former life as a folk outfit – have found far more success since rebranding to kid’s favourite the Teeny Tiny Stevies.
As for the Wiggles, they’re playing the game in reverse; the skivvy-clad icons have harnessed a second wave of success through over-18s gigs and a Tame Impala cover that saw them crowned the unlikely winners of this year’s Triple J Hottest 100.
If there is a winning formula for making successful music for kids in this country, it’s one Paul Field has helped shape. “One major factor is that you’ve got to look at things through the eyes of a child,” he says.
“It’s not always simple, because our audience ranges from pre-verbal to kindergarten and beyond, so you want to make something that appeals to all levels of cognition.”
But while looking through the eyes of children, being mindful of not offending the ears of adults has another benefit, he adds: the increased likelihood of more airtime. “In the early childhood world … It’s personal recommendations that really carry weight.”
There are few people in Australia more trusted to make these exact kinds of recommendations than Zoë Foster Blake, skincare entrepreneur, author and mother. A prolific curator of cool stuff – her blog Zotheysay once crashed under the weight of traffic from her post about which baby products she used and loved – one of the tastemaker’s pastimes is playlist creation on Spotify.
“I do get excellent feedback from parents,” she says of her playlist hobby. “I think we’re all just sniffin’ around for new ideas as parents; we’ll try anything.”
In the Foster Blake household, music is a crucial pillar of family life and something her playlists – with names such as “Hey Kids, Calm Down”, “Kids In The Car”, and “Mornings With Kids” reflect.
Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning
“Good music is good music,” she says. “Both The Wiggles and Queen have songs the whole family can enjoy; it brings me great joy finding and collating them.”
Field’s Peachy Keen incorporates a lot of the traditional early childhood themes you might expect. There’s the gross motor encouragement in Jump Like A Froggy Does and the numeric repetition in Ten Koalas, while Tummy Time, a track tragically close to Field’s heart, promotes safe sleeping practices after the father of five lost his daughter Bernadette to SIDS in 1988.
He doesn’t shy away from the simplicity of some of these tracks, arguing “it’s actually wonderful because, as we all know, in the early childhood world, everything is new. So, what may appear mundane or banal to two grownups is actually magic for kids.”
School and daycare drop-off completed, with full autonomy over the car stereo once again, I have to concede that Field is right. One of the bops on Animal Songs, entitled Ten Puppies, So Cute! is playing: a jazzy Winehouse-esque vocal atop a sexy Spanish guitar riff. I’m going to have it in my head for the rest of the day, and I’m OK with that.

On the release of her eighth album, the Russian-born singer-songwriter talks about making music amid children and Covid –and why stories are the best vehicle for emotional truth
It is tempting, when speaking to Regina Spektor, to just get out of the way, because she is such a joyful talker. I ask a simple question about, say, songwriting and I’m redundant for the next several minutes while she spirals off into a great conversational aria of anecdotes, aphorisms, metaphors, theories and jokes, at the end of which she apologises for not answering the question when in fact she’s answered not only that one but half a dozen that I haven’t asked yet. She has a talent for wonder.
“I have the kind of mind, I’m realising, where I almost get hypnotised by the world,” she says. “There’s a part of me that’s the immigrant chick: let’s get things done. And then there’s some other part of me that just floats off.”
That spirit is in her music, too. Spektor gravitates towards the big stuff – life, death, love, time – that most songwriters tend to approach at a slant, like looking at the sun. She’s written at least half a dozen songs that I can’t hear without crying, which puts me in good company. Her ardent admirers include Peter Gabriel, Neil Gaiman, Mad Men creator Matthew Weiner and Lin-Manuel Miranda, who chose her knockout 2006 song On the Radio on Desert Island Discs and called her “a genius”. Screen music coordinators love her (The Leftovers, The Good Wife, the theme tune to Orange Is the New Black) but even on their own, rich in narrative and imagery, her songs can feel like movies.
Spektor is talking to me from a friend’s house in New York because it’s quieter than her own: she has two small children with musician Jack Dishel. For her, 2019 put a ceremonial seal on the relationship she has with the city that she first entered as a nine-year-old refugee from the Soviet Union in 1989. As well as performing a Broadway residency, she was honoured with Regina Spektor Day by mayor Bill de Blasio (11 June ) and a star on the Bronx Walk of Fame. “I feel like I should always be wearing an ‘I heart New York’ T-shirt,” she says with a chewy, outer-borough, Russian Doll twang. “That was a beautiful run of events. And then…” She throws out her hands. “Covid!”
Spektor fled the city during the pandemic and recorded Home, before and after, her eighth studio album and her first since 2016, in a converted church upstate. It’s possibly her best album and certainly her biggest, with a glorious orchestral sound that’s commensurate with her themes. There’s even a tap-dancer on the nine-minute cosmic extravaganza Spacetime Fairytale. So it’s surprising to learn that she recorded it on her own but for producer John Congleton and engineer Ariel Shafir; the orchestra was actually in Macedonia. “This was the most alone recording I’ve ever done,” she says. “I was one of the Covid-safest people that anyone ever met, so I never even set foot in the control room. If the piano tuner came in, I would leave for three hours.” She sighs. “It was a whole thing.”
Two new numbers, Loveology and Raindrops, date back almost 20 years to an extraordinary outpouring of songs, which has had a presence on every album since. She’s talked a lot about that period with her husband: “We’ve come to the conclusion that my whole life was about me. I didn’t have any responsibilities. I would read a book; I would write a song. I would have a conversation; I would write a song. I would look at two people sitting on a bench; I would write a song. I was like an earthworm. Songs are my byproduct in this world. I leave a trail of them.”
Now that she has a family, she has “insane fantasies” about a day spent reading, playing piano and going for walks. “I’ve always felt time, even as a little kid,” she says. “I feel the weight of it: this is it. What a gift! What a responsibility! Things like mortality, myth, the hugeness of humanity, all of those existential things, they’re very present. I’m grateful for art but I will always end up choosing cuddling with my kids instead of running away to make art. That’s probably why I make a lot less of it.”
Spektor’s father, Ilya, died in April, just before she was due to play a big comeback show at Carnegie Hall. He would have attended that one, like he attended so many others. She remembers her parents paying to press 1,000 copies of her self-released 2001 debut album 11:11, the boxes piled high in their small Bronx apartment. She remembers them inviting their friends to her first show at the SideWalk Café in the East Village to make sure she had a crowd. “I think they had me back because these nice Russian Jewish people kept ordering vodka tonics,” she says, laughing. “My parents came to all the gigs. I was the only person at SUNY [State University New York] Purchase Conservatory whose parents were excited for them to become a musician.” Recently, she was putting together a boxset for the 20th anniversary of 11:11 and Ilya gave her a cache of videotapes he had made of her earliest shows. “There were like 30 songs that I only remembered I had written when I heard them.” She called the bonus discs Poppa’s Bootlegs.
Looking back, Spektor’s breakthrough seems unlikely: a classically trained pianist being adopted by her generation’s most lauded rock dudes. In 2003, she was introduced to Strokes producer Gordon Raphael, who recorded some demos and played them to the band. Within months, she had a record deal and was on tour with the Strokes and Kings of Leon. “People will write me, ‘My daughter plays piano, can you give any advice?’ I’m like, Randomly meet Gordon Raphael! He happens to have worked with this band that every single person in New York loves, that you have never heard of because you live in the Bronx and don’t know about anything. Then this magical thing happens.”
Audiences were initially frosty towards this unknown singer-songwriter, but the bands were lovely. “I guess my destiny was to be the outsider, but you look around and realise that it’s all made up of outsiders, really. Groups, scenes, all this stuff, it’s mythologised and organised later.”
Spektor is loath to explain what her songs mean, except to say that it’s never what she initially expected them to mean. She mimes shaking dice in a cup and rolling them, with no idea how they will land. “It’s hard for me to be a grown-up on press days. People are like, ‘What were you thinking when you did this?’” She pulls a panicked face. “I wasn’t thinking! I don’t even know! So many people want to know that you had a plan.”
The day that Russia invaded Ukraine, Spektor posted an anguished statement on Facebook. She has grandparents from both countries; after the Chernobyl disaster, relatives from Kyiv lodged with her family in their tiny Moscow apartment. “One thing that happens with Jews a lot is we’re from all over the place,” she says. “The idea of nationalism is just not there because you’re always blown about by the grace of whatever nation you’re in – now you’re in favour, now you’re out of favour; now you’re alive, now you’re dead.” She says that there’s an “obvious, insane guilty party” but that it’s wrong to assume that the average Russian wholly supports the invasion. “It’s not like when I went to protest the Iraq war I was facing 15 years in jail… I don’t know if I’m the kind of person that could throw my entire self into the machine to try to stop it.”
The invasion, like her father’s death, occurred after the album was finished, but you can hear the relevant emotions in the songs (Becoming All Alone’s soaring plea of “Stay, stay, stay”; “bombing and shelters go together” in What Might Have Been), just as you can hear them in her most devastating song, 2009’s Laughing With: “No one laughs at God in a hospital/ No one laughs at God in a war.” She writes stories, not diary entries, and they are constantly renewed.
“I used to feel a little bit sad when I realised that in our culture there was a big divide between fiction writers and truth writers,” she says. “To me, fiction is a true vehicle for feelings and realisations about life. Because this place is very weird and mysterious and most of the time we have no idea what’s going on. Every once in a while we get a glimpse and then we realise, oh, actually that was the reverse image of a shrapnel of a tiny mirror that’s a million miles away. It’s very hard to be here, because you’re watching cruelty; you’re watching the next 100 years of war being born. If you wanted, your whole life could be a slow-motion horror. But at the same time it’s just so good here. There are so many wonderful things here and you can fill your days with them.” She takes a giant breath, like she’s just climbed a hill and she’s taking in the view. “I guess all of that ends up being in the music.”
Home, before and after is out on 24 June on Warner records

A new collection sits beside works by 12 female artists, turning the brand’s Mayfair store into an art gallery
Thu 9 Jun 2022 06.00 BST

Cats parade en masse at the Melbourne cat lovers show, with a special breed for everyone to discover. The show, which has made a return after being cancelled for the past two years due to Covid-19, features hundreds of cats, educational talks, and even a ‘purr-fect match zone’ where visitors can figure out which breed would make the best companion for them
Sun 5 Jun 2022 18.30 BST
Last modified on Mon 6 Jun 2022 05.23 BST

The then 12-year-old had diplomats squirming in their seats when she berated them at the 1992 gathering
Fidel Castro was there, along with George Bush, John Major and 100 other heads of state, billionaires and rock stars. But the biggest star of the 1992 Earth Summit was a young girl who delivered what would be known as the speech that “silenced the world”.
Severn Cullis-Suzuki was just 12 years old, and had set up a children’s environment group in Vancouver with her nine-year-old sister Sarika and friends Vanessa Suttie, Morgan Geisler and Michelle Quigg. When they heard about the Rio meeting they pestered family and friends to raise the money to fly south, accompanied by her father, David Suzuki, one of Canada’s leading geneticists. The group hired a small booth at a side event and set about ambushing anyone and everyone (I met them and was knocked out by their enthusiasm and intensity).
And then they were told at the last minute that if they got to the main conference hall 10 miles away in half an hour they could have a short slot to address the world’s governments. “We jumped in a taxi”, recalls Severn, the de facto leader of the group, 30 years on. “I had a singular focus. I just wanted to talk to them and tell them what was at stake.”
If she was nervous when she got on the stage at the vast Rio Centro hall, it did not show. “I am here to speak for all generations to come. I am here to speak on behalf of the starving children around the world whose cries go unheard,” she started off, barely referring to notes.
Film shows the diplomats squirming in the face of her anger and rhetoric. “I’m not blind, and in my fear I’m not afraid of telling the world how I feel. In my country we make so much waste, we buy and throw away, buy and throw away, buy and throw away. I am only a child, yet I know if all the money spent on war was spent on finding environmental answers, ending poverty and in finding treaties, what a wonderful place this Earth would be.”
Severn Cullis-Suzuki – named after the British river that her mother’s family had lived close to – roasted her audience. She had been given five minutes to speak but took more. “You teach us how to behave in the world. You teach us to not fight with others, to work things out, to respect others, to clean up our mess, not to hurt other creatures, to share, not be greedy. Then, why do you go out and … do the things you tell us not to do?” she continued.
The 542-word speech, jammed together in the taxi with her friends, was hailed as “six minutes that silenced the world”, and she was called the “voice of a generation”. Al Gore called it the best speech of the summit, and today it has been watched millions of times and is cited as exemplary essay-writing.
It changed her life. For a while she was a celebrity youth activist – travelling the world for Earth justice and demanding action on climate change, forests and pollution – and a kid with an academic bent.
She sees the parallels between herself and Greta Thunberg. The two met in 2019, when the Swedish campaigner came to Vancouver for a climate march. “It was a very intense meeting. There was lots of violence around her. A man tried to attack her. She is an incredible, charismatic leader; what is amazing about her is how level-headed and focused she is. I saw the young me in her. We had so much in common. Now we are bound together by history. Greta has an extra intensity because of the lack of [global] action.”
Cullis-Suzuki focused on Indigenous culture, studying biology and anthropology. In 2008 she married into the Haida nation on Haida Gwaii, a group of more than 200 islands about 70 miles off the Pacific coast of Canada, and she lived on a reserve there with her children where she immersed herself in the Indigenous culture and language. Now she is finishing a PhD on the Haida language.
“My family has always worked with Indigenous peoples. Dad, who was a third-generation Japanese, came into contact with Kayapo leaders in Brazil. He had travelled there. In the end, Paiakan [who had led protests against the destruction of the Amazon] came to live with us.”
So many environmental battles have been led by Indigenous peoples, she says. “They are so important now because they know how to survive. They have been through the six great extinctions. We are just waking up to the genius of how they have lived with the land for tens of thousands of years. It gives us profound hope. That knowledge has been a real help for me.
“People say the world did nothing after Rio but in fact many agreements came out of it. It built the architecture of global environmental diplomacy. Since then we have seen the rise of immense corporate power, with companies now big enough to be in the G7 but freed from any democratic oversight. Their influence is now immense.
“Now I worry about my children. Eco-anxiety has reached the mainstream and youth is coming to terms with what is their future. We are still living the good life. It’s clear to all of us. Children are attuned to injustice and hypocrisy. We are living at the expense of their future. There is a profound dissonance.”
Last year smoke from Canadian wildfires reached Haida Gwaii, and Cullis-Suzuki moved to Vancouver where she now runs the large climate and conservation foundation that her father set up. “Covid has shown us we can react to a global emergency like climate. We can see what an appropriate response is. For Covid they invested billions of money. Now we know it is possible. We have all the solutions.”
Thirty years on, she says she would not change a word of her speech. “I couldn’t. I wouldn’t. It came from a girl. The voice of youth can be so profound. It hits you hard.”

In an expansive new biography, the acclaimed writer and director’s complexities are explored and contextualised
You can’t chart the whole of Nora Ephron with just the name-making hits that placed her atop the end-of-the-century romcom boom, but you can’t do so without them, either. The polymath writer’s best-known traits – her barbed wit, her particular taste mistaken by some for pickiness, her profound and enduring love of food – course through scripting gigs like When Harry Met Sally … as well as such directorial projects as Sleepless in Seattle and You’ve Got Mail. Lovelorn and loquacious, this is the Nora fans feel they know well enough to assume the first-name basis, a characterization that only covers one side of a many-splendored woman. Kristin Marguerite Doidge, the author of the newly released Nora Ephron: A Biography, hopes to expand the image of a singular talent for the blinker-visioned faithful and uninitiated alike.
“She wrote for five or six decades, and so everyone comes to her from a different angle,” Doidge tells the Guardian from her home in Los Angeles. “Some people might have seen Heartburn before anything else, or maybe you remember seeing This Is My Life with your grandma. Some people find her much later, when she was feeling bad about her neck. The general public tends to think of her as the romantic comedy queen, the lady who did You’ve Got Mail. That’s just one part of her, and what she stands for. A lot of the younger generation doesn’t even know Nora and her movies. I teach at a university, and when I say her name, I get a lot of blank stares. It’s crazy!”
Though Doidge can hardly blame them; it wasn’t so long ago that she considered herself an Ephron neophyte. “I came to her movies later,” she says. “I feel bad saying it, but I wasn’t a diehard. I never associated Nora with Silkwood prior to working on this book. Growing up in the 80s and 90s, I saw Sleepless in Seattle. I heard of When Harry Met Sally … but I wasn’t allowed to watch it! Too scandalous, never knew why at the time. And isn’t that telling, how the woman experiencing pleasure was seen as too much for a kid. As a kid, you don’t even really get the joke!”
Doidge came to kneel at the altar of Nora in 2014, as she searched for a subject capable of sustaining her master’s thesis. The unusual trajectory of Ephron’s career, which began with a groundbreaking tenure in journalism and didn’t reach the directing phase until her 50s, gave Doidge something she could connect to. She came to see Ephron’s fully formed, well-documented worldview as a lens through which she could look at today’s reality. “Around this time, I’d also become invested in this idea that research shows young people are getting married less and waiting longer to do it, and I was curious about why that’s happening,” she says. “I thought, ‘Huh, here’s a woman writing through the women’s rights movement and going on to make these earnest romantic comedies, what would she make of that?’”
Besides outlining a compact chronology of Ephron’s early years and the career she maintained to her deathbed, Doidge’s book highlights the contradictions of the soul contained within a cynical romantic as quick to belittle those close to her as she was to love them. Ephron was famed for her fierce intellect and unsparing sense of humor, and as is so often the case with funny people, the combination could alienate those in her crosshairs. Friends resented how their words or details of their lives had a funny way of ending up in her writing, a habit she never believed should require permission. As Doidge interviewed Ephron’s confidant Richard Cohen and talked her way through the many doors he opened for her, she came to understand this flinty personality as someone sincerely unconcerned with what other people thought about her.
“When I see her in old interviews, she seems so secure in her analyses,” Doidge says. “The interviewer says she was mean to such-and-such, and she says, ‘Well, you have a soft spot for her and I don’t.’ That was just how she saw it, and she wasn’t afraid to say so. If it was in service of making a point or getting a laugh, I think she didn’t mind hurting someone. Someone recently asked me about Joan Didion, and whether Nora came down on the wrong side of her movement. I think it’s crucial for us to realize and remember that these were women working in the context of a very different time. She was critical of her classmates at Wellesley for what she perceived as a lack of toughness, an unwillingness to fight for better conditions for women. I think she also found it silly that that was a thing at all. She had a complicated relationship with the concept of feminism.”
Along with Doidge, we gradually get a wider view of Ephron’s layered psychology and its formative pieces, a dotted line connecting a harsh, undesired youth to an adulthood spent melding levity with angst. Her lesser-known pictures – This Is My Life, Mixed Nuts, the adaptation of her own roman à clef novel Heartburn – give us what Doidge calls “the warmth we crave so badly” while crucially pairing it with a sober-eyed take on the unglamorous aspects of romance or family. We’re moved by the various flirtations of Meg Ryan and Tom Hanks because they’re imperfect and human in frank, even embarrassing ways more truthful than the done-to-death klutziness meant to humanize so many romcom heroines. She wanted her characters to be as multifaceted as the people she knew best, like her sister and regular co-writer Delia; they loved one another as much as siblings can, which is why they sometimes came to blows so bitter that they’d cut off communication for weeks at a time.
“For better or worse, she was the daughter of alcoholics,” Doidge explains. “That was a lifelong journey, understanding how someone you love and admire and look up to can also be falling apart, how to love someone who isn’t just one thing. You see that again with Carl [Bernstein], who she loved so deeply, the father of her babies, who also hurt her beyond what she could take. But she’d just brush herself and say ‘OK!’ and move on to figuring it out. The process of finding your person can sometimes look different than what we originally thought.”
She’s present in every silver-screen attraction in thrall to its own dysfunction, but Ephron’s influence stretches beyond estimation. Tom Hanks told Doidge that every movie he’s done since Saving Private Ryan has been informed in some way by one of the books his dear friend Nora gifted him. Ephron blazed a trail through Hollywood now followed by humorists like Tina Fey and Mindy Kaling; producers hoping to take a more decisive role in the architecture of industry power, such as Reese Witherspoon, also follow in her footsteps. Ephron’s mother always liked to say that “everything is copy,” a truism insofar as every year brings a batch of Ephron knock-offs with a fraction of the conviction and naked honesty she committed to every word. For her, however, the mantra referred to how art didn’t just imitate life but translate it, putting her struggles and joys right on to the page. Doidge sums it up tidily: “All her movies are nonfiction.”
Nora Ephron: A Biography is out now

The Guardian’s picture editors select photo highlights from around the world
Fri 10 Jun 2022 13.55 BST
Last modified on Fri 10 Jun 2022 16.16 BST
Photograph: Thailand Public Health Ministry/Reuters

Lucien Clergue’s shot, taken in the French seaside town of Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer, celebrates a Gypsy pilgrimage amid the stirrings of postwar hedonism
Every May the seaside town of Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer in the Camargue hosts the Gitan Pilgrimage, a gathering of French and Catalan Gypsies. The town’s medieval church houses the statue of Sara-la-Kali, the Black Madonna, which is carried down to the sea, as a signal for the partying to begin. The photographer Lucien Clergue first photographed the pilgrimage in 1955. He had grown up in Arles, just to the north, and was searching for a visual language of the Mediterranean that captured both ancient tradition and the stirrings of postwar hedonism. The pilgrimage, its dancers and its guitar players, rooted that idea. This picture was taken on the beach at Saintes-Marie in 1957.
Clergue had met Picasso in 1953, having waited outside the bullring at Arles to show him some of his photographs; he was only 19 at the time of this encounter, but the pair became friends. Clergue’s first book, Corps Memorable (1957), a collection of images of nudes on French beaches, came with a cover by Picasso and an introduction by Jean Cocteau. He shared many of Picasso’s preoccupations, making series of pictures of bullfights, and animal corpses and harlequin troupes.
In 1970, with the writer Michel Tournier, Clergue created the famous summer photography festival at Arles, which now attracts 150,000 visitors annually. This year, the festival includes a celebratory retrospective of Clergue’s photographs of the Mediterranean – including this one – curated by his daughter, Anne. Clergue, who died in 2014, aged 80, never forgot the bombing of the city during the war, which destroyed his family home; the festival was a brilliant antidote to that history. His pictures often dwelled on life and sun and sea and sex, but there was always an undertow of melancholy; on a shoot on the beaches of his beloved Camargue, he was once heard to exclaim: “Look, I am photographing my tomb!”
Lucien Clergue, The Mediterranean is on show at the Arles photography festival, France, until 18 September

After 27 years, the groundbreaking Saturday night at the Royal Vauxhall Tavern in London ends next month. Performers past and present and famous fans reflect on how it changed them and the queer scene. Introduction by Ben Walters
In November 1995, six twentysomething mates in London were sick of never finding anywhere to go out that fitted their idea of fun, so they put on a night of their own at the Royal Vauxhall Tavern (RVT) and called it Duckie. They were host Amy Lamé, DJs the London Readers Wifes (Mark Wood and Mark Johnston), producer-promoter Simon Strange (AKA Simon Casson) and “door whores” Jay Cloth and Father Cloth. It was the start of one of the world’s longest-running LGBTQ+ club nights and the ignition of a powerhouse performance collective that runs dozens of projects with hundreds of collaborators to this day.
Duckie as an organisation is going nowhere – it has plenty of touring shows, community projects and one-off parties in the works. But in four weeks, after 27 years, its Saturday nights at the RVT will end. The crowds still come but, venue management says, “revenue at the bar” is too low. It’s truly the end of an era.
As a gay teenage Londoner in the mid-90s, the first club I went to was Heaven, which felt somehow compulsory. It was liberating and intoxicating but, as a speccy, self-conscious type more into my parents’ 1960s LPs than house or techno, I didn’t really feel at home. The second club I went to was Duckie. On the speakers were David Bowie, Kate Bush and the Smiths. On stage, “anti-drag” act the Divine David castigated liberal complacency. And, like many other misfits, weirdos and queers, I felt right at home.
All this went against the grain of the 90s gay scene. Rather than gym culture, dance music, strippers and pills, Duckie melded the boozy bonhomie of gay indie-pop night Popstarz with the live-art vibe of the ICA, creating what it called “homosexual honky-tonk”. Less consumerist-aspirational gay, more sarky art-school queer, the crowd was thoughtful, bolshie and (mostly) kind. The Readers Wifes’ eclectic playlist ranged from X-Ray Spex to Abba. The acts were short and scandalous – radical praxis meets music hall. And rather than Soho’s shiny new bars, Duckie found its spiritual home in a run-down boozer south of the river: the RVT.
Around 1860, the pub was the first building to go up when Vauxhall’s notorious pleasure gardens, home to early cocktails, pop songs and classless cruising, closed. The RVT became a space of gay socialising after the war and was central to London’s 60s drag boom. In the 80s, its prominent community role at the time of Aids and section 28 provoked police raids, one involving resident drag act Lily Savage. The RVT hit a lull in the 90s, open just two days a week until the Duckie gang moved in and proved an instant hit. For Amy Lamé, being there “felt like us carrying on this torch” of experimental queer culture.
Duckie’s Saturday nights are a kind of alchemy. They catalyse lifelong bonds among devoted punters while insisting on live performance as a kind of blood sport. New York underground legend Penny Arcade says facing the crowd there is “like running with the bulls at Pamplona”. But it goes both ways. Punters are liable to be on the receiving end of both political challenge and bodily fluids, like those flying during an act by Mouse, a signature Duckie turn who regularly finds innovative new uses for various orifices.
Duckie put the RVT on the map as London’s home of alternative queer performance, paving the way for other influential weekly residencies at the venue. Trans-led showcase Bar Wotever forged a powerful fusion of radical sex-positive cabaret and inclusive grassroots solidarity, giving early platforms to artists such as Travis Alabanza. And one of London’s first drag bingo nights, hosted on Mondays by bearded eco-dragster Timberlina, built a big following off its experimental left-field humour and laid-back vibe. Duckie also repeatedly defended the RVT against profit-led redevelopment. In 1999, it led the charge against plans involving a shopping centre and “snow dome”. And in 2014, after the pub’s sale to international developers, it helped secure legal protections safeguarding its future, including making it a Grade II listed building.
Beyond the RVT, Duckie creates big immersive parties such as the scabrously ironic Gay Shame, held each year on the night of Pride in London. It has produced runs of experimental immersive shows at the Barbican and Southbank Centre and globally toured an Olivier-winning variety show internationally, long before La Clique. It also co-creates community projects with older people, homeless people and queer people of colour – “homemade mutant hope machines”, as I think of them, quietly bringing better worlds into being. The Posh Club, for instance, began as an afternoon tea party for older people without many friends or family and became an engine for fabulous adventures in dressing up, dancing and performing. This turn to social engagement anticipated broader shifts in the arts sector, just as the Wifes’ eclectic musical tastes and the nurturing of experimental short-form live performance have become London LGBTQ+ nightlife standards.
Duckie Saturday nights feel like family: a space to congregate in celebration and sadness, as when the RVT became a listed building or David Bowie died, and a place where trans and genderqueer lives are valued. There have been changes lately: Lamé, now London’s “night tsar”, stepped back from hosting the night and the Cloths left the door. But if change is inevitable, an LGBTQ+ club lasting 27 years in the same venue is a minor miracle. Duckie at the RVT has been a constant of my adult life and many others’, a queer night out that feels like home, an alternative to commercialism and conformity for more than one generation. It’s a place where I learned how powerfully fun, challenge and care can combine. They make for a killer party – and not a bad way of life. Ben Walters
Duckie’s Saturday nights at the Royal Vauxhall Tavern end with Gay Shame on 2 July. Ben Walters is a critic and researcher who focuses on queer and DIY performance and moving image culture. His doctoral research, framing Duckie’s community projects as “homemade mutant hope machines”, can be found here
Award-winning writer and performer from Sheffield known for playing stage characters such as country music singer Tina C
I performed on the very first night of Duckie, as well as at a precursor event called Big Girl’s Blouse. It was the first time I played my character Tina C, which I did for another 26 years, so my work is very closely interwoven with Duckie. There was a tight gang of us at the beginning that went on to do more theatrical shows around the world and to win an Olivier award [for Duckie’s C’est Barbican! in 2004]. There was a sense of having a shared aim and being an alternative to mainstream gay culture.
I remember that first night being crazy busy, but for such an intensely packed, noisy place, there was already a sense that the acts were important. Nobody would talk during the performance, unless it were terrible. It was so valuable for me as a performer in the early days – the respect was there from the beginning. The audience wanted you to be good.
I’m performing at Duckie on 18 June and when I was wondering what to do, I suddenly remembered a character I used to play – a gay man who talks about sex all the time. I had this ridiculously filthy song – Portaloo – to the tune of Waterloo by Abba. I totally erased it from my mind – I mean, it’s not the most subtle piece from my entire oeuvre – but I must have sung it so many times at Duckie. So I will be reprising that.
Duckie has been very influential in the sense of putting forward what I would call a queer aesthetic, as opposed to a gay aesthetic. It was definitely ahead of its time in terms of its queerness, in its attitude towards gender and breaking down boundaries. I would never really use the word “drag” about Duckie, it’s more about a kind of fluidity across sexuality and gender. It’s an alternative queer universe. I think that is massively taken for granted now, but in the 1990s that didn’t really exist and Duckie was a space that made that live. Killian Fox
Multi-disciplinary artist based in London. Last year, she took over from Amy Lamé as host of Duckie at the RVT
Duckie has basically been my life for the past 13 years. I first got involved aged 17 through a dance company called the Stylinquents. They got us in to do the pre-show for [performance artist] David Hoyle and every week we’d come on wearing different looks – in military outfits or looking like menacing schoolgirls. It was really mental.
One week – and this is my most imprinted memory – Hoyle had this other artist come on and they went to the toilet on stage. David was talking about art and the Arts Council while drawing with the crap and being like: “This is art.” It was so out there. I loved it.
Last August, I started hosting the Saturday nights. I’ve been trying to drive inclusivity. Once we did a collaboration with Club Kali, a queer Asian night, and the different energy in that space was just so beautiful. I would like to think that my energy is drawing in more younger people, more women and more trans and non-binary people. And I’m seeing more people of colour. It’s a shame the Saturday nights are ending, but I don’t think it’s the end of it for me and Duckie.
I was already exploring my sexuality when I came to Duckie, but it provided a space where I was able to grow and become more accepting of myself. Back in the day, my mum probably thought Duckie was this corrupting influence, but when she was able to experience what the company do, see me in my element, it allowed us to grow together. That’s a really significant thing for me. KF
Award-winning cabaret, theatre and performance artist, star of C’est Duckie, La Clique and La Soirée, whose career began at Duckie in 1995
Before Duckie, I was an unemployed actor with few prospects. I was also not very good. Then a friend told me this queer nightclub had just opened, where you could do anything as long as it wasn’t shit – you could be a performance poet or an old man playing the spoons. I did a cod-flamenco song about being half-Spanish from Croydon.
I’ve never forgotten the heat of the crowd from the little stage. Duckie made me realise what I needed to do: make my own work, in places where I could be who I wanted to be.
Duckie was such a clear alternative to the sanitised, cynical, money-making London gay clubs of the 1990s. It was a proper alternative space for queer, non-corporate weirdos. It helped me realise you can make shows that are pretty out there, which can still connect. I first did Hanky Panky [Martinez’s choreographed magic-act striptease] at a Duckie night in Birmingham. It’s mad to think it’s since opened literary festivals and been performed at the Sydney Opera House and palaces in Croatia. The conceptual cabaret night we created from there, C’est Duckie, won an Olivier award [the first of three for Martinez].
Duckie is so much about community. It does unique things such as the Posh Club, which provides entertainment for older people, and it’s recently done brilliant work with homeless alcoholics. It’s also sustained itself through the years, understanding younger queer culture, trans culture and people of colour. That’s why younger people go there and old regulars continue to. It brings the generations together.
When I learned Duckie was leaving the RVT, I was shocked. It’s a seedy shithole, but going into that dressing room for me feels like going back into the womb! But all credit to Duckie that it won’t be held ransom by anybody. It will continue to provide a welcoming, alternative home wherever it goes. Jude Rogers
Turner prize-winning artist and photographer, 1990s-2010s Duckie regular
I don’t remember the first time I went to Duckie, which is maybe because it has remained consistently good. To be this good needs an inspired team. Much praise is rightfully given to Amy Lamé, but for me, the Readers Wifes were the main draw. They played tunes that were not on the menu elsewhere: left-field American pop like Iggy Pop’s The Passenger or Martha and the Muffins’ Echo Beach, alongside Bobby Orlando’s classics for Divine, plus whatever UK indie rock and pop had to offer for queer boys and girls who grew up in the 80s and thereafter.
Duckie was unashamedly retro from the start, knowing that those songs speak across generations about the experience of finding oneself just outside the mainstream. It was such a welcoming place. There was a camaraderie of misfits and it was never cliquey. We had found our weekly asylum.
I’d combine the long trip to south-west London from the East End with a visit to the railway arches nearby, using a cigarette break outside as just the right moment to peel away and disappear to more hands-on places such as the Hoist, which are now also history.
The performer I first saw there, and still hugely admire for his disarmingly confrontational honesty, is the Divine David, later better known as David Hoyle. He would have me gasping, laying his fingers in the wounds of my own pathetic-ness, while wrapping the audience in a deep sense of empathy. Duckie was also certainly a precursor of other arty queer east London nights such as Radio Egypt in the mid 2000s. The idea that a boozy night out could have something to do with art and culture has since been widely recognised, yet not supported and protected. It is a shame to see these hotbeds of underground creativity being marginalised in the nightlife industry. JR
Actor, comedian and disability rights activist born in Birkenhead. On TV she has starred in Silent Witness and The OA. This year, she won an Olivier award for her supporting role in The Normal Heart at the National Theatre
In 2011, I was doing standup at the Soho theatre and a friend of mine brought [Duckie co-founder] Simon Casson to see me. The next day, Simon rang up saying he’d like to offer me a spot at Duckie. He basically said: “You can’t fail. You can do anything you want and I’ll rebook you.” My respect for him and the Duckie crew was born from that moment. As a performer, you’re very rarely given the chance to make mistakes or to do whatever you want.
I’ve performed there three times. It’s raucous. It feels like family. It’s creative freedom like I’d never experienced before. For the first gig, I put a headscarf on and pretended I was the Queen, having a dig at the royal family and some of our sacred institutions. The second time I did something more controversial with a bunch of other disabled performers called Inspiration World. It was all about how the Paralympics was a way of getting disabled people off benefits and into work. It was deeply political and very edgy. There’s nowhere else I could imagine putting that on.
One of the joys of Duckie is the dressing room at the Royal Vauxhall Tavern – a tiny room with all sorts of costumes and bodies all pressed up together. You have great conversations and a lot of nakedness and surrealism.
I’m thrilled that I was part of Duckie’s history. It’s such a wonderfully queer and creative world and it has been pivotal in the gay community. Without it [at RVT], there will be a massive gaping hole – euphemism confirmed – and nobody likes a gaping hole. I can’t think of another night that could fill it as well as Duckie did. KF
Wood (AKA Chelsea Kelsey) is one half of Readers Wifes, Duckie’s resident DJs since its inauguration. In 2016, they released their debut album Gaslight
When [Duckie co-founders] Simon Casson and Amy Lamé got a four-night tenancy at the Royal Vauxhall Tavern in 1995, they were looking for DJs. My best friend Mark Johnston and I agreed to do it. We didn’t really want to, to be honest, because we didn’t want to stand up for five hours a night for a whole month. Now it’s 27 years later and we’re still there. It’s a cruel joke.
We had such low expectations. We were playing records that you didn’t really hear in clubs – X-Ray Spex, Kate Bush – whereas everything on the gay scene back then was house or really cheesy pop. When people started dancing at 10.30pm we were like “Oh fuck”. They were taking it a lot more seriously than we were. At 1am we played Wuthering Heights and complete pandemonium broke out – people were up on each other’s shoulders, glasses were getting smashed. The venue asked if we wanted to keep going after the first month, but it really was amateur hour when it started.
Vauxhall was so rough in the 90s, I remember we took a hammer and a chisel in case we were attacked. We had no experience of playing to gay crowds, even though we’re gay ourselves, so we were like: “What are these gay people going to do when they hear Jilted John or Sound and Vision, are we going to get attacked?”
Mark and I always had nine-to-five jobs, so Duckie has provided an essential dollop of weirdness and unpredictability every weekend. I’ve seen some things on that stage that you’re not meant to have seen. In the early 2000s, a fresh-faced kid came on with a curtain of steel rods nailed to his scalp. This terrifying German techno music was playing and he was swaying from side to side. It was just so disturbing.
There was an amazing Japanese woman who used to give birth on stage to a giant cabbage. And of course there’ve been people pulling things out of their arses – I’ve seen so many different things come out of different people’s arses over the years.
I’ve also met some absolutely fantastic people. We’ve had the best punters. When we play something, they actually give a shit. I think the less rigid music that you hear on the gay scene now has quite a lot to do with us and the fact that people are more open about what you can have on stage, rather than just a drag queen. It’s just all about choice – and variety. We’re the un-royal variety performance. KF
Author of three novels including the bestselling 2011 thriller Before I Go to Sleep. Born in the West Midlands, he worked as an NHS audiologist before becoming a writer
When I moved to London in the mid-90s, I couldn’t find any places on the mainstream gay scene that felt like they were for me. I’ve always really loved music, but most of the clubs were all about drugs and being muscular and cruising. Then I heard people talking about Duckie and one Saturday evening my best friend and I ventured down. It was Welsh night and all the way across the Royal Vauxhall Tavern, suspended from the ceiling, were leeks tied to pieces of string. You were literally pushing leeks out of your way to get across the dancefloor. Straight away I thought, this is not like anywhere else.
You never quite knew what was going to happen next at Duckie, especially when we first started going, but you gradually realised that, towards the end of the evening, when [resident DJs] the Readers Wifes said: “This is our favourite song of all time”, it was going to be a different song to the one last week and next week it’d be different again. These little things helped to anchor you amid all the strangeness.
For a club with Arts Council funding, it’s always been prepared to take risks. I remember a performer who came on dressed as the figure from Munch’s The Scream and ended up reversing off the stage with a fish’s head sticking out of his rectum – that was unusual. Whenever Amy Lamé introduced an act with the phrase: “If you’re a Duckie regular move to the back so that the new people can get to the front and have a good view”, you always knew that meant it was going to be messy.
It’s more than just a club, it’s a community. There’s a whole generation of people like me who talk about Duckie as a place where we found our tribe and in many cases our partners as well – I met the person I went on to have a 14-year relationship with at Duckie. It’s trying to push the boundaries and be inclusive right across the spectrum. I’ve travelled around the world and I’ve never come across anything like it. With the Saturday night ending, it feels like the gay scene is becoming that bit more homogenised. KF
British-Australian actor and TV star best known for her roles in the Harry Potter films (as Professor Sprout) and The Age of Innocence. Her autobiography, This Much Is True, is out in paperback on 7 July
I did a standup gig for charity at the RVT in 2009. I loved it. [The night] was unashamedly, proudly, deliberately and flamboyantly gay and that’s always cheering. For a good 45 minutes I sat on a chair and just talked into a handheld microphone. I’m not a comedian, but I somehow was able to do it. I felt supported by the audience. They were very friendly and they obviously liked me and that makes you feel good.
I talked about my gay life. It was salacious, not to say revelatory. It would be hard to shock the crowd there, but I didn’t want to shock them. I was confiding in them. Because it’s odd, being a very public gay woman. There don’t seem to be very many of us and we get overburdened with the responsibility of it. And this was just fun. There were lots and lots of leather boys and it had that air of a bit excited, pent-up sexuality that gay boys generate.
I’m not somebody who goes to gay bars. I don’t like loud music or packed places and I’ve never been a dancehall enthusiast. I think it’s because I’m very short and I can’t see anything going on. I feel hemmed in. I like crossing barriers; I don’t [usually] enjoy exclusively gay experiences, but this was noisy. It was joyous. It was free and untrammelled. And you could not but be caught up in the excitement of the moment. KF

Tredegar is a town in the Welsh valleys that changed the world. Its medical aid society – and local MP Nye Bevan – provided the inspiration for the NHS. Nearly 80 years later, a small group of community film-makers with a keen sense of history set up a huge network of volunteers to help the people of the area through the pandemic. Now, as the cost of living crisis hits, they ask where is the political will to learn from what groups like theirs did all over the country, and change the world again?
Katie Lamborn and Kevin Phillips, Source: The Guardian and Cymru Creations
Thu 9 Jun 2022 11.17 BST
Last modified on Thu 9 Jun 2022 17.57 BST

Jumbo Floating Restaurant encountered ‘adverse weather’ after being towed away from territory’s harbour
One of Hong Kong’s most distinctive restaurants – the Jumbo Floating Restaurant – has capsized in the South China Sea, days after it was towed away from its home of 46 years in the territory’s Aberdeen harbour.
Its owners said in a statement on Monday that the restaurant had encountered adverse weather conditions when passing the Paracel Islands – also known as the Xisha Islands – on its way to an undisclosed location.
“The water depth at the scene is over 1,000 metres, making it extremely difficult to carry out salvage works,” the statement from Aberdeen Restaurant Enterprises said, adding that no crew member was injured and that it was seeking more information from the towing agency. It said it was “very saddened by this accident”.
Opened in 1976 by the late Stanley Ho Hung-sun, a casino magnate in Macau, Jumbo restaurant has become a popular tourist attraction in the former British colony over the last four decades.
Known for its elegant traditional Chinese decorations and signature seafood dishes, the eatery of almost 80 metres in length has been repeatedly featured in films over the years, such as Jackie Chan’s 1985 film, The Protector, and the widely acclaimed Infernal Affairs II in 2003. Its high profile guests also included Queen Elizabeth II and Hollywood actor Tom Cruise.
The coronavirus pandemic dealt the restaurant a huge financial blow. It closed in 2020 due to the pandemic and laid off all its staff. Aberdeen Restaurant Enterprises said the restaurant had become a financial burden to its shareholders, with millions of Hong Kong dollars spent on its inspection and maintenance even though it was not in operation.
It said since the early days of the pandemic in 2020, Jumbo had a net loss of HK$100m (£10m). A lack of maintenance has also caused a 30-metre kitchen barge connected to the restaurant to sink earlier this month.
The restaurant was towed away last Tuesday to an undisclosed location. Before the vessel’s departure, the company said it had been inspected by marine engineers and hoardings had been installed, and all relevant approvals had been obtained.
Additional reporting by the Associated Press

Rediscovered work by two Jewish women has gone on display in Madrid for first time
Photographs by two Jewish female photographers who worked behind anti-fascist lines during the Spanish civil war have gone on display in Madrid after 80 years. For decades the negatives and prints, many of which have never been published, were believed to be lost or destroyed. They are now on show in the capital for the first time.
As the Spanish civil war neared a conclusion in 1939, anarchists of the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo and Federación Anarquista Ibérica (CNT-FAI) fighting in Barcelona took steps to preserve records of their struggle and achievements. Apprehensive of the war’s outcome, they sealed documents and 2,300 photographs, 5,000 negatives and almost 300 photographic plates in 48 wooden crates, which they smuggled out of the city away from the fascist bombardment, destined for the safe haven of the International Institute of Social History (IISH) in Amsterdam.
Barcelona, 1936. Photograph: Estate of the late Margaret Michaelis / IISH / National Gallery of Australia
Years later, having travelled via Paris, Harrogate and Oxford, the crates, known as the Amsterdam boxes, duly arrived. They remained sealed while the anarchists pursued undercover lives during the decades of the Franco regime. When they were finally opened in the 1980s the records and documents inside were inventoried but the photographic material was overlooked.
One of the Amsterdam boxes on display in Madrid
Now, thanks to the detective work of the art historian and curator Almudena Rubio, who has been researching the IISH archive since 2015, it has become possible to identify the output of two foreign photographers, both Jewish women, who travelled to Spain to take sides in the war: Margaret Michaelis, of Polish-Austrian descent, and Kati Horna, from Hungary and a friend of the photojournalist Robert Capa, a compatriot.
Anarchist fighters. Photograph: Estate of the late Margaret Michaelis / IISH / National Gallery of Australia
Michaelis had studied photography in Vienna in the 1920s and went on to work in Berlin until she and her husband, a prominent anarchist, were arrested on separate occasions by the Nazis.
After his release, the couple moved to Barcelona in 1933, where she established her own studio and worked as a portraitist and advertising and architecture photographer.
CNT-FAI street activity in Barcelona, 1936. Photograph: Estate of the late Margaret Michaelis / IISH / National Gallery of Australia
After the outbreak of the civil war Michaelis worked for the foreign propaganda office of the anarchists and contributed pictures to the newly established propaganda commissariat of Catalunya, which sought to maintain morale while encouraging anti-fascist action.
Emma Goldman visits Albalate de Cinca in Aragón. Photograph: Estate of the late Margaret Michaelis / IISH / National Gallery of Australia
Among Michaelis’s newly published pictures, all shot with a Leica, are scenes of street actions in Barcelona by anarchist militants; views of daily life in Albalate de Cinca and Valencia; reportage from a visit to L’Alcora, a village that had abolished the use of money; rare photographs of the veteran anarchist Emma Goldman (memorably branded by J Edgar Hoover “the most dangerous woman in America”); and the arrival of the British Red Cross in Portbou.
A collectivised church in Aragón converted into a carpentry workshop. Photograph: Kati Horna / IISH / Ministerio de Cultura y Deporte. Centro Documental de la Memoria Histórica
As Michaelis left Spain, Horna arrived in January 1937. She, too, was a trained photographer, and had left Germany in 1933. On arrival in Spain after four years in Paris, she committed herself to the social revolution, working for the foreign propaganda office of the anarchists.
Left, anarchist vehicles of the CNT-FAI in Barcelona, 1937. Right, Children in Barcelona, 1937. Photographs: Kati Horna / IISH / Ministerio de Cultura y Deporte. Centro Documental de la Memoria Histórica
She soon established herself as the official photographer of the SPA, an anarchist photo agency, and her pictures were published in such anarchist titles as Umbral, Mujeres Libres and Tierra y libertad.
Horna’s work, like Michaelis’s, was designed to support the social revolution and counteract Francoist propaganda that attempted to discredit the anti-fascist movement. Rolleiflex in hand, she visited a camp set up to look after children removed from the war zone; she recorded humane and sanitary conditions in a prison in Modelo; she pictured a collectivised church in Aragón converted into a carpentry workshop; she saw villagers having free haircuts at a collectivised barbershop; she scrambled through a trench on the Aragón front.
Rubio, whose painstaking research has unearthed the photographs, has no doubts about their importance. “The legacy of the work of Michaelis and Horna is unique, precisely because it shows us the rearguard revolutionary experience, neglected by official historiography, that was instigated by the anarchists of the CNT-FAI. At the same time, it allows us to reconstruct in more detail the life of the two photographers during the civil war, and better to appreciate their work in antifascist Spain.”
In the trenches on the Aragón front, 1937. Photograph: Kati Horna / IISH / Ministerio de Cultura y Deporte. Centro Documental de la Memoria Histórica
Both photographers believed their work had been lost or destroyed in the ruins of Franco’s bombs. Now, for the first time, the pictures are seeing the light of day.
The Amsterdam Boxes: Kati Horna and Margaret Michaelis in the Civil War is at the Calcografía Nacional in Madrid as part of PhotoEspaña until 27 July. The exhibition will travel to Huesca (Aragón) and Barcelona

The best of this week’s wildlife pictures, including a rare albino otter, a wild toki bird and a big-eared opossum
Fri 24 Jun 2022 12.19 BST
Last modified on Fri 24 Jun 2022 18.06 BST
Photograph: Creative Touch Imaging Ltd/NurPhoto/Rex/Shutterstock
Photograph: Media Office Of Iraqi Green Climate Organisation/Reuters
Photograph: Cristopher Rogel Blanquet/Getty Images

We must work with local communities to restore key species on a global scale if we are to tackle the climate and biodiversity crises gripping the world
There are few places in the world as majestic and full of wonder as Ecuador’s Galápagos Islands. From the rosy-hued pink iguanas on the northern rim of Wolf Volcano to the iconic Pinzón giant tortoise on Pinzón Island to the black-tipped reef sharks feeding off Floreana Island, we have both found boundless inspiration in exploring the islands that led Charles Darwin to develop his groundbreaking theory of evolution nearly two centuries ago.
We have both also witnessed a more recent rapidly evolving process in the Galápagos based on a shared vision of restoring the profusion of life that the archipelago is renowned for. This process is rewilding, a positive reframing for nature conservation. There is an idea that rewilding involves restoring nature at the expense of people, but we believe it is all about effectively integrating ourselves within the ecosystems that sustain us – to work with, rather than against, nature to create thriving and resilient ecosystems for the benefit of all.
In short, modern rewilding is the revolutionary act of bringing together people and the planet for people and the planet. It does not require any futuristic technology, relying instead on our scientific understanding of wildlife and ecosystems, combined with the traditional knowledge and wisdom of local communities and Indigenous peoples, who are consistently the most effective custodians of Earth’s biodiversity. In the truest sense of the word, it redresses our balance with the wild.
In the Galápagos, where non-native rats and other invasive species have decimated populations of birds, reptiles and other wildlife, it is inspiring to see some amazing examples of local communities deciding to restore and coexist with nature, rather than exploit it.
On Floreana, for example, residents are collaborating to remove invasive species by 2024 and return 13 native species to the island where they went locally extinct, by 2027. One of those species is the Floreana giant tortoise, whose return could reshape the entire island ecosystem. As the tortoises selectively browse certain plants, they disperse the seeds of native species and create a mosaic of habitats, enabling the island to return to a savannah-like ecosystem.
This will help the return of other species that will collectively restore the ecosystem to health, offering a cascade of benefits to the local Floreana community: climate resiliency, protection of their food and water supplies, preservation of their culture, and nature-based tourism.
And as Floreana is transformed, the ocean surrounding it will also benefit from, among other things, nutrient cycling from seabirds and reduced sedimentation due to the return of native vegetation.
The commitment to rewilding Floreana Island represents a shared vision of the Galápagos National Park Directorate and the local community, who have played leading roles in co-designing these projects from the start.
Re:wild and the directorate have now teamed up with local environmental organisations such as Fundación Jocotoco to replicate this powerful model to rewild the rest of the islands. Re:wild is also taking this approach beyond the Galápagos with local partners elsewhere, including across all of Latin America’s Pacific archipelagos, from Mexico to Chile.
We are seeing other promising examples of rewilding elsewhere. In Australia, reintroducing Tasmanian devils to the mainland will help engineer the entire ecosystem back to health and reduce the intensity of wildfires by helping native small mammals recover and forests to regenerate. In the Iberá wetlands of north-eastern Argentina, local communities have taken great pride in the reintroduction of jaguars, which are reinvigorating ecotourism in the region. In Indonesia, communities on Lombok Island are leading the restoration of coral reefs just a few years after a significant 2018 earthquake. And in the Caribbean, barren islands are being returned to lush green wildlife oases that can mitigate the impacts of extreme weather.
These are in microcosm what rewilding could accomplish on a global scale when done in the right places: thriving wildlife communities living in harmony with thriving human communities. We both agree that the answer to the climate and biodiversity crises gripping the world is both the most basic and ancient of ideas and the most radical to create a liveable planet by working with the wild, rather than against it.
Danny Rueda Córdova is director of the Galápagos National Park Directorate. Leonardo DiCaprio is an environmentalist, Academy Award-winning actor and founding board member of Re:wild.

Peter Ravenscroft pleads guilty to obtaining financial advantage by deception, avoids jail
A former police officer from the UK who lied about his work and education history, including claiming diplomas from a fake university, to gain high-paying Victorian government jobs has been spared a jail term.
Peter Ravenscroft worked as a police officer until he migrated to Australia with his family in 2007.
Over five years, the 56-year-old “blatantly lied” to secure employment in a number of jobs, including one where he earned more than $450,000, the Victorian county court heard on Wednesday.
Ravenscroft, who pleaded guilty to obtaining financial advantage by deception, claimed he had been a detective inspector for the UK National Crime Squad, when in reality he was a detective constable at Sussex police.
He told prospective employers he was a Leeds University fellow, held a bachelor of education from Aston University, and had two diplomas from Guildford University, which does not exist.
He also forged certificates of commendation and training from Sussex police.
The fake history helped him gain employment at the Department of Treasury and Finance and Frankston city council, where he was paid a total of $456,038 as a compliance and safety manager over several years.
He then moved to the Victorian ombudsman, where he earned $196,857, after creating a fake referee named “Dr John Marshall” who he said supervised him at Frankston council.
Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning
Judge Angela Ellis said the lies were “probably entirely unnecessary”, since he performed well in some roles and was a highly decorated UK police officer.
“Deceiving prospective employers with such blatant and calculated lies is appalling behaviour indeed,” she said.
“You clearly have been able to perform at least one of those roles more than capably, which is what makes your offending all the more inexplicable.”
Ravenscroft was convicted and handed a two-year community corrections order. He must perform 180 hours of unpaid community work and undergo mental health treatment and rehabilitation.

AFP say Calabrian mafia have been in Australia for decades, laundering money and ‘pulling the strings’ of other gangs
Thousands of Italian mafia members are operating in Australia and until recently had gone largely undetected while “pulling the strings” of other criminal gangs, Australian federal police say.
In a press conference on Tuesday, AFP assistant commissioner Nigel Ryan detailed the extent of Italian organised crime, including the ‘Ndrangheta, in Australia and plans to target them.
He said members of the notorious Calabrian mafia had concealed themselves within the community for decades while conducting money laundering in secrecy.
Police believe up to 5,000 mafia members are operating in Australia, in league with their colleagues in Italy.
The Calabrian mafia work with other organised crime groups including bikie gangs and Asian or Middle Eastern crime groups to cooperate on drug importation, money laundering and violence.
They are headed by senior figures with authority over their clans, keep a low profile and run businesses to present a legitimate front.
Over many decades the illegitimate wealth gained from organised crime has been slowly legitimised through those businesses.
“It’s entirely possible that people will be living next door to members of the ‘Ndrangheta without knowing,” Ryan said.
“They’ve been able to stay under the radar while living modest lives in modest homes. They funnelled the illegitimate wealth into their legitimate construction, agricultural and catering businesses.
“In many ways, I would say that the ‘Ndrangheta are actually the ones pulling the strings of other organised crime groups, particularly the more violent groups, such as outlaw motorcycle gangs.”
Four years ago, an AFP-led covert investigation into organised crime syndicates trafficking illicit drugs and weapons called Operation Ironside was set up.
At the heart of the operation was a dedicated encrypted communications device called ANoM.
Officers gathered intelligence from the ANoM app to understand how transnational serious organised crime syndicates – including the ‘Ndrangheta – operate and communicate.
Laws have since been passed providing the AFP with additional powers to identify and disrupt criminal syndicates.
“The (Surveillance Legislation Amendment Identify and Disrupt Act) warrants, coupled with intelligence collected from ANoM, have given us the best opportunity today to identify and pursue our next targets,” Ryan said.
“These targets now include Italian organised crime, namely the ‘Ndrangheta.”
Federal police will also look for individuals who facilitate money laundering, which is billions of dollars annually.
Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning
“The ‘Ndrangheta are not just an Australian problem, they are a global problem,” Ryan said.
“They are responsible for 70 to 80% of the world’s cocaine and they are flooding Australia with illicit drugs.
“They are pulling the strings of Australian outlaw motorcycle gangs who are behind some of the most significant violence in our communities.”
There are 51 Italian organised crime clans in Australia, and the AFP has confirmed that 14 of those are ‘Ndrangheta.
The Calabrian mafia is responsible for serious crimes committed across the world and the AFP is working with Italian, US, Spanish and Brazilian authorities to dismantle their finances, communications and operations.

Novaya Gazeta editor Dmitry Muratov will sell 23-carat gold medal in US on Monday, donating proceeds to charity
The editor of the Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta is auctioning his Nobel peace prize medal, with the proceeds to go to helping children displaced by the war in Ukraine.
Dmitry Muratov led one of the last major independent media outlets critical of Vladimir Putin’s government after others either closed or had their websites blocked after the invasion of Ukraine. In March, Novaya Gazeta announced it was suspending operations for the duration of the war after it became a crime to report anything on the conflict that veered from the government line.
Muratov was awarded the Nobel peace prize medal last October. He later announced he would donate the $500,000 prize money to charity “to give the children refugees a chance for a future”. His 23-carat gold Nobel medal will go on sale in New York at 7pm ET (midnight BST) on Monday, coinciding with World Refugee Day. All proceeds will go to Unicef, to help child refugees from Ukraine.
In a video released by Heritage Auctions, which is handling the sale, Muratov said he wanted the sale to be the “beginning of a flashmob, as an example to follow so people auction their valuable possessions to help Ukrainians”.
In an interview last month, Muratov said the auction was “an act of solidarity” with the 14 million Ukrainians displaced by the Russian invasion, which he called “a tragedy”.
“If we look at the number of refugees, we basically have world war three, not a local conflict,” he said. “This has been a mistake, and we need to end it.”
Novaya Gazeta, established in 1993 after the break-up of the Soviet Union, investigated corruption inside and outside Russia as well as the long wars in Chechnya. Muratov dedicated his award to the memory of six of the paper’s journalists who were murdered for their work.

Lynda Ouazar set up a food bank for undocumented people in the first lockdown, supporting those who lost their jobs and houses overnight, and who were unable to seek official help. She joined the Guardian for this collaborative film-making project, Made in Britain, to try to unearth some of these hidden stories in her part of east London
This is the fourth episode of Made in Britain, a community-based video journalism project looking at poverty, inequality and the challenges our communities face in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. The aim is to put the individuals who are typically under-represented in the media in front and behind the camera
Kyri Evangelou, Source: The Guardian
Wed 27 Apr 2022 12.04 BST
Last modified on Wed 27 Apr 2022 13.25 BST

I couldn’t imagine myself outside of cartoonish stereotypes like Apu from the Simpsons and Sacha Baron Cohen’s Borat
When Rami Malek speaks Arabic, he searches frantically for words. He speaks like an eight-year-old trying to repair the root of a dying tree. He speaks like a cellphone losing signal in a long tunnel. He speaks like me.
I started watching Mr Robot by mistake. Back in 2017, it was an obscure niche show on a network no one had ever heard of. It was weird and punk and anti-capitalist before TikTok had turned all the Zoomers into Marxists. It seemed too good to be true; a high-budget production in the aftermath of the Arab spring and Occupy Wall Street, proselytising about toxic consumerism and toxic masculinity, preaching to a choir of disillusioned millennials whose future was stolen by their property investor parents who pulled up the ladder before any of them had a chance to dream. It was a show about loneliness and mental illness and drug dependency, years before the glossy hedonism of Euphoria, but retaining a beating sincerity that was intoxicating and wounded.
It was only a matter of time before kids on the internet ripped Elliot’s monologue from the pilot episode about how capitalism destroyed every genuine notion we still held on to, and how America was an empire built on lies and the bones of third-world children. Then the rest of us started paying attention.
The show’s attitudes were all due to the understated genius of Sam Esmail, an Egyptian-American kid from the suburban ghetto of New Jersey, who had dreamt the full world of Mr Robot in its absolute form and pitched the show as a contained five-season arc. There was not a note out of place.
Sam was the nerdy perfectionist maestro the internet had been waiting for. But it was Rami Malek’s heart-wrenching introversion that grounded the show’s daring premise.
I never noticed just how Egyptian he looked until I saw his twin brother, slightly chubbier and unshaven, standing next to him outside the Oscars. Rami was just a cleaned-up version of a makwagy (the man who irons your clothes for you for a couple of pounds, usually on an ironing board outside your apartment block, then brings it up to you at the end of the weekend), with all the intensity of an Egyptian and the quiet of a first-gen immigrant kid thrown into the jaws of primary- school social life with no grasp of English. Yes, I’m projecting, and yes, that’s the point. It hurts to finally find representation on screen in your late twenties.
I didn’t have an Elliot when I was tumbling through high school. I had Osama bin Laden and the obnoxious and hairy tour guide from the first Mummy film played by Persian-British actor Omid Djalili. I rewatched it again recently and was aghast at the nonchalance of its racism. How was this normal for us growing up? How did we not flinch at the cheap jokes, the sea of robed and dusty Arab farmers yelling nonsensically, frothing at the mouth for blood? This is all I had growing up, and I often wonder what damage it did to my self-esteem, to the potential I saw for myself in the world.
Who could I become if I couldn’t imagine myself outside these cartoonish stereotypes?
For Malek, it took years of playing background White-passing characters in sitcoms and indie films. His most prominent role before then was as Ahkmenrah in Night at the Museum. At least he was Egyptian, right?
But then he was sidelined in the sequel in favour of cultural chameleon and Brown-whisperer Hank Azaria, who spent decades defending his obscene and lazy role as Apu from The Simpsons. He helped introduce high-school bullies everywhere to a cheap foreign accent they could imitate for guaranteed laughs at the expense of the poor foreign kid at the back of the class. Soon he was joined by Sacha Baron Cohen’s Borat, a caricature which somehow lives on as a respected and canonised example of comic genius and not a profoundly racist lowbrow punch-down. Cohen has carved his entire career on such gags, from his one-dimensional faux satirical appropriation of Black culture in Ali G, to his exhausting and redundant piss-take of the Arab world in The Dictator. All his material recycles familiar and tired stereotypes, which he lathers over his skin and dances, plucking cheap laughs at the expense of cultures that never feature in his films or speak with any agency.
I watched the Borat sequel with squinted eyes, trying to figure out why a film like this could still be celebrated. Maybe there was some hidden layer that I couldn’t grasp. An inside joke that everyone else was getting but me. But I could not find it. And yet Cohen has been lauded as an intellectual for shedding light on western antisemitism and homophobia, despite dragging other silenced people through the mud to do it. His films allow us to laugh at racist jokes the way we secretly want to, without feeling guilty. We feel superior to the dumb White Americans he fools into exposing their prejudices, while never being challenged about our own.
The problematic conversation around diversity and representation in film was summed up in a viral interview clip between Matt Damon and Effie Brown from 2015, in which Damon pushed back against the notion that power in Hollywood is concentrated in the hands of White directors, writers and producers, saying that because there were now plenty of actors of colour on screen, it wasn’t necessary also to have people behind the camera who weren’t White. It was easy for celebrities to champion inclusion, but when their own privileges were highlighted, many of them got defensive.
When Ridley Scott picked an all-White cast in his interpretation of the biblical story of Moses in Exodus: Gods and Kings, he justified it by saying there was no way he could finance a film by casting “Mohamed so-and-so”, and that those complaining should “get a life”. Christian Bale played Moses – opposite Joel Edgerton in a tan as the pharaoh and Sigourney Weaver as the pharaoh’s wife. When he was asked why a film that takes place in Egypt failed to employ anyone of Egyptian, north African or Arab descent, he responded: ‘If people start supporting those films … then financiers in the market will follow.’
Media mogul Rupert Murdoch jumped in: ‘Since when are Egyptians not White? All I know are.’
Despite the rich history of film in Egypt, which served for almost a century as the cultural and entertainment heart of the Middle East, it was too inconvenient to hire Egyptian actors to play main roles, or any role for that matter, in a story ultimately about Egyptian history and mythology. A few years later, Israeli actor and former IDF soldier Gal Gadot was announced in a starring role in an upcoming adaptation of Cleopatra. It was billed as a “feminist film”, told from the perspective of the ignored female voice in historical narrative. Without a hint of irony, my own people’s history was sidelined once again. Another group of White producers frolicking through other people’s cultures, clipping flowers from the shrub, and leaving the roots to rot.
Am I bitter? You bet. Am I surprised? Nope.
This is an edited extract from How to be a Bad Muslim and Other Essays by Mohamed Hassan (Penguin, NZ$35.00)

From stars such as TLC and Sleaford Mods to eccentric festival punters in their underpants, we give a glimpse into Glastonbury’s first big day
T-Boz of TLC performing with the group on the West Holts stage. Photograph: Tom Wren/SWNS
Sam Fender on the Pyramid stage. Photograph: David Levene/The Guardian
Robert Plant & Alison Krauss on the Pyramid stage. Photographs: Guy Bell/Alamy Live News, Samir Hussein/WireImage
Jason Williamson of Sleaford Mods on the West Holts stage. Photograph: Jim Dyson/Getty Images
Fans watch Phoebe Bridgers at the John Peel tent
Kara and Johanna Soderberg of First Aid Kit perform on the Other stage. Photograph: Anthony Harvey/REX/Shutterstock
Lee Kiernan from Idles crowdsurfs during their set on the Other stage. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA
Joe Talbot and Mark Bowen of Idles. Photograph: David Levene/The Guardian
Irish-Zambian rapper Denise Chaila performs on the BBC Introducing stage. Photograph: Leon Neal/Getty Images
Top left: Adam Caldwell and Ollie Bowen are walking around the music festival as Trouserless Coldstream Guards. Friends of friends, they only met yesterday, a day before the festival. Top right: The Popes from Woking, mates since primary school. Photographs Antonio Olmos/The Guardian
Bottom left: The Glasto Grannies from Bluth, Northumberland. Bottom right: Aspers Aspinall shaves his chest hair just for Glastonbury. Photographs Antonio Olmos/The Guardian
Festivalgoers watch Crowded House. Photograph: Anthony Harvey/REX/Shutterstock
Libertines fans. Photograph: Guy Bell/Alamy Live News
Dancing under the disco ball at the Glade. Photograph: Guy Bell/REX/Shutterstock

Overlooked except for a scornful reference in Ulysses, Elizabeth and Lily ran a vibrant women-only arts and crafts enterprise
In Ireland, Elizabeth and Lily Yeats are remembered if at all as the “weird sisters” – a fleeting, scornful reference in James Joyce’s Ulysses.
The novel did not name them or elaborate on their alleged weirdness, just as a male-dominated view of Irish history overlooked them except as minor players in an artistic movement.
They ran an arts and craft enterprise, Cuala Press, from 1908 to 1940, but Elizabeth and Lily were chiefly known as the sisters of two famous brothers – the poet William Butler Yeats and the painter Jack Yeats. They lived in the shadow of their male siblings, and the jibe in Ulysses, before fading into obscurity.
Now, however, an academic project has shone a light on the sisters’ unrecognised role in reforging Irish identity in the 20th century – an idealised version of Ireland that enchanted Hollywood and which lives on in some tourism imagery.
After Ireland won independence from Britain in 1921 the Cuala Press bolstered fragile national confidence – and impressed foreigners – with vibrant images of a prosperous Dublin and thriving rural traditions. It was a rebuttal to racist British tropes of a land populated by feckless, simian-like hooligans.
“Their reach was pretty incredible,” said Angela Griffith, an art historian at Trinity College Dublin. “The material they produced was being sold in Ireland, the UK, the US. It was part of the zeitgeist.”
The Cuala Press employed only women and produced handcrafted books, cards and prints that won glowing reviews at exhibitions in Paris, London, Chicago and elsewhere, seeding a romanticised image of Irishness that verged on propaganda. It was echoed in films such as The Quiet Man, a 1952 romantic comedy directed by John Ford that starred John Wayne and Maureen O’Hara, and tourism brochures showing ruddy people in scenic settings.
Griffith and Billy Shortall, a colleague at the Irish Art Research Centre in Trinity College, are leading an effort to collect, conserve, digitise and publish Cuala Press images.
Drawing on an archive donated by the Yeats family and 111 hand-coloured prints donated by Vin Ryan, the founder of the Schooner Foundation, in 2017, the project put the first images online last month.
“They may seem quaint and chocolate-boxy now, but they were quite radical. They were challenging what came before,” Shortall said, referring to negative British portrayals of Irishness. “They were promoting the idea of Irish self-determination.”
The fledgling Irish state established a stable, sovereign country against the odds but the Cuala Press images elided social ills such as poverty and emigration.
The Yeats sisters did not openly champion sexual equality but gave a powerful example, said Griffith. “They employed and trained women, ran their own business and actively demonstrated their own agency.”
History, however, overlooked their contribution. A plaque at the Yeats family home in Chiswick, London, mentions only male members. Cuala Press commissioned mostly female artists but dictionaries and biographies tend to record only the males, said Griffith. To be branded “weird” in Joyce’s masterpiece would have undermined them, she said.
The sisters lapsed further into obscurity after the 1970s when rustic and religious images – such as the Virgin Mary ironing beside a ginger-haired Christ – felt anachronistic in a country keen to project a modern, cosmopolitan image. “The sisters became footnotes,” said Griffith.
Shortall and Griffith hope that putting Trinity College’s archive of images online will alert museums, galleries and private individuals around the world to the importance of any Cuala Press prints they may possess. “There is plenty more out there,” said Griffith.

It is the UK’s favourite holiday destination, but few British tourists explore these stunning tucked-away beaches, sleepy villages and rugged national parksHidden Croatia | Hidden Greece | Hidden France
A lot of us have been rather surprised to discover how much we like being in nature and all that outdoorsy stuff over the past couple of years. Of course, we all still love our city breaks – nothing like an exhilarating weekend in Madrid, Barcelona or Valencia to pep us up – but Spain is also really good for getting away from it all, whether in the mountains, an unspoiled stretch of coast or in a village you just happen to come across on a road trip. The Spanish love rural tourism and there are gorgeous small hotels and self-catering places all over the country.
Those who like proper beaches – the sort of long stretches of golden sand backed by cliffs and fields that you find in Devon, Cornwall and the Gower peninsula – will feel right at home in the Rías Altas. This is the north coast of Galicia, between the town of Ribadeo on the border with Asturias and Cape Ortegal, a distance of about 75 miles. It seems longer, though, because of the estuaries that form a crinkly seaboard along the Bay of Biscay. Shallower than the more fjord-like inlets of the Rías Baixas in the south-west of Galicia, the Rías Altas shelter a string of seaside towns that morph into makeshift resorts in summer.
While having a car or campervan allows the freedom to explore, a lot of the area can be seen by hopping on and off the little trains on the Feve narrow-gauge railway that run along Spain’s north coast. There are about 30 stations on the Rías Altas section and it would take two hours to travel the length of it in one go, but it would be easy to dawdle away a few weeks getting off wherever takes your fancy – the views from the train are often spectacular. A month’s pass costs €88.90 for unlimited travel (bikes can be taken on board for free, too).
At the eastern end of the Rías Altas, Playa de las Catedrales is the most well-known – and photographed – beach, with rocks forming arches and caves that are only accessible at low tide. Heading west, you come to the Ría de Viveiro, an inlet shaped like a teardrop. Stop off in the historic town of Viveiro to sit outside traditional bars, devouring plates of octopus and Galician wines.
At the western end of the coast is the Ría de Ortigueira, the largest inlet in the Rías Altas. The Ortigueira festival, a renowned celebration of Celtic music, takes place from 10-17 July in 2022. Acts include Tanxugueiras, a female vocal trio who put a contemporary spin on traditional Galician folk music.
West of Viveiro, the Estaca de Bares headland is the northernmost point of Spain and home to the Semáforo de Bares hotel (doubles from €80) in a former military maritime station. Or stay in a hamlet near Ortigueira, in a characterful if basic cottage that sleeps four in three bedrooms (from €74 a night).
It’s possible to spend months exploring the vast region of Aragón, which remains stubbornly off the mainstream tourism radar. One of my favourite parts is the Matarraña, in the south-east corner of the region in the province of Teruel, 90 minutes’ drive from the beaches of the Costa Daurada – though it feels like it takes ages to get here from anywhere.
Vineyards and olive and almond groves cover the landscape of rolling hills, which are peppered with gorgeous medieval villages of honey-coloured stone. Sounds a bit like Tuscany? You wouldn’t be the first to think so.
Valderrobres, on the banks of the Matarraña river, is the main town, with a labyrinth of cobbled lanes topped by a 14th-century castle. A couple of gothic churches, a Renaissance town hall and a medieval bridge mean there is no shortage of picturesque selfie locations.
This is a pretty, arty sort of area, and the hilltop village of Calaceite has plenty of galleries and artists’ studios. The village is home to quite a few writers, too, following the precedent set by the Chilean author José Donoso, who settled in here in the 1970s and was visited by Gabriel García Márquez and other Latin American literary figures. Just outside Calaceite, visit the Mas de Flandi olive mill to stroll through the olive groves and taste the organic oils.
For those who fancy a leisurely bike ride, the Vía Verde Val de Zafán is an old railway line that passes through Valderrobres and leads down to the market town of Tortosa. There are some great swimming spots, too, such as El Salt de la Portellada, where the Tastavins river cascades down the rocks to form a pool.
La Torre del Visco (doubles from €325) may be pricey but it’s a beautifully restored 15th-century mansion in an idyllic riverside spot near Fuentespalda. It was one of the first luxury rural hotels in Spain when it was opened nearly three decades ago by British couple Piers and Jemma Markham, who had been working in publishing in Madrid. With an organic approach to food long before it became fashionable, the restaurant is one of the best in the area. In the heart of Calaceite, the Cresol (doubles from €127) oozes rustic chic and has six rooms named after olive varieties.
In the north of the Extremadura region in western Spain, the Valle del Ambroz is a bucolic, sparsely populated area with an abundance of beech and birch forests and lots of wild swimming spots. Cherry and plum orchards flourish on the terraced hillsides and peppers grow in the meadows. While it is off the radar of most foreign tourists, it is popular with the Spanish, who head west from Madrid, north from Seville and south from Salamanca for a blast of rural bliss and long lunches in village squares.
The Ambroz River forms natural pools in the villages of Casas del Monte and Abadía – for those wary of wild swimming, these are good entry-level options for literally taking the plunge. Next to the pools in Casas del Monte is the shady terrace at Aurora Boreal for platters of Extremaduran ham and cheese, homemade croquettes, lamb chops and salad.
Hervás, below Pinajarro mountain, has one of the best-preserved Jewish quarters in Spain. Narrow, winding lanes flanked by houses with rickety wooden balconies lead up to a Templar castle at the top of the little town. Install yourself in the porticoed Plaza de la Corredera and try a few of the local specialities in one of the traditional taverns. Lots of dishes are flavoured with the pimentón paprika made in the adjacent and equally appealing La Vera valley. Try zorongollo (peppers with pimentón and garlic), morcilla sausage with pumpkin and escabeche de patatas (fried potato slices with a punchy vinegar dressing). Order the local pitarra red wine, aged in earthenware vats.
Walk from Hervás to Cascada de la Chorrera, a waterfall close to the source of the Ambroz River, or to the village of Gargantilla along a path lined with chestnut and holm oak trees.
Where to stayHospedería Valle del Ambroz (doubles from €169 B&B plus dinner) in Hervás occupies a revamped 17th-century Trinitarian convent and has an outdoor pool surrounded by gardens. The Parador de Plasencia (doubles from €122 B&B), in the heart of the medieval town and just south of the Valle del Ambroz, is ideally situated for exploring the La Vera and Jerte Valleys, Las Hurdes and the Sierra de Gata, as well as the Monfragüe national park. One of the best-designed paradors, the building dates back to the 15th century and was originally a monastery.
While Santander has a string of lovely urban beaches, head east and you immediately come to a surprisingly rural stretch of coastline. The Costa Trasmiera, popular with Spanish holidaymakers, stretches for 30 miles from the Cantabrian capital to the fishing town of Santoña – where there are quayside canning factories to visit and see the best anchovies you’ll ever taste being filleted at lightning speed by nimble-fingered workers.
If you arrive in Santander on the car ferry from Plymouth or Portsmouth you’ll soon leave the city behind and be driving through open countryside with just a few cows for company. Half an hour away is Langre beach, where a crescent of limestone cliffs frames a bay of pale golden sand.
Noja is the main holiday town in Trasmiera, with a couple of dozen hotels and lots of bars and restaurants. It’s not exactly charming but there are four superb beaches to choose from, including Ris where eerie rock formations punctuate the sand. Your next swim should be at Berria, where two kilometres of glittering sand are bookended by rocky headlands. Whoever thought this was just the spot to build a massive ugly prison must have been on mind-altering substances, but just try to ignore it.
Look instead beyond the beach to the nature reserve formed by the Santoña, Victoria and Joyel marshes. This is the most important wetland area in northern Spain and attracts migrating wading birds from autumn to spring, particularly spoonbills, curlew sandpipers and avocets. Part of the reserve is designated as the Trasmiera ecopark, a sustainable tourism project with several observation points and visitor centres, including the restored Santa Olaja mill, where you can see how the force of the tides was traditionally harnessed to grind wheat.
The three-bedroomed Casa de las Marismas (from £790 a week) is in the village of Escalante by the Marismas de Santoña wetlands and three miles from Berria beach, which is accessible via a cycle path as well as by road. There are several campsites along the coast, including Playa Joyel (pitches from €98 a week, two-bedroom lodges from €448 a week), which has a pool and kids’ club and is right next to Ris beach in Noj.
In the underrated province of Jaén, in the north-east corner of Andalucía, this mountainous nature reserve is the biggest protected area in Spain and an idyll for birdwatchers, cyclists and walkers. Olive, cork oak and Aleppo and Austrian pine trees carpet the hillsides and valleys, which are home to ibex, wild boar and deer.
You might spot a golden eagle, Egyptian vulture or even a lammergeier here. The mighty Guadalquivir River rises in the Cañadas de las Fuentes, and flows across Andalucía for 400 miles until it reaches the Atlantic at Sanlúcar de Barrameda.
The hub of the area is the small town of Cazorla, which was voted Spain’s capital of rural tourism for 2022, in recognition of its efforts to promote sustainable holidays in natural surroundings. In the north of the reserve, which gets far fewer tourists, the castle seems to merge into the rock in the village of Segura de la Sierra.
Bus services only link the main places in the region so, ideally, take a car. On the way, stop off in the extraordinary towns of Úbeda and Baeza, where the wealth of Renaissance buildings has gained both of them Unesco world heritage status. It is possible to manage without your own transport, however. Set up base in Cazorla and follow walking and cycling trails from there, such as the GR 247 Forests of the South, the longest circular route in Spain.
Where to stayThe Parador de Cazorla (doubles from €113 B&B) is modern but built in traditional Andalucían style. In a gorgeous location in the hills, there are sweeping views of the surrounding countryside to be enjoyed while lying by the outdoor pool.
The Puente de las Herrerías campsite (cabins from €54 a night for two people) has pitches for tents, caravans and motorhomes, as well as cabins and chalets. The site also has a pool and offers activities including ziplining, treetop challenges and rock climbing.
There are very few places in Europe where brown bears roam freely, but in late spring or summer it’s just possible to spot a few ambling around this lush mountainous area in Asturias, northern Spain. Establish a base in the village of Pola de Somiedo and find out more about the project to protect the population of about 280 Cantabrian bears at the Fundación Oso Pardo information centre. To maximise chances of seeing them, venture out with the guides at Somiedo Experience.
Spectacular glacial lakes, limestone peaks and beech forests define this alpine landscape, which is a Unesco biosphere reserve. Spanning five valleys, Somiedo is home to wolves, chamois, golden and booted eagles, and griffon vultures. Thatched stone shepherds’ huts, known as teitos, dot the hillsides, which are covered in flowers from May to September.
It is possible to get here from the UK without flying or driving on the ferry to Santander, taking a train to Oviedo and then a bus down to Pola de Somiedo. You can set off on walks or bike rides from the village itself and sign up for other activities once there. Combine hiking with mindfulness and meditation on a retreat with Walking in Spirit (from £650 for two sharing an apartment) led by therapist Frankie Sikes.
The Palacio Flórez-Estrada (doubles from €65) – parts of which date back to the 15th century – in Pola de Somiedo has nine cosy rooms (no televisions) in the main house and four one-bedroom apartments in the former stables. The family who run it make everyone feel at home. Surrounded by lush gardens, with a pool, playground, tennis court, organic vegetable plot and a stream tinkling alongside, this is an idyllic spot for switching off. It often runs cultural events as well as birdwatching excursions and other activities.

In her new show, Juno Temple plays the no-nonsense assistant who got The Godfather made ... by fighting mob bosses. She talks tough women, making T-shirts for Keeley – and why she always looks like she slept in her car
It is five in the afternoon and Juno Temple is giving off slumber-party vibes. Curled up close to her webcam, blond hair cascading everywhere, she is on a bed surrounded by cushions, some leopard-print, others fluffy and candyfloss-pink, in a friend’s west London flat. This is home for the 32-year-old actor whenever she is in town from Los Angeles to shoot Ted Lasso, the cockle-warming smash-hit sitcom about an ebullient US coach (Jason Sudeikis) managing an English football team. Temple plays Keeley, a smarter-than-she-looks Wag who runs her own PR company. First seen tottering into a packed changing room to whisk her boyfriend off for a chest-wax, she is prone to philosophical posers such as: “What would you rather be – a lion or a panda?”
The show is midway through shooting its third season. Temple hasn’t been filming today – “I’ve been doing fittings and taking lots of deliveries of very nice, beautiful things,” she says in her chirpy-posh voice, right before the doorbell chimes again – though she did just receive last-minute rewrites for the next episode. “Sometimes they arrive the morning you’re filming,” she says brightly. “Keeps the brain ticking!”
What is on her mind right now, however, is her new television series, which dramatises the making of The Godfather. She squeals the show’s title back at me when I mention it – “The Offer!” – then kneels up for a moment as she starts discussing it, which has the unfortunate effect of cutting off her image at the neck. This happens whenever she gets animated; I would say something except one doesn’t want to interrupt her flow and poop the party. Better to wait for her to tire herself out and return to the horizontal again.
Temple has good reason to be excited. The Offer is a prestigious 10-part drama for Paramount+, its title a reference to the threat made by the mafia boss Don Corleone (played by Marlon Brando) in the 1972 gangster masterpiece: “I’m gonna make him an offer he can’t refuse.” The series is full of juicy stories and background colour, mostly involving the Paramount producer Robert Evans (a show-stealing Matthew Goode), who was vehemently opposed to casting the newcomer Al Pacino, as well as an assortment of mobsters determined to prevent their good name being besmirched by Hollywood.
Among the highlights is Temple’s performance as Bettye McCartt, assistant to the producer Albert S Ruddy (Miles Teller) and a largely unsung figure who was instrumental in shepherding the movie to the screen. Brandishing a pile of Godfather books taken from my own shelves, I ask Temple why McCartt isn’t mentioned in any of them. “But don’t you think that’s kind of magical?” she says, misinterpreting my question as criticism and leaping rather winningly to her character’s defence. “She’s not really a Google-able person. She is still such a mystery. I have huge respect for that because it’s so alien to us these days.”
McCartt, who died in 2013, was a former publicist who worked for Ruddy pulling strings, massaging egos and clinching deals. She went on to be an agent and manager for the likes of Tom Selleck and George Clooney, and yet her name is unfamiliar to us. Has she been written out of the picture by a male-dominated industry? Again, Temple goes on the defensive. “Whether that has or hasn’t happened in the past, the show makes clear her contribution now,” she says. “In one scene, she actually goes to see the mob boss in his club – she walks into his space, with all these mafia guys there, which is incredible. And she knows she might never walk out again. What a ball-buster she is!”
When we first meet McCartt, she is posing as a studio employee in order to elbow aside one of her rivals for the post of Ruddy’s assistant. Has Temple ever done anything sneaky to land a job? “I don’t think I’m that sneaky a person,” she says. “I remember in London trying to get into some club when I was underage, and I lied that I was in the band that was about to perform. The bouncer looked at me and said: ‘Sorry, you so aren’t of age.’” When it comes to work, she’s a straight-shooter. “Though I did once pretend to be American for a casting. I got through three stages of auditions before they realised I was English.”
Indeed she is: she grew up in a 14th-century house in Taunton, Somerset, the daughter of Julien Temple, who directed the Sex Pistols movie The Great Rock’n’Roll Swindle and the infamous musical flop Absolute Beginners. Richard Ayoade recently played a flamboyant filmmaker based on him in Joanna Hogg’s two Souvenir movies. No, says Temple, she hasn’t watched them. Her distracted tone suggests they aren’t high on her must-see list.
She made her screen debut at the age of 10 in Pandaemonium, her father’s 2000 film about Coleridge and Wordsworth, but began her own acting career in earnest when she was cast as Cate Blanchett’s daughter six years later in Notes on a Scandal. When she announced she wanted to act, her father showed her – wouldn’t you just know it? – The Godfather. “He said: ‘You want to be an actress? OK, we’re going to watch one of the greatest films of all time.’” Her reaction? “I was catatonic afterwards.” With emotion, presumably, rather than boredom.
The early years of her career are littered with dubious comedies (St Trinian’s, Wild Child, Year One) as well as memorable turns in high-calibre movies. In Atonement, she wears a mop of frizzy ginger curls as the dazed, damaged girl who marries her childhood rapist, played by Benedict Cumberbatch. She and Brie Larson are the free-spirited teens at the end of Noah Baumbach’s comedy Greenberg, who almost persuade Ben Stiller to fly to Australia with them on a whim. Early signs of her comic pizzazz were apparent in the apocalyptic 2010 indie comedy Kaboom, in which Temple exuded screwball sassiness and killer timing, and made the wearing of a fez grounds for comparison with Judy Holliday.
As she describes it, she didn’t have her act together in the early days. “I was very grungy,” she says. “I wore duct-taped shoes, duct-taped trousers, dirty T-shirts, nose piercings, smudgy eyeliner, listened to a lot of Nirvana. I was actually very clean – I’m an epic bather – but super-grungy-looking. I remember going into a big audition for the lead in a studio movie. My agents called quite quickly afterwards and said: ‘Hey, so, um, they loved your audition but they’re not going to send it to the heads of the studio because they asked if you’d slept in your car last night.’ I was like: ‘What?’” She’s up on her knees again, face temporarily hidden from view. “My first reaction was: ‘I don’t have a driver’s licence! I don’t own a fucking car!’”
She learned a lesson that day. “I realised you had to go in already emulating what you think the character would look and smell like, even how they would shake somebody’s hand. My agents were very patient with me. I’ve got this mane of matty hair, and normally I do look like I’ve slept in my clothes. I don’t know how I manage it. As glamorous as I try to be, I always look a bit windswept.”
Put her in front of the camera in character, she says, and she’s fine. It’s just being herself that presents a problem. “I get a lot of feedback from photographers who ask: ‘Could you look a little less … frightened?’” She grimaces at the thought. “Urgh … It’s about privacy and being captured in those moments that are yours, and which you really don’t want everyone to know about.”
Perhaps her determination to guard her private life helps explain how she can be so convincingly raw and exposed on screen, as she has been in her finest performances: Afternoon Delight, say, where she plays a sex worker befriended by a married woman (Kathryn Hahn), or Killer Joe, the sleazy, sweaty trailer-park psycho-drama that teamed her with Matthew McConaughey. That picture gets her vote for the film that would most benefit from The Offer-style making-of treatment. “It marked a change in my career,” she says. “People saw a side of me they hadn’t seen before, so it did shift things for me. And I won a Bafta rising star award for it.” She collapses in cackling laughter, and raises a triumphant fist: “Still rising, still rising!”
Roles don’t come much more intense than Afternoon Delight and Killer Joe, which makes Keeley in Ted Lasso even more of a tonic. If watching the show was a balm for audiences cooped up in the pandemic, making it served the same purpose for her. “I can be a pretty dark human,” she admits. “And Keeley has such an extraordinary amount of light in her. She was so vitally important to me being kind to myself when most people couldn’t leave their houses. She taught me to be kinder to myself.”
It was only once she was back out in the world again that she comprehended the effect Ted Lasso had on the public. “It’s a show that has brought a lot of positivity to everyone,” she says. Fans discuss plot points and character motivation with her while she is grocery shopping in LA. Some refer to her instinctively by her character name. “I keep hearing: ‘Keeley! I mean Juno!’ I’m going to get T-shirts made saying: ‘You Can Call Me Keeley.’ People tell me they want to be friends with her. I’m like: ‘Me too, man!’”
The Offer is on Paramount+ from 22 June.

Antle believed funds to be proceeds of operation to smuggle people across US-Mexico border, prosecutors say
Bhagavan “Doc” Antle, one of the stars of the runaway hit Tiger King, has been charged with laundering more than half a million dollars.
Federal prosecutors said that Antle believed the money to be the proceeds of an operation to smuggle people across the Mexican border into the US.
Charges against Antle and Andrew Jon Sawyer, one of Antle’s employees at Myrtle Beach Safari, were revealed on Monday during a federal court hearing in Florence, South Carolina.
According to federal prosecutors, Antle and Sawyer laundered $505,000 over a four-month period by doling out checks from businesses they controlled, receiving a 15% fee from the money that passed through their hands.
The checks, prosecutors allege, falsely purported to be payment for construction work at Myrtle Beach Safari but were in reality intended to serve as evidence that the recipients had legitimate income.
According to the complaint unsealed in court Monday, Antle discussed his plan to conceal the cash he received by inflating tourist numbers at his 50-acre wildlife tropical preserve. Prosecutors also said he had previously used bulk cash receipts to purchase animals for which he could not use checks.
Records for the Horry county jail show Antle and Sawyer were both arrested on Friday. Attorneys for both men did not immediately comment on the charges when reached via email.
According to authorities, Antle and Sawyer each face a maximum of 20 years in federal prison if convicted.
Antle is featured prominently in Tiger King: Murder, Mayhem and Madness, a 2020 Netflix documentary miniseries that focused on tiger breeders and private zoo operators in the US. The series focused heavily on Joe Exotic, an Oklahoma zoo operator who was targeted for animal mistreatment and was convicted in a plot to kill a rival, Carole Baskin.
Animal rights advocates have accused Antle of mistreating lions and other wildlife. He was indicted in Virginia in 2020 on animal cruelty and wildlife trafficking charges.
In May, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals asked the IRS to investigate Antle’s Rare Species Fund, a non-profit raising money for wildlife conservation. Peta alleges he uses some of the fund’s money to subsidize his safari site in Socastee, outside Myrtle Beach.
“It’s fitting that ‘Doc’ Antle is behind bars after years of locking up the endangered animals he uses in tawdry photo ops. His legal woes are mounting, as Peta recently blew the whistle on his apparent ‘charity’ scam, and the end to his reign of terrorizing tiger cubs can’t come soon enough,” said Debbie Metzler, associate director of Peta’s captive animal law enforcement division, in a statement.
Antle is facing two felony counts of wildlife trafficking and conspiracy to wildlife trafficking charges, as well as 13 misdemeanor counts of conspiracy to violate the Endangered Species Act and animal cruelty charges tied to trafficking lion cubs. Those charges are scheduled to go to trial next month.
Antle has a history of recorded violations, going as far back as 1989, when he was fined by the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) for abandoning deer and peacocks at his zoo in Virginia. Over the years, he has more than 35 USDA violations for mistreating animals.

Seventy-five years after Diary of a Young Girl’s publication, Sonnet for Anne Frank reflects on the ‘awful paradox’ of the journal’s bright spirit and her fate
Former children’s laureate Michael Rosen has written a new poem to mark the 75th anniversary of the release of Anne Frank’s diary.
The poem is titled Sonnet for Anne Frank; Rosen wrote in this form, he said, because sonnets have “a certain kind of dignity” and give “you time to reflect”.
Rosen addresses Frank directly in the poem writing, “you compressed so much life into that loft”, but that “each time we read, we struggle to enjoy / your love of life while knowing how it ended”.
Rosen said: “I’ve got an unresolved dilemma in the poem, which is that in the diary you’re reading a person who is so alive and so full of hope and life’s details and problems from a teenager’s point of view, but it’s almost impossible to read it without thinking of her terrible fate. So there is an awful paradox between the living spirit of the diary and the knowledge that you have.
“[The poem] makes a space for the reader to dwell on that paradox, which is in its own way quite painful. You laugh a lot with Anne Frank, and you think she’s having fun at the neighbours’ expense, and then you just suddenly have this simultaneous sense of being appalled by the terrible end.
“And that’s why it ends on the word ‘ended’.”
Frank received a blank diary for her 13th birthday on 12 June 1942, and wrote in it while she and her family were in hiding in a secret annexe above her father Otto’s workplace in Amsterdam.
After the family were discovered by the Nazis, Otto’s secretary Miep Gies found the diary in the annexe. When the war was over Gies gave it to Otto, the only member of the family to survive the Holocaust, and he decided to publish it, as Anne had wished. When translated from Dutch to English, the book’s title became The Diary of a Young Girl.
The poem was commissioned by the Anne Frank Trust, an education charity that teaches young people to challenge prejudice.
Rosen, who is a longtime supporter of the trust, is currently professor of children’s literature at Goldsmiths, University of London. He served as children’s laureate from 2007 to 2009.
As well as much-loved children’s poems and the classic picture book We’re Going on a Bear Hunt, his books include The Missing: The True Story of My Family in World War II, which was released in 2020 and traced family members who died in the Holocaust.
Since you took us into that attic spaceno room under the eaves has been the same.Wherever we go – our homes or others’ –whenever we dip and duck under beamsyou are in the shadows, writing pageslaughing, crying, eating, daring to loveimagining a better world than yours.How you wrote leads us to think we know you.
You compressed so much life into that loftwhich we pore over and love you for ityet the real world – not the one you imagined –didn’t allow you to live and write any more.Each time we read, we struggle to enjoyyour love of life while knowing how it ended.

There are plenty of laughs in this bittersweet drama as a retired stylist makes his way across town to do the hair and makeup of a deceased and disagreeable client
The price of admission, as they say, is justified by the sight of legendary German actor Udo Kier in a Dynasty-era lime-green pantsuit, heels, sunglasses, a rakishly inclined hat and a More cigarette smouldering between his lips. In another of his arrestingly unpredictable career-swerves, Kier now teeters on a knife-edge between throwaway camp humour and sentimental sorrow, playing Pat Pitsenbarger, a character based on a real-life figure from director Todd Stephens’s Ohio home town.
Pat is a retired hairdresser, now in a care home; he is recovering from a stroke, still alert, although secretly addicted to his cigarettes and an obsessive habit of folding paper napkins into the kind of small square shape that used to go under highball glasses in the bars where he once hung out. He is visited by a haughty lawyer, Mr Shanrock (Tom Bloom), and Pat’s nurse can’t believe that her patient will wish to see this man: “Shall I tell him you’re dead?” Shanrock tells Pat his late client Mrs Rita Parker Sloan (Linda Evans) – the Republican society hostess whose coiffure was nurtured by Pat every Friday afternoon – has left instructions in her will that Pat should do the hair and makeup work on her corpse before she is buried. So Pat has to reassemble his flamboyant clothing ensemble and sashay across town for this final job, his chef-d’oeuvre, and make his peace with his memories of Rita’s snobbery and homophobia – and also with his hairdressing rival Dee Dee Dale (Jennifer Coolidge), who stole his most famous client.
There are plenty of laughs here and Kier doesn’t have to work very hard to get them: he demonstrates a tremendous hauteur in the way Pat asks for various inaccessible items at the local convenience store and then like a Vegas high-roller, while other customers are impatiently lining up behind him, demands various lottery scratchcards: “Hit me!” Like Werner Herzog, Kier’s German accent lends a deadpan drollery to everything he says, but there is a gooey soft-centre to his film, and Kier carries that off reasonably well, his face becoming almost boyish. Another intriguing persona in the Udo Kier gallery.
Swan Song is released on 10 June in cinemas.

The world’s biggest Black stars have turned to the genre not to pander to white tastes – but to remind fans where it came from
This week, Drake treated fans to a surprise drop of his new album Honestly, Nevermind. Its release, just nine months after his last record, Certified Lover Boy, received lukewarm reviews from critics, was unexpected. Fans had hoped for a return to the sounds he made famous: conventional, bassy, euphoric hip-hop tunes to brood to; agonised lyrics that would be the mainstay in Instagram captions for the rest of the summer. But instead, another curveball: track after track of deep house beats.
A few days later, Beyoncé teased her new single, Break My Soul, featuring the distinctive bassline of the house classic Show Me Love by Robin S. It’s been hard to nail down Beyoncé’s sound in recent years. Her critically acclaimed 2016 album Lemonade featured some songs that entered new territory – take the country-tinged single Daddy Lessons – but on the whole, it was firmly anchored in the kind of R&B that has been popular and chart-topping for the past decade. But this single offered something new – an unmistakeable hark back to 90s house.
Unsurprisingly, this shift in tone by two global powerhouses of R&B and hip-hop has attracted heavy criticism, with the artists being accused of pandering to white tastes – and pockets. Part of the criticism is rooted in fact: both have chosen to centre a genre that isn’t typically associated with our current perception of commercially successful Black music. Sure, both had flirted with house in the past – Drake on the top-10 charting Passionfruit, and Beyoncé with Formation, which hinted at New Orleans house offshoot genre bounce, but had largely steered clear, until now.
This seemingly sudden enthusiasm for house music might at first seem random, or even cynical, if you are to believe the critics. House has, after all, become synonymous with whiteness, with its figureheads still being mostly white, male DJs, and electronic music festivals such as Creamfields and super clubs such as Ministry of Sound still pulling in largely white audiences, though the same can also be said for most music festivals. Many young Black people have accepted this status quo. But it doesn’t take much digging to find that the roots of the genre are firmly planted in Black, brown and LGBTQ+ communities.
House music was born out of Chicago’s predominantly Black nightlife scene, with the godfather of house, Frankie Knuckles, pioneering the distinctive sound. The origins of techno, too, can be traced to Black Detroit and there are still prominent electronic Black DJs in the field, such as Honey Dijon, Jayda G and Seth Troxler, even if the majority now form part of an underground movement catering to music lovers in the know.
So how did house become so white? As electronic music grew in popularity and started being adopted by international audiences in the 1990s, white people slowly started to take ownership of it. But the full picture is much more nuanced than appropriation alone. The quiet erasure of Black influence on the genre was in part facilitated by white communities and their concerted effort to shut down Black nightlife venues, with law enforcement too often unfairly associating these spaces with unruliness and crime, a trend we continue to see with the over-policing of grime music.
As the genre began to establish itself in the mainstream in the early 90s, the popularity of house went from strength to strength, and white folks began to take up space behind the decks. Artists such as Daft Punk and Pete Tong garnered incredible success from music that sampled Black artists, and became the palatable, inoffensive faces to reel in white audiences hooked on traditionally Black sounds. This slow whitewashing happened alongside the proudly Black-fronted explosion of R&B and hip-hop, which, perhaps seeing what happened to house, emphatically refused to centre white artists – a trend that largely continues today, though not without exception. Today, the legacy of this separation is seen in white music fans’ overidentification with a genre that was not built by them, and young Black people under-identifying with it and the breadth of what Black music can look like beyond R&B and hip-hop.
This tension is palpable in the electronic nightlife scene. Black promoters have spoken out about reportedly being shut out of London’s biggest nightclubs. In 2015, Black house producer Felix Da Housecat accused Berlin’s electronic epicentre Berghain of racism after being denied entry, and Solange has shared her experiences of “hostility” in predominantly white spaces after reportedly having a lime thrown at her at a Kraftwerk concert.
Thankfully, initiatives have been formed to start championing the Black history these pillars of British music culture were built on. In 2020, Black staff at the electronic music website Resident Advisor started a project to highlight 120 prominent Black producers of the past 20 years, after feeling the site had historically favoured white producers. The Bristol-based producer Ifeoluwa created the Digital Archive for Underground Music to counter his feeling that the city, so rich in Black culture, had largely whitewashed its influence. Both echoed the sentiment, too, that the fact that the history of Black electronic music had not been written by Black people meant it too often omitted key moments and details of it.
Further afield, house producers, many hailing from South Africa such as Uncle Waffles and the now veteran Black Coffee, have become aspirational Black figureheads of the genre – selling out huge shows on the African continent and beyond. Perhaps piggy-backing on this trend, the releases by Drake and Beyoncé are important – and not because they’re necessarily groundbreaking or brilliant. Whether you like house music or not doesn’t matter. This renewed enthusiasm for house is less a matter of taste, and more a way of regaining ownership of a genre that has had its roots ripped from the soil. Seeing the world’s biggest Black stars start a conversation about the origins of house music will propel Black fans to dig deeper into their history – and show white people how to appreciate it.
Michelle Kambasha works in the music industry
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a letter of up to 300 words to be considered for publication, email it to us at guardian.letters@theguardian.com

Recordings from May 1965 were sealed for nearly 50 years, and reveal folk-like renditions of songs including I’m Waiting for the Man and Heroin
Lou Reed’s earliest versions of some of the Velvet Underground’s greatest songs, including I’m Waiting for the Man and Heroin, have been unearthed and will be released in August.
The US record label Light in the Attic, in partnership with Reed’s widow Laurie Anderson, will release Words & Music, May 1965 as the first album in a new archival series.
It features demos of songs that Reed recorded with future Velvet Underground bandmate John Cale, and mailed to himself in a notarised package as a way of securing copyright on the recordings without filing the official paperwork. The five-inch reel-to-reel recordings remained sealed for nearly 50 years and have been heard by almost no one before.
Reed performs the songs on acoustic guitar and harmonica, with Cale adding vocal harmonies, making the performances more akin to the folk music of the time than the avant garde rock that the Velvet Underground would soon pioneer. Two months later, in July 1965, guitarist Sterling Morrison had joined the group for another round of demos, by November they were called the Velvet Underground, and by December their lineup was finalised with Maureen Tucker on drums.
Of the songs demoed in May 1965, I’m Waiting for the Man and Heroin would end up on their 1967 debut album, The Velvet Underground & Nico, while Pale Blue Eyes would be released in a substantially different version on the band’s self-titled 1969 album.
Some of the lyrics on the May 1965 demos also deviate from the later versions: the demo of Heroin opens with the line: “I know just where I’m going,” and has some distinctive Reed lines that didn’t make the finished recording: “People selling people pound by pound / And the politicians and the clowns / And the do-gooders with their frowns.”
Writing the liner notes for the release, US rock critic Greil Marcus said: “The poverty in these songs – the bathtub-in-the-kitchen you hear in their clumsiness, the fifth-floor-walkup you can hear in their defiance – lets you hear them, now, as chalk on a wall, not the markings that wash away in the next rain but inscriptions that somehow become part of the brick, even if in a year or two no one will be able to read them.”
The reissue also features Reed-penned songs that have never been recorded since, such as the doo-wop-tinged Too Late, and the R&B track Buzz Buzz Buzz. Another folk-tinged song, Men of Good Fortune, shares a title with a track from Reed’s solo album Berlin but is completely different. Included with some versions of the reissue are unheard Reed songs from home recording sessions in 1963 or 1964, plus doo-wop number Gee Whiz, recorded by Reed in 1958 when he was 16 years old.
Words & Music, May 1965 will also be available on single LP, CD, cassette and 8-track formats, as well as on streaming and download services. Clips of the songs can be heard now on Light in the Attic’s website.

Charges against former film producer relate to alleged assault in London in 1996, CPS says
Harvey Weinstein will face two charges of indecent assault allegedly committed against a woman in London in 1996, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) has announced.
After a review of evidence gathered by the Metropolitan police, the CPS gave the force the green light to charge the former Hollywood film producer on Wednesday.
Rosemary Ainslie, the head of the CPS special crime division, said: “The CPS has authorised the Metropolitan police to charge Harvey Weinstein with two counts of indecent assault against a woman in August 1996.
“Charges have been authorised against Harvey Weinstein, 70, following a review of the evidence gathered by the Metropolitan police in its investigation.
“The Crown Prosecution Service reminds all concerned that criminal proceedings against the defendant are active and that he has the right to a fair trial.”
The Met said the two alleged offences took place between 31 July and 31 August 1996 and that the alleged victim is a woman, now in her 50s.
It is not yet clear what the route to Weinstein being extradited and standing trial in a UK criminal court would be.
Weinstein founded the California-based independent film distribution and production company Miramax – combining the names of his parents Miriam and Max – with his brother Bob in 1979. The company was behind some of the biggest blockbusters of all time.
Miramax has been largely credited with the birth of the art house film boom and – with the release of Steven Soderbergh’s Sex, Lies, and Videotape in 1989 – it became the most successful independent studio in the US.
In June 1993, Miramax was bought by the Walt Disney Company in a deal that allowed the brothers to stay on in creative roles.
The director Quentin Tarantino’s cult classic movie Pulp Fiction, which was backed by Miramax, came out a year later. It made over $213m (£170m) at the worldwide box office on a budget of only $8m and went on to be awarded the Palme d’Or award at the Cannes film festival.
In 1997, The English Patient landed Miramax its first Academy Award for best picture. Two years later, Shakespeare in Love won seven Oscars, including a best actress award for Gwyneth Paltrow.
However, Weinstein developed a reputation as being difficult to work with and, after a string of successes, he hit a rough patch in 2005. Disney parted ways with the Weinstein brothers that year after disputes about budget and creative control.
The pair launched the Weinstein Company but the newly formed independent studio struggled initially to repeat their earlier successes. The Weinsteins attempted to regain control of Miramax in 2010 but failed.
By 2011, Weinstein was enjoying success and critical acclaim once again when The King’s Speech was nominated for a dozen Oscars and awarded best picture.
The following year he won several Golden Globe awards for films including My Week with Marilyn, Iron Lady, and The Artist, which would also go on to win best picture at the Oscars.

The shelling of Sievierodonetsk, the aftermath of Hurricane Agatha, wildfires near Brasília and the Queen’s platinum jubilee celebrations in London: the most striking global images this week
Fri 10 Jun 2022 19.45 BST
Photograph: Diego Herrera Carcedo/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images
Photograph: Patrick T Fallon/AFP/Getty Images

First single from forthcoming album Renaissance preaches freedom but gets stuck in some familiar musical tropes
The last major musical statements the world heard from Beyoncé were Black Parade, an electronic growl of anger at police brutality and racism that slowly built into a euphoric celebration of African American and African culture, and Be Alive, her Oscar-nominated contribution to the soundtrack of King Richard: a ballad set to a relentless, pounding rhythm that hammered home its message of Black empowerment. They were, spiritually at least, of a piece with the albums that preceded them in 2019, the Beyoncé-produced alternative soundtrack for The Lion King, which dragged the sound of Afrobeats into a mainstream spotlight, and the live recording of her extraordinary Coachella performance Homecoming: evidence of an artist committed to taking musical risks, of constantly pushing forward and trying something different.
It makes the release of the first single from her forthcoming album Renaissance all the more surprising. Rather than presenting her audience with something strikingly different, Break My Soul sounds weirdly familiar. It’s a mid-tempo house track based around a keyboard bass sound that – without wishing to be overly technical – very closely resembles setting number 17 on the Korg M1 synthesiser. Even if you’ve never heard of a Korg M1 synthesiser, you’ve heard that sound: it’s the basis of the 1993 Stonebridge remix of Robin S’s Show Me Love and MK’s 1992 remix – or “Dub of Doom” of the Nightcrawlers’ Push the Feeling On, two of the most influential house tracks in recent pop history.
In Britain at least, we’ve heard a lot of pop singles that sound like one or both of them in the last decade. The vogue for reviving Robin S’s Show Me Love reached a peak around the middle of the 2010s, the era of Kiesza’s chart-topping Hideaway, Disclosure’s White Noise and covers of the track by Clean Bandit and Sam Feldt. Push the Feeling On was revived around the same time – you could hear its influence on Tinie Tempah and Jess Glynne’s Not Letting Go – and has proved even longer-lived. In 2020, it was sampled on both AJ Tracey’s Dinner Guest and Mist and Fredo’s House Party, and last year formed the basis of Riton x Nightcrawlers’ Friday, a Europe-wide hit.
It’s worth pointing out that neither the original 90s tracks, nor their latter day successors, had anything like the kind of impact in the US that they had elsewhere. And Break My Soul is an extremely classy example of its type. It’s decorated with a bouncy piano line, raw-voiced interjections sampled from rapper Big Freedia and a hook that irrevocably works its way into your brain and features an impressively unexpected key change 3:14 in. It offers an ever-shifting chorus of harmony vocals and a typically fantastic lead performance: amid the lyrics about quitting your job, letting your hair down and finding new drive lurks the line “Bey is back and I’m sleeping real good at nights”, which seems destined to join “Becky with the good hair” and “I woke up like this” in the pantheon of endlessly quoted, swaggering Beyoncé lyrics.
It’s obviously going to be a huge hit, but it also isn’t a Single Ladies or Run the World or Crazy in Love, the kind of Beyoncé single that stops you in your tracks: it feels like it’s following a musical trend rather than setting one. That said, you only need to look at the kaleidoscopic contents of her last solo studio album Lemonade to realise that Break My Soul probably isn’t representative of Renaissance as a whole: her albums tend to teem with ideas, of which Break My Soul’s 90s house revivalism is doubtless only one.

The British actor on getting texts from Winona Ryder, researching his character Eddie Munson through the medium of thrash metal and the show’s ‘monster’ final episode
“This year is my year. I can feel it.” This line was said by the character Eddie Munson in the first episode of season four of Netflix’s monster-hit show Stranger Things, but it could easily have been uttered by actor Joseph Quinn.
It takes talent to join a much-loved TV cast in their fourth season and become a fan favourite. This series of Stranger Things has set Netflix records by hitting No 1 in 83 countries and is more watched than Bridgerton. But as the charismatic but vulnerable Munson, 28-year-old Quinn has made a splash. He only joined Instagram in May and already has more than 1.6 million followers.
His character is the voluminously haired metalhead who runs the Hellfire Club, Hawkins high’s Dungeons & Dragons society – with sidelines in drug-dealing and a band called Corroded Coffin. He soon finds himself at the centre of the sci-fi saga’s latest adventure. Prime suspect for a gruesome murder and accused of satanic worship, Munson becomes the Indiana town’s most wanted man.
Quinn manages to steal even his first scene though: jumping on the table in the school cafeteria, dancing, waggling his tongue, flipping the bird and flicking food in diners’ faces. It is quite the entrance.
“That was so weird,” says Quinn with a laugh. “I auditioned by doing a self-tape of that speech, but it was one of the last scenes I ended up shooting. So I waited from November 2019 to June 2021.”
Born in south London, Quinn trained at Lamda and, until now, was best known for homegrown period dramas. He played Arthur Havisham in Dickensian, Leonard Bast in Howards End and Enjolras in Les Misérables. He played the queen’s son, Tsarevich Paul, in Catherine the Great, which starred Helen Mirren as the empress of Russia. His stage roles include Wish List at the Royal Court and Mosquitoes at the National.
So Stranger Things represents a departure, but the show has been lit up by Munson’s arrival. Quinn himself, though, couldn’t be more self-effacing.
You’re getting rave reviews for Stranger Things. Are you proud?I’m relieved, really, that’s the overriding feeling. The show represents my pandemic. At the end of my first day’s filming in Atlanta, we went into lockdown. I went home and lost my mind like everyone else. When I went back, it was a completely different experience because I couldn’t come home [to the UK], so I became very close to the cast. That’s the best thing about this business. You go to a strange place and meet a bunch of strangers. You leave with a fondness for the place and some dear friends.
You were cast after just two self-taped auditions, weren’t you?No meetings, no chemistry reads, no protracted process. It was pretty unusual and very disarming. It meant I was waiting for [creators] the Duffer brothers to realise they’d made a mistake.
The show has overtaken Bridgerton to become the most-watched English-language series in Netflix history. Are such figures hard to get your head around?You get past a certain number and it’s kind of boggling. I’m thrilled that people are watching it because I can’t tell you how hard everyone worked.
What brought home to you how big it had become?Mainly its influence on the zeitgeist. Kate Bush is now back in the charts, which is so cool. I was in LA last week and two cars drove past playing Running Up That Hill. I’ve seen people walking down the street wearing Hellfire Club T-shirts, which was spooky.
The Duffer brothers have acknowledged that Eddie is loosely modelled on Damien Echols of the West Memphis Three. Did you research him?Little bits, but I’m not going to pretend I did a huge amount. I tried grappling with Dungeons & Dragons, but accepted that wasn’t going to happen. Music was my main way in. I listened to a lot of heavy metal – Black Sabbath, Metallica, Dio – and I worked with a brilliant vocal coach called Mary Howland. But 99.7% of the work is that wig.
Oh, you can take slightly more credit than that…OK, maybe only 99.6% is the wig. It’s objectively ridiculous. When I take it off, that helps me go unrecognised, so it’s been a blessing in that respect.
Did you know much about the satanic panic of the 80s?Not before landing the role, but it’s testament to the Duffer brothers how they reference it in this sensitive, finely executed way. They don’t crowbar in the nostalgia or real-life nods, they just let them live in this world they’ve created. That makes it feel authentic – well, as authentic as a show with a tentacled lizard-man can be.
With you, Charlie Heaton, Millie Bobby Brown and Jamie Campbell Bower, there’s a sizeable British contingent in Stranger Things…It’s a testament to the heritage of British acting and the grounding we get over here. It’s an invaluable thing. I owe a lot to my training, what little I have.
What did you learn from older cast members such as Winona Ryder and David Harbour, who play Joyce Byers and Jim Hopper?Unfortunately, I didn’t have many scenes with them but I went for dinner with David and his wife [Lily Allen]. He was gracious and lovely. I was coming back from a party at 2am recently when I got a text which started: “Hey it’s Winona!” I thought, “I can’t sit on this”, so I showed my flatmate. I know I’m in a show with her but I’m still a fan. Winona’s wonderful – a real example of someone who hasn’t been corrupted by Hollywood. She made all us new guys feel welcome.
The climactic two episodes of the series are shrouded in secrecy. Can you tell us about them?The thing is, they’ve got my family tied up somewhere and if I spoil anything, I’ll never see them again. No, I can say there’s a guitar scene and that the scale and ambition are astonishing. All the seeds that have been planted bear fruit and it’s just carnage. You know the finale is two-and-a-half hours, right? Ending with this monster, feature-length episode is so bold.
Will you be back for the fifth and final season?I’ll be furious if they don’t bring me back [laughs]. I’d love to, if they’ll have me.
When did you first realise you enjoyed performing?It was painfully stereotypical. I was an only child of separated parents, which breeds a pathological need for attention. I was never a stage kid being taken to auditions from an early age, but I’d always been curious. At primary school, I became a bit of a showoff. I got a drama scholarship to Emanuel school at Clapham Junction and it was the only thing I had any natural aptitude for. The fact that it’s my bread and butter now is mental.
You’ve worked alongside both Helen Mirren and Olivia Colman. How was that?The two dames. I’ve been spoilt. Mosquitoes was a crazy experience. Working at the National with a Lucy Kirkwood script, Olivia Colman attached to it and Rufus Norris directing was a real “pinch me” moment. Like everyone else in this country, I’m in love with Olivia Colman, so forming this weird family and working with her every night was a career highlight. She’s a force of nature. Phenomenal. And Helen Mirren was… well, she’s Helen fucking Mirren. She was very kind, had great advice and a filthy sense of humour, which is always great fun.
Next up, you’re in a film called Hoard. What can you tell us?It’s directed by this extraordinary young woman called Luna Carmoon, who grew up in south-east London obsessed with film. It’s an independent British film made on a half-a-Mars-bar budget but Luna has written something feral and different. I’m excited for people to see it because there’s definitely something about her.
What do you do when you’re not working?In a desperate attempt to reconnect with my youth, I started skateboarding again this year. I’ve still got some tricks in my bag but it’s much scarier now. Otherwise, I cook, I exercise and I worry.
I heard that you take your work seriously but don’t take yourself seriously?Other way around. No, it’s hard to take yourself seriously in a three-ton wig. Anthony Hopkins, who’s a hero of mine, was once asked why he wanted to act for a living. He replied: “Beats work.” This is a fascinating job and, without wishing to sound like a Hallmark card, that’s kind of what I want out of life: an adventure.
Stranger Things season 4, volume 2 will stream on Netflix from Friday 1 July

As a kid growing up in Aberdeen, she rebelled against singing. Now she’s proving sensational in the classic Weimar musical – but finds its present-day parallels chilling
Let’s get one thing straight: although Amy Lennox sings and is Scottish, she is not related to Annie Lennox. She is, however, used to people making the assumption. She laughs, remembering a breakfast radio appearance from 2016 on which the host kept referring to Annie, thinking it was her mum.
“I was half-asleep,” she says. “Then the penny dropped and – on live radio – I said: ‘Oh my God! You think my mum’s Annie Lennox.’ And the producers behind the glass went – she throws a hand up over her mouth and opens her eyes wide. “Everyone was flapping. I thought, ‘I’m going to let you sit on this. You deserve it.’” She laughs again. Sure, both Lennoxes are from Aberdeen. But Amy’s journey – from belting out Christina Aguilera and Whitney Houston songs in her bedroom to the West End – had nothing to do with nepotism.
There is one legacy she has to live up to, though: she is following Jessie Buckley’s Olivier-winning turn as Cabaret showgirl Sally Bowles in Rebecca Frecknall’s dynamic staging of the classic 1960s musical. Buckley and her Emcee, played by Eddie Redmayne, stepped aside in March for Lennox and Fra Fee, who is from Northern Ireland. Lennox wouldn’t normally step into a role first cast for another actor. “I don’t want to be put in a stifling position where I’m being told, ‘Stand here, do it like this’ – rather than originating a musical. It’s not how I work. It doesn’t get the best of anyone. I was always adamant about that.” A breath. “And then I thought, ‘Well, this does feel different.’”
Lennox is outspoken, chatty, fond of a giggle and sharing an opinion. We’re sitting in the bowels of London’s Playhouse theatre, to talk about how Frecknall (“Frecks” to Lennox) managed to persuade the star to take a recasting and propel her further into the spotlight. Lennox may not yet be a big name. But for the past 14 years she’s been in musicals, plays and on TV (she bowed out of Holby City earlier this year). Her cheeky, lascivious Bowles is like a jolt of electricity, and no doubt a sign of great things to come. How daunting was it to take over from Buckley? “Do you know what? I didn’t really have much time to think about it.” Her casting was confirmed, she says, and then “we started the following week. It was so fast.”
Lennox and Fee previously shared a stage in Belfast for 2015’s The Last Five Years, a two-hander musical charting the breakdown of a relationship. Cabaret was a completely different experience, given that Bowles and the Emcee barely interact. “We hardly saw each other in the rehearsal period,” she says. “It was very, very odd. I’d bump into Fra – and we were like passing ships. Bumping into him in Pret, I’d be like, ‘How was your week?’”
They’re both leads, though. It’s just that each speaks to a particular aspect of the story’s descent towards antisemitism and authoritarianism. Fra’s Emcee lulls you into a false sense of security, before slapping you across the face – look, Nazis! – and unravelling the freewheeling, booze-soaked world you’d come to understand. Lennox’s Bowles, meanwhile, blows through like a hurricane. She’s preening and cooing one moment, dressed in pink frou-frou taffeta for Don’t Tell Mama, then roaring through the title song the next, dishevelled and looking swamped in a man’s suit.
Off stage, I can see hints of Bowles’s frenetic drive in Lennox: the way she cracks herself up, gushes about her colleagues, and describes the breathlessness of her part. At the end of every performance, she says, “I just get spat out. It’s like a wipeout from flumes. Just” – she makes the sound of something shooting from a tube – “out! You’re done. I’m not having to conjure it because the show itself takes me there. It’s relentless.”
Lennox has built her stamina up over years, after falling in love with musicals at the age of 11. She remembers watching a TV documentary. “Proper stagey kids from London,” she says. They were maybe auditioning for Annie (she makes a retching sound). “And I thought, ‘Oh, what’s this?’” She wasn’t a child with pushy stage parents, though. Her mum was a solicitor, her dad the head of IT and communications for an oil firm. She had rebelled against ballet (mum’s idea) and singing (dad’s) before finding her way to musicals.
“You don’t get that local opportunity that kids down in the south-east of England take for granted – because they’re so close to this hub that we’re in now.” She motions to the West End above our heads. “I didn’t have any of that.” In Aberdeen, it all felt “so far away that you don’t really have links”. Envy propelled her, though. After seeing those children on TV, and then failing an audition for the school musical, she joined a local am-dram group and was soon honing her acting and singing.
“I auditioned for the National Youth Music Theatre loads of times. I got recalled. Never got in. My poor dad would fly with me down to London. And I never got in. It was always because I would get to a song and panic.” Over time, she learned to take charge of her voice, landing Liesl in The Sound of Music at the London Palladium right out of drama school in Guildford. She’s since received an Olivier nomination for her Lauren in 2015’s Kinky Boots, plus stage credits in 9 to 5 The Musical, Lazarus, Legally Blonde and others.
When she started out, Lennox was often told she wasn’t playing roles “big enough”, as if only an exaggerated performance would resonate. But in one of her quieter moments in Cabaret, her Bowles expresses an apathy about her situation – sleepwalking into horror – that strikes a brutal chord today. “Politics,” her Sally asks, “what’s that to do with me?” “It’s bonkers. I don’t think [Cabaret’s writers John Kander and Fred Ebb] ever intended for it to feel so valid now. We like to think, as human beings in this society, we’re constantly moving forward, striving for excellence and this and that. But we’re not! If anything, we’re just driving ourselves towards absolute disaster and we all know it,” Lennox says.
She alludes to everything from deluded strongmen to the war in Ukraine, from reproductive rights for women to the general acceptance of a future more bleak than the recent past. “It’s like Groundhog Day – and there are quite a few moments in the show that do that,” she says. “There was a prop newspaper we were using and it said, ‘Russian invasion imminent’. And you go: ‘Oh God. Oh God. What the hell’s going on?’ We’ve got another Hitler over there. Some man that’s ” She stops herself. “I’d be interested to know how much more of an edge this show has because of what’s going on in Ukraine and in Russia. It’s just chilling. Absolutely chilling.”
Beyond the show’s depiction of fascism’s creeping rise, we discuss theatre’s post-lockdown stumble back into the light. Shortly before we speak, some of the cast of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s high-budget Cinderella found out that their jobs were to be cut short, some via social media. “I think that’s deplorable,” says Lennox. “We’ve all been pushed to our limits [by the pandemic]. I don’t know the ins and outs of what happened. But didn’t someone consider, for a moment, the repercussions of the way it was dealt with?” (The Really Useful Group said it had made “every effort” to ensure cast members were notified of the the closure.)
She takes a breath, emerging sunnier. “It’s a crazy old thankless existence for so many people. I’m grateful. I feel like I’ve got the best job in the West End. Maybe even the world.” She laughs again. Bowles has taken over her life for the past couple of months – so much so that, on some days, Lennox has to refrain from speaking to preserve her voice, which makes for silent commutes back to Ramsgate from London with her husband, actor Tom Andrew Hargreaves.
There’s now a sign on her dressing room door, made by her colleagues after she’d been really tired at the start of her run. “You know the line when I’ve got my gin and I say, ‘I’m just not speaking today.’” She laughs. “I’ve got an ‘I’m just not speaking today’ sign on my door. I’ve only done that once. I’ve only not spoken once.” She laughs again. “It’s very hard. I’m not very good at it.”
Cabaret at the Kit Kat Club is booking at the Playhouse theatre, London, until 19 November.

OVO Hydro, GlasgowThe singer is in pristine voice throughout this celebration of her totemic 1995 album, which includes a touching dedication to her former drummer Taylor Hawkins
A video montage precedes Alanis Morissette’s arrival, capturing the Canadian-American angst-rock godmother’s extraordinary pop culture resonance with clips of everything from her Curb Your Enthusiasm cameo to James Corden and Justin Bieber howling Ironic on Carpool Karaoke. French and Saunders’ memorable flesh-coloured body suit parody of the Thank U video might have featured too, for a flavour of the satirical backlash that followed the singer’s late-90s celebrity zenith, but the point nonetheless remains: however big you remember Morissette to have been, she was bigger.
A quarter-century later – large parts spent in self-imposed exile finding inner peace through spirituality, meditation and motherhood – Morissette has reengaged on her own terms with a music business that nearly killed her to mark a milestone for 1995’s totemic 33m-selling Jagged Little Pill. The 25th-anniversary celebrations of an album already several times rereleased, once rerecorded in acoustic form and now the subject of a hit jukebox musical have been stretched out for more than two years now. But who’s complaining? Let’s just say nobody is here in feverish anticipation of Morissette’s latest chakra-balancing ambient album The Storm Before the Calm.
Stomping the stage in baggy yellow T-shirt and leather trousers, Morissette sings with a loud and pristine voice, trilling the high notes during Hand in My Pocket so effortlessly they’re practically yodelled, leaning so far back from the mic during the rousing chorus of You Learn that she may as well be in the car park. The sleazy record industry exec-shaming Right Through You near enough forewarned #MeToo, and helps explain Morissette’s renaissance among younger listeners. But most fans tonight look like long-termers, many of them almost disbelieving that the tour-shy star is finally here in front of them, windmilling her peroxide hair.
Ironic is touchingly sung in memory of Taylor Hawkins, who drummed with Morissette before joining Foo Fighters. Flaming break-up song You Oughta Know has been covered by Britney and Beyoncé, but for full fierceness has to be experienced from the source.
The encore frames Morissette’s tricky progression post-Jagged Little Pill, first with 1998’s Uninvited, an almost Mogwai-esque noise rock dirge which improbably sold seven million copies. The zen hosannas of Thank U were mocked in their day, coming from a singer pigeonholed as angry young woman. Today they sound like first steps on a long path to happier and healthier superstardom.

No stakes, no danger, nothing of substance: the show has atoned for many of the Star Wars prequels’ sins, but if it’s ever going to be exciting, the action needs to focus less on the ageing Jedi
There is a scene towards the end of Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith that encapsulates everything that went wrong with the prequel trilogy.
Anakin Skywalker, Force wunderkind turned emo Jedi slayer, and Obi-Wan Kenobi, his former chum and sensei, are engaged in a lightsaber duel, ostensibly to the death. This encounter is the culmination of three films’ worth of glacial-paced inevitability. A master who must kill his student. A student convinced he’s been betrayed by his mentor. There should be excitement; a crescendo of emotion and tragedy. But there isn’t. Instead, we get unconvincing CG lava sploshing hither and thither; peril-free jumping from one high thing to another high thing; and we get this:
Obi-Wan: “Anakin, chancellor Palpatine is evil!”
Anakin: “From my point of view, the Jedi are evil!”
But even guff as bad as that isn’t the biggest problem with the scene, or the prequels as a whole. The biggest problem was how riotously boring this fight was – and, by extension, all three films were – because we already knew the outcome. Fans had known it for decades. Watching it unfold in real time was like listening to an office bore tell you in pitiless detail about the intricacies of their commute.
The worst thing was, Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan and Hayden Christensen as Anakin were trying their best. The fault never lay with them. Which is why the news that both actors would reprise their roles for a Disney+ Obi-Wan series, set a decade after the events of Episode III, was so welcome. It could be a do-over. Maybe it could even make up for the prequels’ overuse of greasy and weightless CGI, the rhythmless editing, stodgy exposition, or the cast of characters with barely a single definable characteristic besides “that one has a bushier beard”.
Obi-Wan Kenobi the TV show has generally felt like the worthy prequel we never had. The scripts sound as if they were written by people who have, at some point in their lives, said words to other humans. As we’ve come to expect since The Mandalorian, the production design and effects are so sensational as to be barely noticeable. There are no more rubbish green-screen sets or unconvincing CG characters whose explosive deaths would give you a real, worrying thrill that you could only safely admit to a therapist. There is none of the Senate plodding that smothered the prequels beneath a fatberg of stultifying nonsense. It feels like the TV show had a checklist of every flaw the prequels had, and set about addressing them all. Apart from one, that is.
The one it failed to address was, sadly, the biggest; the problem that caused that lightsaber duel at the end of Revenge of the Sith to, somehow, be duller than a Fisher Price butterknife: like the prequels before it, Obi-Wan Kenobi isn’t even remotely gripping, exciting or moreish, because we already know exactly what is going to happen. And what is going to happen is this: nothing.
At no point – from their meetings, escapes, duels, captures and preposterous, trenchcoat-dependent rescues – has it felt like Obi-Wan, Leia or even Darth Vader were in any peril, because we know they weren’t. They all survive unscathed until Episode IV. Like the prequels, audiences are going into Obi-Wan Kenobi knowing who lives and who dies, making the whole thing feel like a very expensive, very handsome entry in an appendix. The prequel films were a slog for many reasons, but high on that list is that nothing occurred at any point that was remotely unexpected. Obi-Wan Kenobi, so far at least, is circling that same plughole of ennui. There are no stakes, no danger, nothing of substance for us to sink our teeth into, and a howling vacuum where there should be a mystery to unravel.
The way around this, obviously, is to introduce secondary characters about whose fates we are unaware. This is what The Clone Wars (the animated series set between Episodes II and III) did, and that succeeded in unspooling a superb, sprawling narrative out of it. This is how Better Call Saul went from Breaking Bad prequel to probably the best TV show ever made. Prequels and high-stakes excitement don’t have to be mutually exclusive, if the prequel in question is aware that it needs to do more than merely tell us how something we already know happened, happened. The Star Wars prequel films failed in that respect. As great as Obi-Wan Kenobi is in many ways, it hasn’t yet managed to do this. Characters exist solely to be in the orbit of the Obi-Wans, Darths and Leias about whose fates we know all too much, with (spoiler alert) figures like Indira Varma’s briefly interesting undercover rebel Tala Durith being introduced and bumped off before she could become a figure of genuine significance.
If, as rumoured, season two is in development, there is still (a new) hope. As counterintuitive as it might sound, a show called Obi-Wan Kenobi needs to barely be about Obi-Wan Kenobi, and lean into new players like Moses Ingram’s morally ambiguous Reva Sevander – now one of only two newly introduced characters of note, alongside O’Shea Jackson Jr’s Roken. The supporting cast desperately needs to grow, and we need to care about those new additions. If it doesn’t and we don’t, the whole show is just another expensive lightsaber duel near some naff CG lava that even the most committed Star Wars nerd (and I’m pointing two thumbs at my own Boba Fett T-shirt here) will find themselves struggling to care about. Come on, Obi-Wan Kenobi, you’re my only hope.

The multifaceted artist worked in photography, film and paint – a new retrospective explores his pioneering work around the globe from Harlem to Dakar
Wed 8 Jun 2022 07.00 BST
Last modified on Thu 16 Jun 2022 10.41 BST

As a child, the Canadian actor-director starred in the former Python’s The Adventures of Baron Munchausen. In this extract from her new memoir, she recalls how she feared for her life on his chaotic film set
When I was four years old, I treated my junior kindergarten class at North Toronto Christian School to a raucous rendition of Sit on My Face by Monty Python. It was show and tell, after all, so I sang them my favourite song, which included the lines: “I love to hear you oralise / When I’m between your thighs / You blow me away!”
I knew the song because among my father’s most treasured possessions were the albums of Monty Python’s Flying Circus. Over and over we would listen, as a family, to the Lumberjack Song, the Dead Parrot sketch and the Argument Clinic and watch The Meaning of Life, Life of Brian and Monty Python and the Holy Grail. By the time I was four, I could recite most Monty Python sketches and scenes by heart.
In 1987, when I was eight and already a child actor, Monty Python member Terry Gilliam came to Toronto to do a screen test with John Neville for the title role in his new fantasy-comedy film, The Adventures of Baron Munchausen. He was auditioning girls all over the world for the part of Sally Salt, the Baron’s trusty sidekick. The collective blood pressure in our house almost exploded over my getting the chance to meet Terry, let alone a chance to work with him.
Terry was giggly, fun, rambunctious. He reminded me of the kind of disobedient, unregulated child I had avoided in school in order to keep out of trouble.
When my mother got the phone call that I had got the part, I saw her cover her mouth in what looked like a mixture of shock, excitement and fear. I witnessed in my father a pure, unmitigated elation, which was simultaneously exhilarating and daunting. I had been cast in a movie directed by Terry Gilliam, in which Eric Idle, another former Monty Python member, would also perform. The pinnacle of my success, and of my father’s pride, had been reached. I was eight years old.
Production would begin in three months’ time in Rome, primarily at the legendary studio Cinecittà, where Fellini had made his movies, as well as two locations in Spain. I began counting down the days until my departure.
Our apartment in Rome was in a tiny little square called Largo dei Librari, just off the Campo de’ Fiori. Almost every night, my mother and father and I ate dinner in the same small restaurant courtesy of my per diem. On days off, my family went sightseeing. We went to the Pantheon, the Colosseum, Piazza Navona. We had at our disposal a driver and a stretch-limo Mercedes. My siblings all came over on first-class tickets. This glamorous life we suddenly found ourselves in the middle of was a shock to our family’s system, although not an unwelcome one.
The cast included Alison Steadman, Bill Paterson, Eric Idle, Jonathan Pryce, Oliver Reed and a 17-year-old Uma Thurman, who was appearing as Venus in her first major film role. As we rehearsed, Terry’s insane hyena giggle would greet me whenever I said or did something he found funny.
As we went into production, things quickly began to fall apart. Terry was erratic, a dreamer, someone who didn’t live in the world of “logic and reason” – just as the Baron himself didn’t. I would overhear the crew complain that plans, months in the making, would suddenly be replaced at the last minute with wild, ambitious impulses that put enormous pressure on the crew, the budget and the schedule.
Born in Toronto, Canada into a theatrical family.
First appears on screen as Molly in Disney’s One Magic Christmas and soon becomes known as “Canada’s sweetheart” for her appearances in several long-running children’s TV series.
Stars in The Adventures of Baron Munchausen and goes on to appear in many other films, including Exotica, The Sweet Hereafter, The Weight of Water and Dawn of the Dead.
Her directorial debut, Away From Her, adapted from an Alice Munro short story and starring Julie Christie, is nominated for two Oscars.
Explores her complicated family history in the documentary Stories We Tell, winner of the Toronto Film Critics Association best Canadian film of the year.
Writes the Netflix miniseries Alias Grace, based on Margaret Atwood’s novel of the same name.
Reviewing her memoir, the New York Times described her as “a stunningly sophisticated observer of the world”.
There were many special effects in the film; scenes of battle, exploding bombs, space and moonwalking. As we were about to shoot a sequence involving explosives, Terry led me down a route I was to run through – the set of a bombed-out city. I was told there would be explosives going off as I ran, but I wasn’t concerned. It would all be perfectly safe, I was told. I was given two cotton balls to put into my ears in case the sound was too loud for me. After Terry yelled “Action!” I began my run as instructed. Blasts of debris exploded on the ground around me, accompanied by deafening booms that made me feel as if I myself had exploded. A log I was to run under was partially on fire. The gigantic blasts continued and shook everything around me. I ran, terrified, straight into the camera, tripping over the dolly tracks.
Terry laughed and looked perplexed. “What happened?” he asked, as though I had just run screaming from a slow-moving merry-go-round. I couldn’t breathe. It didn’t seem possible that this could have been the plan, that things hadn’t just gone terribly wrong. But they hadn’t. This was the plan. And I had just ruined the take. I was mortified. It took a long time to reset the take and while Terry didn’t show any frustration about the delay, he also didn’t seem to notice how scared I was.
I had to do it again. I had to do it until I got it right. I went cold with fear, shaking. I sobbed in my father’s arms in between takes and pleaded with him to intervene. He held me close, soothing me. But when an assistant director came over to say they needed another take, my father said, with genuine remorse: “I’m afraid they have to do it again, love. I’m sorry. There’s nothing I can do.” And so I ran the gauntlet of explosives again. And again. And again.
There were many subsequent scenes in which explosives were used. One took place in a rowing boat, which was placed in a giant tank of water to mimic the sea. Jack Purvis, Eric Idle and I were seated in the rowing boat behind Angelo Ragusa (John Neville’s stuntman), who sat astride a large Arabian horse. As I remember it, a series of smallish explosions were to go off beside the boat, followed by a larger explosive that was so powerful, it was placed deep underwater at the bottom of the tank. On the first take, the small explosions scared the horse and it began backing up into us. Angelo forced it to jump overboard into the water to save us from being trampled. As the horse hit the bottom of the tank, its hooves pulled the larger explosive up and as it surfaced, it detonated quite close to me.
I remember not hearing anything, Eric’s terrified face, the crew looking panicked at the edge of the tank. I remember a hard, crushing sensation in my chest and being carried towards an ambulance as the crew looked on, alarmed. I remember that the doctors were kind, that my parents were told there was nothing wrong with me and that I went back to work the next day. The scenes with explosions continued, each one terrifying me more than the last.
We shot quite a few scenes in that same giant tank of water, wetsuits under our costumes. Once, we shook with cold in the tank for several hours, until Eric Idle yelled at Terry and I was taken out early. In another scene, I dangled from the underside of the Baron’s hot-air balloon high above the ground in the parking lot of the studio. I was very scared and at one point I screamed as I heard a loud ripping sound that I thought was my harness coming loose. It turned out to be a minor rip in my dress. Terry giggled at my fear, telling me I was fine. “Don’t worry!” he yelled up. “We can’t afford to lose you!”
The hours were crushingly long sometimes. I started drinking coffee. A lot of it. I sneaked it from the craft services truck. If I had coffee in me, I knew I could do what was asked of me, even if my body was resistant. My heart might beat too fast, but at least I wouldn’t fall asleep standing up.
There was chaos, almost daily. Between the problems with the producers, the studio and Terry, the production always felt on the brink of disaster.
After the production moved to Spain, I came down with an illness that had me vomiting and feverish for days. I listened, through a haze, as my father explained that there was no choice but for me to work. The next day, legs shaking, fever raging, I ran with hundreds of people out of the gates of the town, in the last scene in the film. The war against the Turks, which is the main struggle of the film, had been won. I had to look happy. And I did, between rounds of barfing.
When the film was finally released into the world, it came out with a deafening thud. It was a bomb for the ages, right up there with Heaven’s Gate in terms of ill-fated, budget-bloated failures. It was too closely associated with outgoing executive David Puttnam, who was leaving Columbia Pictures on bad terms, and the release was purposefully botched. I was stunned that after about $46m spent, horror endured and survived, and a pretty great movie made, a production’s fate could be reduced to the outcome of a petty studio squabble.
When I was in my mid-20s, I met a nine-year-old actress on a film set who I will call Sandra. Sandra’s mother, who I will call Jessica, clearly had big ambitions for her kid. One day, she emailed me to say that her daughter was close to landing a part in Terry Gilliam’s new film, Tideland, which would be shooting in Canada. Was there anything I could do to help or put in a good word for Sandra? I gagged when I read the email. I told her how big a mistake I thought it would be for Sandra (who I happened to be very fond of ) to work on a Terry Gilliam production. I told her about my experiences on The Adventures of Baron Munchausen and how lightly my safety and sense of security had been taken. None of it got through to her. In a panic, I finally wrote to Terry hoping it might spare another kid from the kind of traumatising experience I had had. Here is our email exchange.
I hear you’re making a film in saskatchewan this summer. i hope you have a great time – there are some great crew people you’ll probably be using from Winnipeg who got into making films because of you. (it’s actually pretty bizarre - i worked out there this winter and at least 5 people told me that Baron Munchausen was the film that made them choose to be in film.)
I guess i just wanted to touch base and share a few things about my experience working on that movie. I know you’ll be working with a young girl and i realise we’ve never had a chance to talk about that time – or i guess i mean i haven’t communicated to you what my experiences were, or how i remember them now, or how i feel they affected me. I know you’ve heard varying reports (i can’t remember who told me that) and i realise that it’s not really fair for me to not communicate it all to you directly. especially since the only people who i hold responsible (and who, by definition, were supposed to be responsible) were my parents.
Basically, I remember being afraid a lot of the time. I felt incredibly unsafe. I remember a couple of trips to the hospital after being in freezing water for long periods of time, losing quite a bit of my hearing for days at a time due to explosives, having my heart monitored when one went off relatively close to me, etc. I remember running through this long sort of corridor where explosives went off every few feet, things were on fire, etc. i cried hysterically in my dad’s lap and begged him to make sure i wouldn’t have to do it again, but I did. I think i did it quite a few more times. I remember the terrifying scene where we were in the boat and the horse jumped out and ended up surfacing a plastic explosive that went off right under my face. i remember being half trampled by a mob of extras and then repeating the scene several times. i remember working very long hours.
i know i had some fun as well, but it’s pretty much obliterated by the sense of fear and exhaustion and of not being protected by the adults around me. And again, the adults who should have been there to protect me were my parents, not you. This of course took some time to arrive at. I admit i was pretty furious at you for a lot of years.
what i went through is nothing compared to what many kids in the world suffer. but it certainly was unusual for a middle-class kid in toronto and it hardened and isolated me for many years i think. it also created a pretty substantial lack of trust in my parents (again, not your fault, but a byproduct of the experience).
this – contrary to how it may read – is not meant to be a guilt trip. you were always fun and fascinating and you gave me a ton of confidence. you’re a genius and it was a privilege (no matter what my age) to watch you make a great film. I think that film was hell for you too and you had enough responsibility just keeping it going without having to be a parent to someone else’s child. I believe that you felt that if there was something that was particularly traumatic to me that my parents would have informed you and pulled the plug. of course this is what should have happened on many occasions. i don’t think my parents were monsters by any stretch of the imagination. i do think, though, that you can’t overestimate how in awe of you people like them can be. i think they were so shocked and thrilled to have their daughter in a Terry Gilliam movie that they couldn’t see past that. they didn’t want to be an annoyance or an inconvenience to anyone and it must have been daunting to imagine holding up 100 people for your kid.
so here’s my point. who knows who you’ll cast and what their parents will be like. my suspicion is that you might need to be constantly analysing whether you would put your own nine-year-old in the positions you’ll be putting this kid in. because it’s entirely likely that the child’s own parents will be (for whatever reason) incapable of making the right call. this is a huge responsibility but i’m starting to think (from watching other kids and parents) that this is a fundamental part of the job when you’re working with kids who should really be in school anyway.
try to keep a close eye on the mood of the kid, ask them a lot of questions about how they’re doing, if they want to stop doing what they’re doing, etc. if they seem uncomfortable, afraid, take it upon yourself to make the call as to whether or not it’s best to stop or keep going.
if there are water scenes in this one – make sure it’s warm!!!! if there are explosions in this one – i really can’t emphasise enough how much better it would be if you could do reaction shots separate from the explosions themselves. I still duck when a car door slams too close or too loud.
i know it’s probably a sucky way to shoot it – but it might save you another email like this one.
sorry for the babbling. i just realised i wasn’t doing either of us any favours by not letting you know this stuff. and i really think you’re a decent person so hearing this might have an impact without being too alienating (i hope).
good luck with the film. i know it’ll be brilliant.
He wrote back the very next day.
Sarah,Ever since I started this Canadian project your name has been at the forefront of most of my Toronto conversations. Every potential crew member I interview ends up including you in the chat. You are ubiquitous. How many people get that adjective thrown at them? I also hear you are about to start your first film as director. Congratulations. You’ve done brilliantly. You’ve continued to be a wonderful actress and I’m certain you’ll handle the directing business just as well. As far as the scars of Munchausen go, I had no idea that they were that deep. What always impressed me from my side of the camera was how professional you were …always prepared and willing to dive into anything, no matter how difficult, that we organised (possibly that should read, disorganised). In fact, I started taking for granted that you could always be counted on, unlike some of the adults. You seemed so focused, I had no idea you were having such a terrifying time. For what it’s worth, we were always concerned to make things safe for you (you were too valuable to the production to allow anything to happen to you). Although things might have seemed to be dangerous, they weren’t. The only time events got close to trouble was when the horse jumped from the boat. We all were terrified, however I knew that Angelo Raguzzo [sic] was one of the most brilliant horsemen I had ever seen and that he would make sure none of you in the boat were harmed. Nevertheless the explosion was a fuckup and I apologise.
One thing I’m curious about. Can you tell, when you see Sally in the film, in which of the shots it’s you … and which ones are your double? Do you remember that the shots of you in the boat were right at the edge of the tank with stuntmen in the water next to the boat?I only ask, not to minimise your bad memories, but to try to understand the differences in the way you and I remember the events… especially since you were so young and impressionable and sensitive and yet seemed to be so wise and about 30 years old.
Luckily, for the girl in the film we are starting, there are no physically dangerous or terrifying scenes. I grant you there are some disturbing ones for adults but I don’t think so for her. Like you, she is in every scene. It’s her film. She’s nine years old and has been acting since she was four. Extraordinary! Luckily for her, I’m much older now. And a lot more tired. Possibly a bit more wise as well. And I will take to heart your suggestions.
Thanks for making contact. Hopefully, next time I’m in Toronto we can manage a dinner together. I’m curious to learn who you are now. Terry
thanks a lot for getting back to me. i do know in retrospect that many things that terrified me were not as terrifying as they seemed then. (and i definitely remember that the boat was in a tank.) and i’m pretty sure i know which shots were the double. however – it does raise a question of what i remember vs what happened. it’s like this with photographs. whole memories get built around them, which is sometimes a reflection of a general sense of things as they felt at the time as opposed to what actually occurred. so i’m willing to accept that my impressions may have been unlike what an adult might have. i think that’s sort of the point. it wasn’t a good environment for a kid because there were things that could easily be interpreted as dangerous without actually being dangerous. i think it’s harder to make those distinctions as a child, and i didn’t have a lot of support in trying to make them. the really traumatic things that happened are distinct memories that gave me nightmares well before the film came out so confusion between what the stunt double was doing as opposed to me didn’t really play into my bad memories i don’t think.
i really appreciate you responding. i wasn’t sure how you’d react. i hope the film goes really well. i’d love to get together when you are next in toronto. i’ve really appreciated this exchange.
In the end, Sandra wasn’t cast in Tideland. The part went to 10-year-old Jodelle Ferland. When Tideland was released, the Globe and Mail published an article called “Twinkle, twinkle little star.” The writer, Gayle MacDonald, wrote: “Film-makers like Gilliam keep coming to the Canadian talent trough for child actors because our kids, by all accounts, tend to be easy to direct, manage and mould. Chalk it up to our easygoing, accommodating national character.”
Unsettled by MacDonald’s framing, I asked for Terry’s permission to publish our email exchange as part of an article I wrote for the Toronto Star in response to MacDonald’s piece and, to his credit, without hesitation he agreed. (One of the things I still admire about Terry is this lack of fear, this lack of an instinct to hide and protect himself from exposure or attack. I think most people would have refused to let their emails be published this way.) I wrote the following conclusion to the piece:
At a film festival event a few weeks ago, I saw Terry for the first time in 17 years. We had a friendly chat and spoke about Jodelle. He said, “She had a great time, you could tell she really loved it …and she was happy to be there …” He paused, and looked at me thoughtfully. “Then again,” he said, “I remember thinking the same thing about you . . . that’s why I was so surprised to get your emails.” He looked confused.
It would have been difficult for anyone to see how unhappy I was at the time. Like many kids, I was eager to please and good at adapting to difficult situations, storing them away to unpack later.
In every interview I’ve read with Jodelle Ferland, she talks about shooting Tideland as a very positive experience. Based on my own experiences, I’m curious about whether her impressions will change. Perhaps I’ll drop her a line in a decade or two to find out.
I wrote this conclusion to the article in another time, in another political climate. Here’s what I left out: when Terry first saw me at that film festival event, he grabbed my shirt “playfully”, turned me around, tried to pull it up and said: “Come on – show me the scars! Where are the scars?!” I actually have a really long scar on my spine from scoliosis surgery and, not understanding that he was speaking in metaphor, I said: “Um. It’s right there.”
I asked him how Jodelle Ferland had fared on set. I told him I had called my union to ask them to visit the set often to check on her, given my own experience with him. He laughed and said: “They came once or twice. She was great and we worked overtime a lot. No one paid much attention!”
I felt sick to my stomach. Despite my emailed pleas to him to be careful with children, a big part of me felt, deep down, that it was hopeless for me to imagine him taking responsibility.
When I was in my late 20s, an assistant director on a film I was acting in said to me: “Our special effects guy really wants to introduce himself to you, but he’s scared you might hate him. He did the special effects on Baron Munchausen.”
Later that day, when I reintroduced myself to special effects icon Richard Conway, who I hadn’t seen since I was a child, his eyes filled with tears. He said: “I’m sorry. I’m so sorry about what happened to you on that movie.”
I replied, in earnest: “What did happen to me?”
“A lot of things went wrong,” he said. “Everyone in my job carries around an image that haunts them of something that went wrong at work. For me, it’s the look on your face as you were carried out of the water tank and into the ambulance after the explosive surfaced so close to you. You were crying. No – you weren’t crying. You were hysterical. Screaming in terror.”
As Richard and I got to know one another better, he suggested we watch the movie together. “It would be a kind of exorcism, maybe. For both of us.” Neither of us had watched the film in many years, fearful of how it would make us feel. One evening after wrap, we watched it together at the hotel. During the scenes that had been most terrifying to shoot, my breath caught in my throat. Richard said: “Can we hold hands?” I reached for his hand and held it tight. During the scene in the boat, I felt him squeeze my hand harder and turned to see tears streaming down his face. “I’m so, so sorry,” he said. I hugged him, so grateful for the apology, even though I didn’t think it was his to make.
At one point, as the Baron and Sally make their way up into the sky on their way to the moon, we found ourselves marvelling at the artistry of the film, the hand-painted backgrounds, the meticulously crafted analogue illusions. As the Baron and Sally sail through a sky of perfect clouds, Richard said, “I spent weeks with my crew making those clouds by hand. No one gets to do anything like that any more. No one gets to feel what it’s like to create a magic image with your own hands. Since CGI, it’s all a lost art.” We watched as Eric Idle and I climbed along the edge of a perfect crescent moon, watched horses and tigers materialise out of the stars, were swallowed whole and stayed intact in the belly of a sea creature. We watched together in wonder, holding hands until the end.
In 2018, when Terry was in the middle of a firestorm of controversy over comments he had made about the #MeToo movement, someone tweeted out the old email exchange between Terry and me as evidence of his subpar character. In response, Eric Idle, who I hadn’t heard from since I was a child, tweeted a response:
“She was right. She was in danger. Many times. It was amazing we never lost anyone.”
She was right. She was in danger. Many times. I read these nine words over and over again. Someone who was there was appearing from out of nowhere to confirm my memories and verify my version of events.
I swear it was around that time that I stopped ducking for cover when I heard the sudden noise of a car door slam.
Because he was so childlike and full of genuine wonder, it was hard for me, for many years, to see how responsible Terry Gilliam was for the terror of being on that set. And so I blamed my parents. I’m struck by how many times in my emails to him I make sure to tell him I don’t hold him responsible and lay the blame at my parents’ feet. No matter how much I thought about him over the years, Terry still stubbornly lived in my memory primarily as someone who was brilliant and who had also had that look in his eye that is precious to children: the look that says, “I’m glad you’re here.” Because he had never really removed himself from a state of childhood himself, he was just like a playmate with a very large stash of expensive, dangerous toys.
I think the truth is that I let Terry off the hook in part because, even as a child, I had bought into the glamour of the idea of the enfant terrible director, the out-of-control mad white male genius – a myth that has dominated the film industry’s understanding of what brilliance must necessarily look like. As an adult, I find myself wholly intolerant of the fetishisation of this archetype of genius, having seen, first-hand, great works made by decent, conscientious people, and having witnessed sharp impatience with female or Bipoc [Black, Indigenous and people of colour] film-makers who show any similar signs of irresponsibility. Terry lived for so long in the film world’s imagination as a “mad genius” whose madness and recklessness somehow elevated his work.
I don’t blame my parents as much as I used to, understanding more now how hard it would be to stand up and stop an enormous production under dire financial and time pressures. As the years go on and Terry makes more and more comments that demonstrate not just a childlike incapacity for understanding grown-up problems but a wilful dismissal of movements that seek to claim equality and acknowledgment for past harms, I see him, and the role he played in the mayhem back then, differently. I see it in the context of a cultural phenomenon of what many white men have been allowed to get away with in the name of art. Though he was magical and brilliant and made images and stories that will live for a long, long time, it’s hard to calculate whether they were worth the price of the hell that so many went through over the years to help him make them.
The other day, my child Eve raised the idea of watching The Adventures of Baron Munchausen. Eve is now the exact age I was when I made the film. As we watch, I find myself grateful for the comparatively predictable nature of my children’s childhood. At nine, there have been no great adventures for Eve, and no great traumas. Eve is captivated by the film, and finds it hilarious, mesmerising, and strange to see how much we look alike. Halfway through, when the characters’ lives are in danger for the eighth or ninth time, Eve gets scared and wants to stop watching. Just before I press the power button, Eve grabs the remote from me and says, “Actually, let’s watch to the end. I have to know if it turns out okay.”
It does. When we arrive at the last scene, there I am, smiling in a crowd of hundreds of people. The war is won, the adventure over. Sally Salt can now go back to her regular life, and the Baron says goodbye. If I try, I can conjure up the feeling of what it was like to shoot that last scene; that harrowing day, when I was so ill and forced to work anyway. But the memory loses its power in the presence of my child’s delight at having discovered a joyful ending, worth waiting for.
Edited extract from Run Towards the Danger by Sarah Polley published by September (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply

Authors recommend their favourite recent reads, from addictive novels and fascinating cultural history to a game-changing graphic memoir
Bernardine EvaristoMore Fiya: A New Collection of Black British Poetry, edited by Kayo Chingonyi, brings together a wonderful array of outstanding poets whose linguistic flair and wide-ranging perspectives excite, inspire and challenge in equal measure. As a companion, Canongate is also republishing the 1998 anthology The Fire People: A Collection of British Black and Asian Poetry, edited by Lemn Sissay.
Hilary MantelA novel featuring the young Joseph Stalin might not sound like summer entertainment, but Stephen May’s Sell Us the Rope is fresh and original: jaunty, cunning, thought-provoking but never solemn. For nonfiction, and a venture into the strange world of coincidence and prediction, try Sam Knight’s The Premonitions Bureau. It’s a book hard to classify, but wholly fascinating: lively, nimble, its subject poised on the frontiers of the possible.
David NichollsOn Agoraphobia by Graham Caveney took me by surprise: simultaneously a memoir and a fascinating cultural history of the condition, it’s entertaining and erudite. I was similarly gripped by Sarah Polley’s essay collection Run Towards the Danger: frank, sometimes painful stories about growing up, exploitation and recovery from a really fine actor, director and writer. And one of my favourite novels of last year is out in paperback. Bleakness and anxiety aren’t emotions everyone wants to experience on a sun lounger, but Gwendoline Riley’s My Phantoms is brilliantly funny, sharp and slender. She’s an exceptional writer, a modern Muriel Spark.
Anne EnrightReaders love characters but writers love structure because the structure is the answer – it is the story. Jennifer Egan is a genius of structure, and The Candy House is a thrilling read. It is a narrative dance, and like all great dances it is done with pleasure and with heart. It also makes your brain go doinnggg. Take it slowly: turn this multifaceted jewel of a thing in the light. Emilie Pine is a great writer to read when you don’t know why you are sad. Ruth & Pen is about two people who face their ordinary, heartbreaking problems with tenacity and grace, and Pine seems to hold the reader safe in a way that feels right for the times – a truly compassionate book.
Sara CollinsReading Elizabeth Day’s Magpie gave me the kind of noir-ish high I usually only get from reading the best of Gillian Flynn. Heavily pregnant Marisa, who has just moved into a gorgeous house with her doting partner, Jake, appears to have the life she has always dreamed of – except that the menacing new lodger, Kate, seems intent on stealing it for herself. Day’s novel is a psychological thriller with a strong thematic pulse: it brilliantly co-opts genre conventions to evoke the way both motherhood and infertility can sometimes be experienced as a sort of fever dream. Nothing beats a summer afternoon in the company of a book as addictive as this.
Ali SmithKamila Shamsie’s Best of Friends will be out in early autumn, and is a shining tour de force about a long friendship’s respects, disrespects, loyalties and moralities. Shamsie never compromises. This novel is of a rare quality, and even more evidence of her ability to write fiction that’s simultaneously vividly alive to its time and so good and true that it’s as if it has always been with us. The other recent pleasure for me was Irene Solà’s When I Sing, Mountains Dance. Translated from Catalan by Mara Faye Lethem, this novel about, well, everything, is fine-tuned to a kind of astonished and astonishing connectivity that’s an act of revolutionary revitalisation up against the odds of any despairing.
Jonathan FranzenEasily the most exciting new book I’ve read in the past year is Jo Ann Beard’s Festival Days. It is a knockout – a collection of nonfiction narratives that read like short stories, plus one short story that makes you wonder if it, too, is nonfiction. Masterly sentence by sentence, entirely original in method, the pieces are full of death and the threat of it, but their effect is the opposite of funereal. Beard’s wry voice and her clear-eyed compassion make her the best sort of company.
Pankaj MishraTwo books, Anuradha Roy’s novel The Earthspinner and Sumana Roy’s meditation How I Became a Tree, from an India befouled by chauvinists and their will to power, offer some release from today’s human-made ordeals. With their tender attentiveness to the non-human, these narratives speak of more compassionate and resilient modes of existence than those devised by the perennially agitated makers of history.
Colm TóibínA while ago, an astute friend recommended an American poet called Mary Ruefle. She is 70 and lives in Vermont – she’s a big discovery who is going to keep me going all summer. Her tone is wry and knowing, ironic and angled. She likes statements, or what seem like statements, but nothing is certain. She can move from jokes to dead seriousness in a single seamless second, as though John Ashbery met Wisława Szymborska in a dark Vermont wood. Ruefle is also a great essayist – see her book Madness, Rack, and Honey – with insights on literature and life that are unexpected, original, witty and sharp.
Sarah WatersKate Charlesworth’s Sensible Footwear is a lively graphic memoir that doubles as a comprehensive history of modern British LGBTQ+ life: it’s a wonderful reminder of just how much fun, love and friendship has been had in the fight for queer rights. Julia Armfield’s novel Our Wives Under the Sea, about a woman whose wife returns a bit peculiar from a submarine expedition gone wrong, is terrifically odd. And I defy anyone not to be utterly beguiled by Nell Stevens’s Briefly, a Delicious Life. A story of George Sand, Chopin and a teenage Spanish ghost, it’s a lush, gorgeous, really special read.
Olivia LaingMy Dead Book by Nate Lippens is the most electrifying thing I’ve read in a long time, a poetic, compressed novella about queer loss and addiction that reminded me of Gary Indiana and William Burroughs. And while we’re on the subject of queer excess, do not miss Bad Gays by Huw Lemmey and Ben Miller: a tour de force of the shadowy side of gay identity.
Ian RankinFor those who enjoyed this year’s TV adaptation of Kate Atkinson’s novel Life After Life, Wrong Place Wrong Time by Gillian McAllister is the thriller equivalent. A loving and law-abiding son stabs a stranger to death in the street. His mother awakes next morning to find she has gone back in time to the previous day. And it keeps happening, the gaps of time widening. Can she work out why the crime took place – and maybe even stop it? This is a phenomenally clever brain teaser with a lot of heart. I also loved The Clockwork Girl by Anna Mazzola, set in Paris in 1750. A king obsessed with automata, a genius inventor, court intrigues, vanishing children and a charismatic young heroine determined to uncover the truth: this is historical fiction with a fantastical twist, done with verve and skill.
Robert MacfarlaneAs a spy-thriller addict, I roared through Mick Herron’s new Slough House novel, Bad Actors, with the odious, odorous genius Jackson Lamb at its heart, and a couple of loathsome main characters who surely only coincidentally resemble well-known British political figures of our time. I’ve also recently read back to back the Basque writer Dolores Redondo’s superb Baztán Trilogy of (sort-of) noir/crime novels, starting with The Invisible Guardian, as well as the trilogy prequel, The North Face of the Heart. In poetry, I highly recommend Jason Allen-Paisant’s superb first collection, Thinking With Trees; and I’m also deep in the newest translation of the oldest poem: Sophus Helle’s version of the ancient Babylonian Epic of Gilgamesh, which Helle has translated from the Akkadian, with verve and drama.
Katherine RundellSusanna Clarke’s Piranesi is so beautiful and so strange. Set in a fantastical labyrinthine house, it has a daring and a grace that are quietly, transportingly spectacular. If you were looking for a book that distils the concept of wonder, this is the one: it feels like a work of pure generosity. For children’s books, I love everything Sharna Jackson has written: her most recent, The Good Turn, is a sharp, deliciously witty mystery, which salutes community and compassion without ever moralising.
Mohammed HanifGoat Days by Malayalam writer Benyamin is an epic little novel about an immigrant trapped in the Saudi desert, learning to love goats and planning a very risky escape. The Quilt and Other Stories by the late Urdu writer Ismat Chugtai gives us a glimpse into thrilling fictions created out of domesticity and the perils of intimacy.
Polly SamsonAlexandra Heminsley’s Under the Same Stars, out in July, is a satisfying family mystery set on a remote and starkly beautiful Norwegian island in the Arctic Circle. I’ve also enjoyed travelling to Mexico in three timeframes with Anna Hope’s insightful and elegiac new novel The White Rock. Two of my favourite prose stylists have new books this summer: Emma Forrest’s Busy Being Free, a heart-rending and acerbic memoir of appetite and abstinence, and Cressida Connolly’s masterful novel Bad Relations – it has been a joy to see it garnering the ecstatic reviews it deserves.
Fatima BhuttoI am obsessed with the poet Frank O’Hara. Meditations in an Emergency, his 1957 collection, reprinted in March, really is my book of the year. Right now, I’m reading Also a Poet by Ada Calhoun, a memoir about her father, the art critic Peter Schjeldahl, and his obsession (there are many of us) with O’Hara. It’s a wonderful book about a daughter imitating her father who’s busy imitating O’Hara, and about New York and the magic of O’Hara’s poetry. Also, Pakistan is producing incredible films, music and literature right now. Other Names for Love by Taymour Soomro comes out in July and is a moving first novel about fathers and sons, longing and the struggle of being at home in the world.
To explore all the books in the Guardian’s summer reading list visit guardianbookshop.com Delivery charges may apply.

Rainer, 39, and Eka, 40, met in Jakarta at an underground LGBTQ+ film festival in 2010. They now live together in Toronto, Canada
In the summer of 2010, Rainer was volunteering at an underground LGBTQ+ film festival in Jakarta. “I was born and raised in the city and had been part of the festival for a while,” he says. “There are some anti-LGBTQ+ laws and a lot of prejudice towards gay people in Indonesia, so we never told the authorities exactly what we were showing when we asked for permissions.”
During a screening at the Centre Culturel Français (CCF), now known as the Institut Français d’Indonésie, he noticed that another volunteer was having trouble getting the film to start. “I went to the control room and found Eka struggling to get the DVD player to work,” he says. “I thought he was a hunk straight away.” After Rainer helped him to get the film started, they began to chat. “He seemed really intelligent and sexy,” says Eka. “I had a good first impression of him but I didn’t expect it to turn into anything.”
When the screening ended, they exchanged numbers. After sharing a few text messages over the following week, they arranged to meet for dinner at a hotel. “LGBTQ+ people can’t date publicly in Indonesia, so meeting up was nerve-racking, but exciting at the same time,” says Rainer. The pair immediately hit it off, but couldn’t meet up again for several weeks. “He told me he was going to travel around Indonesia for a photography project,” says Eka. “We stayed in touch through text messages for the month that he was away and we spoke on the phone a few times a day.”
When Rainer returned, he immediately asked Eka if they could become an official couple. “I just said, yes, let’s do it,” says Eka. They spent the next few months going on regular dates to cinemas, concerts and cultural events around the city.
Although they loved spending time together, their relationship came with challenges. Being gay in Indonesia not only incurs hostility from the general public, but in some states it is punishable by flogging or prison terms. “We had underground groups where we could meet but it was dangerous as they were often infiltrated by extremist groups,” says Rainer. “They somehow got my phone number and ID and I started receiving death threats.” As anti-LGBTQ+ rhetoric intensified, the couple feared for their safety. In 2011 they moved in together, pretending to be brothers. They were forced to continually change apartments when neighbours became suspicious about their relationship.
Despite the difficulties, they refused to let prejudice dent their relationship. In 2014, Rainer proposed. “I’d been in Singapore a few weeks before and he’d sent me a text saying, ‘Hey babe, let’s get married,’” laughs Eka. “I arrived home and he asked again with a cake and flower, and I said, ‘Yes’.” Two weeks later, the pair went on holiday to Canada, and decided to make things official. For legal reasons, their marriage certificate was posted from Ottawa back to Indonesia. “We were scared someone would open it and we’d go to prison,” says Rainer. “Luckily it came straight to the apartment.”
Persecution of LGBTQ+ people continued to worsen in Indonesia, so the couple decided to move. In 2016, they returned to Canada on Rainer’s student visa. They applied for asylum, which was granted, and they now have Canadian citizenship. They live together in Toronto and both work for a non-profit LGBTQ+ health organisation. In two years, they plan to celebrate their 10-year wedding anniversary with their friends from Canada. “Our first wedding was quite lonely,” says Rainer. “We are looking forward to having a party!”
Rainer admires his partner’s persistence. “He’s the fire and I’m the water. We’re opposites, but his logical thinking helps me to decide things. He seems like he has a hard shell but there’s a kindness inside.” Eka says his husband reminds him that life is to be enjoyed. “For me, life was always about working, but Rainer is so easygoing. He’s so patient with all my thoughts, worries and anxieties and always tells me things will be OK,” he says. “I think we complement each other well and he always knows what to do for fun.”
Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here

Singer celebrates ‘fantastic, gripping’ show in a rare statement, after her 37-year-old song entered the UK top 10
Kate Bush has said it is “really exciting” that her song Running Up That Hill has reentered music charts around the world, 37 years after release, due to it appearing in an episode of Stranger Things.
Issuing a rare statement to thank her legions of new fans, the musician wrote on her website on Sunday: “You might’ve heard that the first part of the fantastic, gripping new series of Stranger Things has recently been released on Netflix. It features the song, Running Up That Hill which is being given a whole new lease of life by the young fans who love the show – I love it too!
“Because of this, Running Up That Hill is charting around the world and has entered the UK chart at No. 8. It’s all really exciting! Thanks very much to everyone who has supported the song. I wait with bated breath for the rest of the series in July.”
Running Up That Hill plays a key role in the latest season of Stranger Things, being the favourite song of the character Max, played by Sadie Sink, and appearing as a motif throughout. The song has become a particular hit among Gen Zers, who were not born when the song was first released in 1985, appearing in TikTok after TikTok since Friday.
After the song appeared in the Netflix show last week, Running Up That Hill reached No 8 in the UK charts, based on streams and downloads, three decades after it reached No 3 on its initial release. Running Up That Hill also re-entered the UK charts in 2012 after it was used in the closing ceremony of the London Olympics.
Running Up That Hill is also the most-streamed song on Spotify in the US and the UK, just shy of Harry Styles’ As It Was in Spotify’s global chart, and in the same No 2 position on Apple Music. The song is also expected to place highly in the US charts, which are announced on Tuesday.

The best of this week’s wildlife pictures, including a new iguana, a nesting weaver and a rare albino giant tortoise
Fri 10 Jun 2022 09.20 BST
Last modified on Fri 10 Jun 2022 09.35 BST
Photograph: Jonathan Alcorn/Zuma Press Wire/Rex/Shutterstock
Photograph: The Midland county, Texas, sheriff's office
Photograph: Fredrik Sandberg/TT News Agency/AFP/Getty Images

In the early 1970s the Irish star conquered the charts on both sides of the Atlantic. Then his career crashed. Now 75, he talks about self-belief, blowing his chance at Glastonbury – and the story behind one of the darkest No 1s in pop
Gilbert O’Sullivan is showing me a framed portrait of himself with Muhammad Ali, in which the young Irishman is attempting to land punches on The Greatest. It was 1973. The singer-songwriter – an accomplished schoolboy boxer until he “started getting hurt” – had successfully asked the champion heavyweight to do some publicity photos for his latest album, I’m a Writer, Not a Fighter.
“It’s funny,” he says, “but whenever anyone comes round they say, ‘We know who he is [gesturing at Ali], but who’s the other fella?”
The previous year, “the other fella” had become the biggest-selling British-based solo artist in the world: bigger than Elton John, Rod Stewart or David Bowie. His sweet, affecting tunes and wry, poignant, often colloquial wordplay landed him three Ivor Novello awards and six No 1s with songs such as Get Down and Clair. Alone Again (Naturally) topped the US charts for six weeks. Then he disappeared below the radar, his career derailed by court cases and changing fashions.
“From the mid-70s onwards, no music paper would interview me,” he says, blaming the Charlie Chaplin jacket, cap and pudding basin haircut he had adopted early on so he stood out: a sort of proto-Peaky Blinders. “If there ever was a review, it would say: ‘Isn’t this the guy who wears a cap and boots and looks ridiculous?’”
Now a youthful 75-year-old, O’Sullivan lives in Jersey with his Norwegian wife of 42 years, Aase (“pronounced ‘orsa’ as in ‘orse and cart’”), but we meet in his daughter’s London kitchen, where he cuts a casually dressed, gently spoken, genial presence. In recent years, the world has come round to him again. Artists from Morrissey to Pet Shop Boys have covered his songs, and 2018’s eponymous album – his 19th – was his first Top 20 offering of new material since 1974. “I never lost the belief in what I do,” he says, smiling from beneath a mass of slightly greying hair. “For me, success was always writing a good song.”
This, he tells me, remains every bit the obsession it was when he started on an upright piano in his mother’s shed (which now stands, complete with instrument, in his garden). Thirteen new songs appear on his forthcoming album, which features KT Tunstall and Mick Hucknall. The title, Driven, describes him well.
“Writing songs is all I’ve ever done from the age of 14 and I never lost the joy of that process,” says the singer, who keeps office hours when in writing mode. “Ever since I was a youngster my philosophy was always: ‘You might not be as good as you think you are, but thinking you are is good.’”
Born Raymond Edward O’Sullivan in Waterford, Ireland, one of six siblings, to a meat packer and shop owner, music provided an outlet during a “not great childhood”. When he was seven, his family relocated to a Swindon council house in search of a better life. He doesn’t recall being affected by the era’s “No Irish, no blacks, no dogs” mentality, but had no close friends, suffered from recurring dyspepsia and cystitis, lost his father to stomach cancer when he was 12 and experienced “a bit of bullying. I remember defending myself against another kid in the playground, while everyone egged him on.”
Many working-class households had a piano in those days and inspiration arrived with the Beatles. “They wrote fantastic songs that we identify with, and hadn’t needed a degree or GCE to do it.” Like the Fab Four, the young Irishman couldn’t read or write music. “So before I got a tape recorder I wrote my songs down using notes and arrows,” he says. “Then in the morning, I wouldn’t have a clue what it meant.”
After a “magical” time studying art at Swindon College (where he played in Rick’s Blues with future Supertramp founder Rick Davies), some hapless episodes followed, such as sending a cassette of songs to the Troggs manager-producer Larry Page, realising it was his only copy and traipsing all the way to London to get it back (Page’s secretary found it in the bin). Then came the big break, after moving to the capital he sent a tape to Tom Jones’s svengali, Gordon Mills. “His secretary said that when Gordon first saw the pictures he went: ‘Who’s this idiot writing to me?!’ But he really liked the songs.” Enough to sign O’Sullivan up and move him into a bungalow on his Weybridge estate in Surrey. Mills had a private zoo and asked the singer to babysit a small tiger on the sofa. “Gordon said: ‘Don’t worry, it’s only a cub. It won’t attack you.’”
O’Sullivan was in the bungalow when he wrote Alone Again (Naturally), surely one of the darkest No 1s in pop, in which the young protagonist ponders the impact of his father’s death. He has lost count of the numerous people – myself included – who have told him that song sings their life, but is adamant none of it is autobiographical.
“You’ve got to give me credit as a writer,” he says. “You don’t have to experience something to be able to write about it in a genuinely sympathetic way. I think I have an understanding of the things I get into.” He had been upstairs in the bathroom when word came that his father had died in hospital, and remembers his sister screaming. “But the truth is I never ‘cried when my father died’ [as the song says]. I was very teary when my mother passed away four years ago, but I never really knew my dad, because he was out at work. I regret that, and he would have been proud of me.” When Neil Diamond covered the song in 2010, he remarked that it was “difficult to understand how somebody that young could write something like that”.
Unlike his contemporaries, O’Sullivan didn’t embrace success or excess, shunning red-carpet invitations (when he was nominated for a Grammy, Mills said “You have to go!”) and preferring home to touring. “I was too shy to get many girlfriends, and I wouldn’t let relationships become serious in case it interfered with my work.”
He could be – and admits he still can be – endearingly naive. He spent hours designing a new image for his first tour, basing it on American cops, with a military-type shirt and badges, which he’s still rather proud of, noting that Bryan Ferry did something similar later. “Gordon said: ‘You can’t go on like that. They’ll think you’re a bloody Nazi!’”
He remembers being in the office when a cheque to him for a million pounds arrived, but was told “they’re taking 90% of it”. He eventually bought a house in Weybridge, 10 minutes walk from the Mills, but when he visited Elton John’s mansion, he was “gobsmacked” at the luxury, returning home to “an empty lounge with nothing on the walls”. When he went to Las Vegas with the Mills, Gordon’s wife, Jo, had to lend him money for souvenirs.
By the mid-70s, things weren’t going as well. Instead of letting his client tour the US with the Moody Blues, his manager put O’Sullivan straight into arenas – hugely ambitious for a first US tour, even after a No 1 – and the tour was pulled halfway through due to poor ticket sales.
“But it was a wonderful disaster. We had an orchestra, and played songs on the plane.” When O’Sullivan wanted to use other producers – as had Rod Stewart and Elton John – Mills told him: “‘If I’m not going to produce your records, nobody will.’ So I had to make that terrible decision to break up with Gordon.”
They parted amicably until he reminded Mills about a pre-fame agreement to share 50% of the rights to songs which were, after all, the singer’s compositions. “Gordon told me to come to the office to sort that out,” he says. “But when I got there they told me to fuck off.” So he sued, opening “a can of worms”, including the [then commonplace] conflict of interest where the same person was manager, producer and record company.
“It was very sad,” the singer sighs. “I had a fantastic lawyer – a Rumpole of the Bailey – that tore Gordon to shreds. I don’t think he knew why he was there. He just assumed his lawyers would take care of it, but the judge gave me everything [£7m in unpaid royalties] plus the shirt.” The 1982 judgment became a landmark case, later cited by Elton John and George Michael and protecting generations of musicians, but it was a pyrrhic victory, costing O’Sullivan a “father figure” and his closeness with Mills’s family. The case stopped him recording and afterwards he felt blackballed by elements of the industry. “I’d done something that nobody had done before and won,” he says
After meeting Aase, an air hostess, the singer ploughed his energies into family life, telling the Jersey authorities that they should let him live there because “I’m not the kind of pop star who throws TVs through windows.”
In 1990, he released an Italian house single as Go’Ss, which got to No 70. “My last hit,” he says. “Once people found out it was me, it plummeted down the charts.”
In 1991, he sued again after the rapper Biz Markie sampled Alone Again (Naturally) in a comedy rap, which its creator felt insulted the song’s sincerity. “They asked to use it and I said no, but they went ahead anyway. The judge said if they didn’t withdraw the track he’d have every Warners Brothers product removed from the shelves. The shit hit the fan. I wish I hadn’t had to do it, but I’d been wronged.” It was another landmark ruling, establishing the laws on copyright infringement regarding sampling.
Otherwise, he spent the 90s trying to rebuild his career, before a 2004 compilation of his hits went Top 20, and songwriters such as Paul Weller and Glenn Tilbrook started acknowledging his influence. In 2008 he was invited to play Glastonbury, but his two performances overran. “I wrote a long apologetic letter to Michael Eavis,” he sighs, “but they’ve never had me back. My agent didn’t talk to me for three months.”
Nine years ago, he got in touch with Mills’s widow, Jo, for the first time in decades. “She’d been through the mill, been married again and had everything taken away from her. My brother and I drove her home. She was living in a little room in a cheap apartment. It was heartbreaking. This is a woman who’d had a mansion, but she wasn’t in the slightest bit bitter. I’m glad we reconnected because she’s since passed away.”
In 2017, he performed at the Proms in Hyde Park. In the audience, apparently close to tears, was Clair Mills, the Mills’s daughter and the subject of his first British No 1, Clair. It is a song about babysitting her when she was three. “I exaggerated, but Clair would get up in the night – ‘No you can’t have a drink/Oh all right then but wait just a min’ – and she did call me Uncle Ray,” he says, smiling. “Gordon played the harmonica and Clair laughs on the record. The family loved it. Of course, I’d never be able to write that song today, because it’s about a man and a child. But that’s the age we live in. It was an affectionate tribute and that affection is still there.”
In many ways, the 75-year-old is very different from the awkward loner of his youth. His daughter Tara has banned him from writing to unkind reviewers, which he used to. He jokes that his wife would divorce him – “Actually, my daughters would divorce me!” – if he ever returned to the 1974 song A Woman’s Place, which he’d intended as “a working-class boy’s observations on his matriarch mum” but led her to exclaim: “Don’t you dare call it A Woman’s Place is in the Home!”
Today, he reads left-of-centre newspapers, listens to Father John Misty and sings (on the new album) about racial profiling and climate change. However, just like his young self, he doesn’t drive, doesn’t visit pubs, records ideas on to cassette and his adult equivalent of the shed is a music room in a state of “organised chaos”.
“I have obsessive compulsive disorder, so everything has to be in its place, from rugs to toothbrushes,” he says. “It drives my daughter’s husband mad because I come here and get the broom out, but order and routines are very important to me. Of course there’s no better discipline than writing songs.”
He’s written approaching 300 now, and once he’s finished touring Driven, he’ll get down to write some more.
“I’ve always thought that if you get off the treadmill, you lose it,” he says. “I never got off the treadmill.”
Driven is released on 22 July on BMG. Gilbert O’Sullivan is on tour, gilbertosullivan.co.uk.

Public Photography. The Sixties, an exhibition in Madrid as part of the annual PhotoEspañna festival, explores the power of the printed image as it appeared in books, magazines, newspapers, posters, and more. The Sixties surveys the publications that carried images of everything from Beatlemania to the sexual revolution, the civil rights struggle and the first man on the moon
Wed 8 Jun 2022 09.17 BST
Last modified on Tue 14 Jun 2022 13.02 BST
Photograph: Biblioteca Nacional Madrid/Luis Acosta Moro

The Pyramid stage’s youngest ever headliner looks entirely at home, giving an imperious, hugely engaging performance
It’s not just that Billie Eilish is, as she’s keen to point out, the youngest headliner in Glastonbury’s history … it’s that she’s the first mainstream pop star – as in the kind of pop star that tweenage girls scream at – to headline Glastonbury. A few years ago, the announcement of an artist like that filling the main Friday night slot on the Pyramid stage would probably have generated a degree of controversy. Some berk would have got up a petition about it. But in 2022, the appearance of Billie Eilish’s name at the top of the bill passed without comment.
Whether that’s evidence that Glastonbury’s audience is skewing younger, or that Glastonbury is becoming more pop-facing in the artists it books, or that Eilish is considered of a slightly different stripe to her peers, is an interesting question. Watching her bounce from the industrial electro pop of You Should See Me in a Crown, to the kitschy lounge stylings of Billie’s Bossa Nova, to the Beatles-y Getting Older, to the Dr Dre-influenced All the Good Girls Go to Hell, one is struck by the sense that she’s certainly more musically eclectic than most of her peers. And if you get the impression that festivals aren’t necessarily her natural habitat – “you guys are troupers, with your tents and shit”, she opines at one point – from the moment she appears, she looks entirely at home.
While many of the artists who appear on the Pyramid stage on Friday seem overawed by the size of the crowd they’ve attracted and the vociferousness of their response – at one point, it looks like Sam Fender is so struck by the moment he might start crying – Eilish looks anything but. There’s something imperious about her performance: it all feels appealingly confident. The set is essentially a truncated version of the show she’s been touring around arenas in recent months, and it comes complete with pop arena show staples including dividing the audience up and getting them to cheer in turn, a lot of talk about empowerment and loving yourself, and videos of the artist as a small child playing on the big screens. But it doesn’t lose anything in translation to a festival setting. If she asks the audience to crouch down and jump, they happily oblige. It’s heavy on slow-moving ballads, which is theoretically risky, but she never seems to lose the crowd.
Perhaps that’s because Eilish is a hugely engaging performer. Moreover she genuinely appears to be enjoying herself, at odds with her pouty gothic image and the plethora of songs on her last album – Happier Than Ever – that made being a teenage pop sensation when you’re barely out of her teens sound like a pretty miserable business. Her enthusiasm is infectious, her biggest hits – Bury a Friend, Bad Guy – pack an immense bass-heavy punch, while the ballad Your Power, introduced with a mention of the overturning of Roe Vs Wade as “a dark day for women”, has a spellbinding, eerie fragility. By the time she ends with Happier Than Ever’s slowly-building title track – its furiously angry crescendo given an extra layer of theatricality by the sheer quantity of pyrotechnics exploding over the stage – her performance doesn’t just seem like a musical shift for Glastonbury, but a triumph as well.

Broadway transfers of West End shows were out in front at this year’s celebration of the best of New York theatre
Broadway transfers of West End adaptations of The Lehman Trilogy and Company have dominated this year’s Tony awards, which were seen as a return to relative normal after Covid-impacted ceremonies.
It was a big night for British talent in New York, with the Broadway transfer of The Lehman Trilogy winning best play, best director and best actor in a play. “This play was written as a hymn to the city of New York but, like the Lehman brothers themselves, our show started thousands of miles away,” said playwright Ben Power, who adapted the show from Italian novelist and playwright Stefano Massini. His version made its debut at London’s National Theatre in 2018.
The play’s director, Sam Mendes, picked up his second Tony award, using his speech to herald “a season of such rampant creativity and diversity” and thanked his colleagues for “keeping this show alive during some pretty dark days”. Simon Russell Beale was also named best actor in a play, saying he felt “a little sheepish” that he won over his two nominated co-stars, Adrian Lester and Adam Godley. The Lehman Trilogy also won for scenic design and lighting of a play.
The Broadway transfer of Company, which originated in London’s West End, was named best revival of a musical. Patti LuPone, who won an Olivier for the role, beat out A Strange Loop’s L Morgan Lee, who was the first openly transgender actor to receive a Tony nomination, for best featured actress in a musical.
LuPone thanked “all of the Covid safety people”. In reference to a video that went viral last month in which an audience member at a post-show Q&A screamed that she paid LuPone’s salary after LuPone asked her to put her mask over her nose, she also thanked producer Chris Harper, “who pays my salary”.
Matt Doyle was also named best featured actor in a musical for Company, which also won for scenic design and directing of a musical. The musical’s creator, Stephen Sondheim, who died last year, featured in the ceremony’s In Memoriam section.
Pulitzer-winning musical A Strange Loop was named best musical, having led the night with 11 nominations. Its writer, Michael R Jackson, also won best book. “I’m so speechless, I should have written down a speech,” he joked before stressing the importance not just of representation but also “doing the very best work we can do”. The show tells the story of a Black queer man writing about a musical about a Black queer man.
The Michael Jackson musical MJ saw wins for Myles Frost for best lead actor in a musical as well as for lighting, sound design and choreography. Joaquina Kalukango was also named best lead actress in a musical for Paradise Square. She thanked her parents for “sacrificing everything” and “all of the nameless ancestors who have suffered”.
West Side Story Oscar-winner Ariana DeBose was host and called the ceremony “the first Tony awards since Broadway got its groove back”. A more diverse season than ever before, with plays from seven Black playwrights, DeBose joked that the “great white way is becoming more of a nickname than a how-to guide”.
Phylicia Rashad, who was the first Black actor to win best actress in a play for A Raisin in the Sun in 2004, won best featured actress in a play for her role in Skeleton Crew.
Richard Greenberg’s Take Me Out won for best revival of a play while Modern Family star Jesse Tyler Ferguson was named best featured actor in a play for his role, beating out co-stars Jesse Williams and Michael Oberholtzer.
Deirdre O’Connell was named best lead actress in a play for Dana H, a drama which saw her mime audio footage from playwright Lucas Hnath’s mother detailing a harrowing true story of kidnap. The show also won for sound design in a play.
The British musical Six, in which Henry VIII’s wives give a pop concert, won best original score (music and lyrics) for Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss, who first created it while students at Cambridge University. Six’s costume designer Gabriella Slade also won in her category.
Angela Lansbury was given the lifetime achievement award for her long and storied career on stage. The 96-year-old had previously won five Tony awards, for shows including Gypsy, Sweeney Todd and Blithe Spirit. She was unable to attend, but musical tribute was paid by the New York City Gay Men’s Chorus.
Last year’s Tony awards were affected by the truncated season, with just a handful of eligible shows. This year, 34 productions were able to be nominated and 29 of them managed to score at least one nod.
The pandemic continues to affect Broadway box office, with the 2021-2022 season raking in around US$845m (£688m), compared with the historic high of $1.8bn of 2018-2019.
Attendees this year who were sitting in the orchestra section were not required to wear masks but PCR testing was mandatory. Those sitting further from the stage had to remain masked for the duration.

While his Mercedes is uncompetitive, Hamilton has not let that slow him down in using F1 as a platform to speak out from
Lewis Hamilton won his first grand prix 15 years ago this weekend in Canada. He has been centre stage ever since. He still is, just not perhaps in quite the way he would prefer.
After seven years of unprecedented Mercedes domination helped him to 103 GP wins, Hamilton’s 2022 car is not at the level of Red Bull or Ferrari. Once again, it looks like a supporting role for the seven-time world champion on the track in Baku this weekend. Off it, he is still making headlines, from doubling down on his commitment to inclusion and diversity, to film-making and becoming a citizen of Brazil.
The FIA president, Mohammed ben Sulayem, caused controversy this week when he was quoted pointing out that in the days of Niki Lauda and Alain Prost they just got on and drove, whereas modern drivers use F1 as a platform, referencing the likes of Hamilton, four-time world champion Sebastian Vettel and Britain’s Lando Norris speaking out about human rights, LGBQT+ support and mental health.
In Azerbaijan on Friday, Hamilton underlined he had no intention of stepping back and urged more drivers to become involved. “Formula 1 continues to be an important platform to use our voices,” he said.
“For every single one of us here to do more, to speak out more, to spark more conversations. Creating a more inclusive environment is so important, and focusing on creating better diversity within your organisation and within the sport. But it’s moving at a slow pace. I encourage all drivers to be more outspoken and speak about what they care about.”
Vettel, who recently aired his views on the environment and more on BBC’s Question Time, added: “The topics Lewis is continuing to raise, the issues Lando has been talking about, and the stuff I’ve been mentioning, are topics that are very important. They are bigger than us, bigger than a sport can ever be.”
In fairness to Ben Sulayem, inclusion was a cornerstone of his election manifesto in his bid to become president of the sport’s ruling federation. He clarified his recent comments on Twitter this week and said that sport should be “a catalyst of progress in society.”
And just as practice for round eight of this year’s championship was about to begin in Azerbaijan, the FIA confirmed the appointment of the Ukrainian Tanya Kutsenko as its dedicated motorsport equality, diversity and inclusion adviser.
Apart from the wider influence Hamilton’s global standing affords him, he revealed he is also bringing his specific expertise to bear on a new motor racing movie starring Brad Pitt. “It’s a super-exciting project and a long time in the making,” Hamilton, who will not feature in the movie, explained. “I’ve been spending good time with Brad, which is pretty epic! I’m also making sure that the cast and crew is diverse too. Looking at racing movies I can’t say they’ve all been spectacular. I want to change that, to show people how great this sport is.”
Elsewhere, he is now a Brazilian citizen after after a bill passed by the country’s lower house of parliament. The proposal was made by a congressman after Hamilton flew the Brazil flag after his superb victory in last year’s Brazilian GP, then gave a keynote speech at a business event earlier this year.
“I’m speechless,” said the man whose childhood hero was Ayrton Senna. “Brazil is a place I’ve loved since following Ayrton. You’re just drawn to the country. It’s so diverse and there’s the energy, the music, the colour. I’ve had amazing times there and clinched my first championship there. I had an epic win in São Paulo last year and my biggest following is in Brazil.”
Wins have been impossible to come by for Hamilton or Mercedes this season, however. The seven-time world champion has won races every year he has competed in F1 but is now without a win in the last eight races as the team struggles.
In Baku, Hamilton had to be content with 12th-fastest second practice time as Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc set the pace, ahead of the Red Bulls of Monaco winner Sergio Pérez – now rewarded with a two-year contract extension – and reigning world champion Max Verstappen.

Gunfire erupted Saturday night in Philadelphia’s downtown area and near a Chattanooga nightclub and north-west of Detroit on Sunday morning
Gunfire killed three people and wounded at least 11 in one of downtown Philadelphia’s most popular entertainment districts late on Saturday night, hours before separate shootings in Tennessee and Michigan left six dead and at least 16 wounded, authorities said.
The violence erupted as many, including Joe Biden, call on Congress to enact meaningful gun control measures, especially in the wake of deadly mass shootings last month in Buffalo, New York, and Uvalde, Texas.
In Philadelphia, police officers were patrolling the downtown area on South Street when numerous gunshots rang out, and they witnessed several suspects firing into a large crowd just before midnight, the city police inspector D F Pace said during a news conference.
An officer fired at one of the suspects from about 30 feet away, Pace said, but it was unclear if that person was struck.
“You can imagine there were hundreds of individuals just enjoying South Street, as they do every single weekend, when this shooting broke out,” Pace said.
At least two men and a woman were killed in the shooting, he said. Police later identified the slain victims as Kristopher Minners, 22; Alexis Quinn, 27; and Gregory “Japan” Jackson, 34.
The conditions of those who were wounded by gunfire remained unknown on Sunday afternoon.
Investigators processing the scene recovered two handguns, including one with an extended magazine, police said. No arrests were immediately announced. Pace said police were asking business owners to review video from surveillance cameras.
The department said on Twitter late on Saturday that people should avoid the area, which is home to nightlife entertainment venues, bars, restaurants and others businesses.
On Sunday, Philadelphia’s mayor, Jim Kenney, issued a statement calling the shooting “beyond devastating”.
“Once again, we see lives senselessly lost and those injured in yet another horrendous, brazen and despicable act of gun violence,” Kenney’s statement added.
Meanwhile, the shooting in Tennessee occurred near a nightclub in Chattanooga about 2.40am. Three were killed, 14 were struck and injured by bullets, and three were hit by cars while trying to flee the chaotic scene on McCallie Avenue, police there said.
The Chattanooga police chief, Celeste Murphy, suggested investigators suspected there were multiple shooters drawn into a dispute among each other, but detectives were still trying to figure out what sparked the gunfire.
“We’re trying to determine exactly what happened and what led up to this taking place,” Murphy said, adding that officers believed there was no active threat to Chattanooga residents in general as of Sunday afternoon.
Sixteen of the wounded in Chattanooga were adults, and one was a minor, police said. Six other minors were injured in a shootout the previous weekend in Chattanooga.
In another shooting early on Sunday, three people were killed in Saginaw, Michigan, authorities said.
MLive.com reported that police responded to a report of multiple gunshots around 2.30am. Two men were pronounced dead at the scene, and a woman died later at a hospital of her wounds.
Two other men also were shot. They arrived at a hospital in personal vehicles and were being treated for their injuries, according to a news release from the police department in Saginaw, about 100 miles north-west of Detroit.

(Outside)The award-winning singer’s effortless fifth album channels Patsy Cline and features a soaring duet with fan Willie Nelson
She’s laden with every music award her adopted homeland New Zealand can muster, but the queen of Kiwi country deserves a wider audience. This fifth album may help locate it, boasting a duet with Willie Nelson on Beyond the Stars, a waltz full of tumbling guitars and sweeping strings with Neilson soaring effortlessly above. Strong-voiced 50s divas such as Patsy Cline – of whom Willie is reminded – remain a central strand of Neilson’s work and she handles a potentially saccharine number with brio, its accompanying video exhibiting Neilson’s impressive way with gothic frockery.
I Can Forget is a grief-stricken companion piece, another tribute to her late father and to Canada’s Neilson Family Band in which Tami cut her teeth – at age 10 she once opened for Kitty Wells. She still co-writes with her brothers. She knows her industry, and fires several broadsides against its patriarchy here, among them a title track that overreaches its cinematic ambitions, its style in sharp contrast to the angry thrash of Mama’s Talkin’ and the proto-rap of Careless Woman. She delivers a capsule autobiography in similar bare-bones fashion on King of Country Music, and a women-empowering croon on Baby, You’re a Gun. The Kiwi queen remains an imperious talent.

Extinction, a new book by Marc Schlossman, explores endangered and extinct species and the factors threatening them through a rare behind the scenes look at one of the most important sets of natural history collections in the world at the Field Museum in Chicago
Mon 6 Jun 2022 07.00 BST
Last modified on Thu 9 Jun 2022 08.55 BST

In a message at the climax of celebrations, monarch acknowledges her fragility but commits to continue her reign
The Queen crowned her historic platinum jubilee celebrations with a last-minute appearance on the balcony of Buckingham Palace on Sunday, bringing to a close four days of festivities that revealed not only the contents of her handbag, but a nation’s undiminished appetite for a party.
The 96-year-old monarch waved to cheering crowds gathered in the Mall for the carnival climax of the four-day bank holiday weekend.
She was accompanied only by those closest to the throne, a tableau of the future of Britain’s monarchy, with the Prince of Wales, the Duchess of Cornwall, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and their children; an image incorporating three future kings, and two future queens.
This was the people’s day of the jubilee, as thousands of street parties were held across the UK. In London it did not, as threatened, rain on the Queen’s parade, as a carnival extraordinaire featured a two mile-long pageant dedicated to the only monarch most of us have ever known.
It was initially uncertain whether the Queen, whose mobility issues had caused her to miss so much of the jubilee, would be fit enough to attend. The first indication came when the royal standard was raised above Buckingham Palace at 4.30pm, meaning she had arrived.
Later, in a written message of thanks to the nation, she seemed to acknowledge her fragility, but committed to continue as monarch, saying: “When it comes to how to mark 70 years as your Queen, there is no guidebook to follow. It really is a first. But I have been humbled and deeply touched that so many people have taken to the streets to celebrate my platinum jubilee.
“While I may not have attended every event in person, my heart has been with you all; and I remain committed to serving you to the best of my ability, supported by my family.
“I have been inspired by the kindness, joy and kinship that has been so evident in recent days, and I hope this renewed sense of togetherness will be felt for many years to come.”
Along the route from Whitehall to Buckingham Palace, retracing her coronation procession, more than 6,000 participants – celebrities, costumed performers and colourful characters on extravagant floats – paraded through central London.
The procession, telling the story of the Queen’s seven-decade reign, was led by the gold state coach, more than 250 years old and a poignant symbol of the coronation.
The monarch appeared as a hologram, projected on its windows in archive footage of her as a young sovereign waving to crowds.
The pageant marked the end of a four-day, flag-waving orgy of patriotism; military ceremonials; crowds thronging the Mall; beacons and bunting; Buckingham Palace transformed by light shows and a spectacular drone display.
An average of 11.2 million TV viewers – reaching a peak of 13.4 million – tuned in to watch Saturday’s Platinum Party at the Palace and the unveiling of the biggest secret of all, the Queen demonstrating her capacity to still surprise, and her superb comic timing, in a small cameo having tea with Paddington Bear, and revealing – after seven decades – the marmaladey contents of her famous handbag.
Earlier on Sunday, Charles, who had paid tribute to “Her Majesty – Mummy”, and Camilla joined a Big Jubilee Lunch at The Oval, in south London.
His hope was that the spirit of togetherness, engendered over the weekend, would endure, telling guest Sarah Friar, CEO of neighbourhood app Nextdoor: “When it comes to Monday, are we going to go back to all the bickering again? Let’s hope we don’t do that.” Gemma Snow, from the Eden Project, who also spoke to Charles, said he talked about “keeping that togetherness going”.
There were royals aplenty in the royal box, but the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, who flew in from California last week with children Archie, three, and Lilibet, one, were not present. Absent from the palace balcony on Thursday, the couple have only been seen in public on one occasion when they appeared with other members of the royal family at Friday’s service of thanksgiving.
The final carnival act of the jubilee took place around the Queen Victoria Memorial outside Buckingham Palace, as the £15m pageant concluded in a finale with Ed Sheeran performing his hit Perfect, followed by a mass rendition of the national anthem.
A roll call of British stars, from TV, film, music and sport from each era of the Queen’s reign had travelled the route in eight open-top buses. They included Idris Elba, Alan Titchmarsh, Sir Cliff Richard, fashion royalty Kate Moss and Naomi Campbell, as well as the puppet Basil Brush.
There were dames in vintage cars, including Joan Collins, Darcey Bussell, Prue Leith, Twiggy and Zandra Rhodes. A peloton of 300 cyclists, on vintage bikes, was led by Sir Chris Hoy, Dame Laura Kenny and husband Sir Jason Kenny. A nod to Britain’s history was provided by parades of classic motorbikes, scooters, Morris Minors and vintage Land Rovers, with dancers performing the Lambeth Walk.
A fleet of Aston Martins represented James Bond. There were hippies, hula-hoopers, energetic space hoppers, Daleks, ice-cream vans, a towering cake with corgi toppers, and giant puppets – all accompanied by a cacophony of musical hits from decades past.
More than 85,000 Big Jubilee lunches were held, according to organisers.
In reality, it was a jubilee without its leading lady for much of the time, as she missed the thanksgiving service, the Epsom Derby and the pop concert. The Queen was on public view in person for just over 27 minutes throughout the weekend.

Lenny Abrahamson says characters in the books and TV adaptations less encumbered than his own generation
The Irish director behind Conversations With Friends and Normal People has said he loved depicting a modern and unencumbered Ireland in the hit TV programmes.
Lenny Abrahamson, who adapted Sally Rooney’s first two novels for the screen, said he noticed striking differences between the Ireland of Rooney’s generation and his own.
“I found it fascinating to visit the lives of people in pretty much the same place that I had been. I went to Trinity College, I remember my feelings walking through the gate for the first time, so I can directly compare those two generations,” he told the Radio Times.
“I found that really exhilarating and positive. I thought: God, these people and the world that they’re inhabiting is so much less encumbered by some of the stuff that Irish people had on their backs when I was that age. So, recognising this is an opportunity to show this culture and this place in its new form.”
Abrahamson, 55, best known for his 2015 film Room, which received four Oscar nominations, said he believed cliches of Ireland were still out there. “Sally’s work is like a massive palate cleanser, it resets your expectations,” he said.
Both Normal People, Rooney’s searing tale of teenage first love, and Conversations With Friends, which focuses on the relationships between a group of young Dubliners, broke out of the online-only, youth-focused BBC Three to become huge BBC One hits. They propelled the careers of the actors Daisy Edgar-Jones and Paul Mescal (Normal People), as well as Alison Oliver who stars alongside Joe Alwyn in Conversations With Friends.
Abrahamson said he felt a responsibility for younger actors when filming the sex scenes prevalent in both shows. One such scene in Normal People lasted more than nine minutes, making up a third of the episode.
“The intimacy in these series is an essential part of the story. It’s not decorative. We did feel great responsibility, so within the filming [we had] an intimacy coordinator. We created a safe environment and we showed the actors the episodes before they were broadcast, to make sure they were happy,” he said.
After the release of Normal People, clips of intimate scenes were taken out of context and distributed on porn websites. At the same time, callers to the RTÉ Radio 1 show Liveline voiced complaints about the sex scenes in the show.
Abrahamson said everyone involved with the show felt confident that their work was “good and important” and could be defended. “I don’t think any of that [the repurposing of footage on porn websites] hurt any of the actors.”
The production team were quick to get any clips taken down from porn sites, he said. “I think that’s all you can do, otherwise you’re letting the worst people in society determine what you can do because of how they’ll construe it.”
Abrahamson said the viewer complaints reflected Ireland’s historically Catholic culture. “But ultimately I think it was a positive experience. That Liveline episode became iconic precisely because it doesn’t represent the country now. We could look at it and shake our heads, whereas before that was the dominant view,” he said.

Judge in copyright case confers status on Only Fools and Horses character after lawyers asked him to watch three episodes
Derek “Del Boy” Trotter, the aspirational market trader in the TV sitcom Only Fools and Horses, would probably raise a proud lovely jubbly toast to his newly acquired status of “literary work” following a high court copyright ruling he would hail as cushty.
Del Boy’s status was legally defined after a company, set up by the creator of the award-winning BBC comedy, won its copyright battle with the operators of an “interactive theatrical dining experience” Only Fools the (Cushty) Dining Experience.
Lawyers representing Shazam Productions, set up by the Only Fools and Horses creator John Sullivan, who died in 2011, alleged that the operators of the dining experience company had infringed copyright in the sitcom scripts and copyright in “each of the central characters”.
Described as a “part-scripted, part improvised” dramatic performance, the dining experience’s paying customers enjoyed drinks and a three-course meal while interacting with actors playing central characters from the sitcom: Del Boy, his brother Rodney, Uncle Albert, Boycie, Marlene, Cassandra, Trigger and DCI Roy Slater.
Lawyers for Shazam, said the characters had the “distinctive character traits conceived by John Sullivan” and used their “signature phrases and ways of speaking” – including Del Boy’s mangled French.
One key issue of the case, which was heard in March, was if the scripts of Only Fools and Horses were “literary works” – which enjoy a higher standard of copyright protection – or “dramatic works”.
Lawyers for Shazam, a company owned by Sullivan’s family, had asked Judge John Kimbell to watch three episodes of the sitcom, giving him a box set for research.
In his ruling published on Wednesday, the judge said that the character of Del Boy was a literary work, and that each script of the series was a dramatic work. He also ruled there were “significant commonalities” between the sitcom scripts, and those of the theatrical dining experience that had been copied from the series, and could not be defended on the grounds of parody or pastiche.
“I do not accept that the nature of Only Fools the (Cushty) Dining Experience was so removed from Only Fools and Horses as to make it obvious that it was not associated with Only Fools and Horses,” he said.
“The similarity in the dress and appearance of the characters in the publicity material for Only Fools the (Cushty) Dining Experience, the use of the Only Fools domain name were, in my judgment, such that it was likely to cause casual observers to consider that the Only Fools the (Cushty) Dining Experience show was officially authorised and associated with Only Fools and Horses.”
Jim Sullivan, the creator’s son, had told the court he found the defendants’ show difficult to watch, not just because “it is, in my opinion, of poor quality”, but also because the defendants had “essentially written a new episode of Only Fools (albeit, in my opinion, very badly) and in doing so, have copied my dad’s work”.
Operators of the dining experience show contended that their use of the characters and materials from the sitcom did not amount to material that could be protected by copyright. They denied “passing off” – essentially tricking customers into thinking it was an officially endorsed product – on the “footing” that their show would not be seen as connected with the owners of the intellectual property in the sitcom, but as an unofficial tribute show, and questioned whether Shazam, rather than the BBC, owned goodwill attached to the name Only Fools and Horses.
In a statement after the ruling, Sullivan, a director of Shazam, said: “This case was about protecting John Sullivan’s legacy and the integrity of his work. Only Fools and Horses did not just magically appear out of thin air overnight. It took my dad decades of personal experience, skill and hard graft to create and develop an imaginary world rich in memorable characters, dialogue, jokes, plots and history.”
He added: “This legal action has taken a long time and has not for one moment been pleasant for me or my family. That said, some things are worth fighting for, and this will always be one of them.”

Gerald Mahood always knew he was adopted and for decades accepted he would never meet his biological mother. Then he found a clue to his past on a piece of paper kept in a wardrobe
Gerald Mahood was 60 when he discovered that this was his real name. He always knew he was adopted. “A bastard!” as his adoptive mother explained when he was four. He was born in Northern Ireland in the 1950s and like many babies whose mothers were not married at the time, he entered the world as a secret. The midwives – nuns – placed an advert in the Belfast Chronicle. “Home for an unwanted child, sort of thing,” he says.
The only comment the social worker’s report made about his adoptive parents was that their house was clean. His birth mother has said that she “handed me to them, and then they drove off with me,” Mahood says, though he is still unsure about his first few years, and he may have been placed with another family first. At around three, he moved from Northern Ireland to south-west England.
For decades, Mahood lived with the understanding that he would never know his biological mother. His adoptive parents discouraged questions. From time to time, he tried to explore his past, but, with no birth certificate, he hit a wall. Besides, he says, “I’ve known people who are adopted and [reconnecting] hadn’t gone well. For a long time I thought, ‘Let sleeping dogs lie’. But it kept haunting me.”
When his adoptive mother had a fall in 2018, he and his youngest daughter gathered clothes to take to the hospital for her. In the wardrobe, they found a piece of paper listing family names and birthdates. “My date of birth was not what I thought. This made me think, ‘One more roll of the dice’,” But he says he acted only after his adoptive mother died, in 2020. He presumed that both his biological parents “would probably be dead” too.
However, a social worker in Northern Ireland “did some detective work and got my mother’s name … She met my mum, took photos,” including a photograph of Mahood’s late father. “She said, ‘Do you want to meet her? She’s wanted to meet you all her life.’”
“As soon as Covid restrictions were lifted, I went to Northern Ireland,” Mahood says. His daughters, 40 and 36, “came over to support me. For me, it was like heaven. This is the place my ancestors come from. The rolling countryside, the space, it’s very idyllic.
“We were greeted at the gate by a strangely familiar-looking woman, who threw her arms around me, and said, ‘You’re a Mahood!’ I’d never met her before – she was my cousin. She led us into my mother’s cottage, and there she was – my actual mother. ‘You took your time!’ she said. When I looked into her eyes, it was like looking into a mirror.”
Mahood, 63, and his mother, 92, have talked on the phone every week since – “about birds, gardening, everyday stuff. I think we both feel very redeemed that we have had a year of being able to speak to each other,” he says.
Mahood has always drawn and painted, since early childhood. “It was my creative outlet, my refuge,” he says. He never felt he belonged in his adoptive family, nor at school. “Me and my pals who were secondary modern, we were really just expected to go on the shovel. We were all scratching around. Mostly it was about music and forming bands and getting high.”
In his 30s, after a string of casual jobs (roofing, house painting, etc.), Mahood undertook a fine art degree, but afterwards his painting lapsed while he worked. Over the past two years, “I’ve gone back to taking my painting seriously. With real joy,” he says. In finding his mother, “Some kind of spiritual thing has happened to me, which has been very, very beneficial.”
He has begun to use his birth name, including on his art website. Reconnecting with his birth mother has been transformative. It has given him access to his ancestry: “There’s family history going back at least to the battle of the Boyne” – and it has given him permission to take himself more seriously as an artist.
“It’s been a wonderful blessing. There is a light at the end of the tunnel sometimes, and it is unbelievable to me to have found it.”
Gerald’s art can be found at: geraldmahood-artist.com
Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?

Author Laura Kay is part of a new wave of authors releasing uplifting queer literature that casts its characters as the heroes of their lives – not the victims
“I have read some really fantastic fiction about queer women, but I have quite often felt that it leans towards the slightly gloomier side,” says author Laura Kay. For the London-based writer, it was natural that her debut novel, The Split, would be a romcom. “I really just wrote the story that I wanted to read,” she says. Published last year, the story follows Ally, who, after a savage break-up, moves to Sheffield – taking her ex-girlfriend’s cat, Malcolm, with her.
Only after The Split was published did Kay realise its significance. “Other people started reading it, and telling me, ‘Oh my God, this is the first time I’ve read this story about queer women,’” she says. Readers praised the novel for being refreshingly joyful and funny – including a happy ending, which is not that common for a book with an LGBTQ+ plot. Kay also deliberately avoided reference to any trauma surrounding Ally’s sexuality.
Published in April, Kay’s most recent book, Tell Me Everything, is another romcom, this time about therapist Natasha, who is still living with her ex-girlfriend. But Kay’s book is far from alone. This summer, a host of LGBTQ+ romcom novels are coming out (excuse the pun), crammed with blossoming romances and glittery escapism. “It feels like there’s sort of a shift,” says Kay. “I think that’s because the people that make the decisions are seeing that there’s an audience that are desperate to read queer romcoms.”
These titles include Lily Lindon’s recently published Double Booked, about a 26-year-old woman who realises that she is bisexual, and two queer coming-of-age novels: Cynthia So’s young adult novel If You Still Recognise Me and Henry Fry’s First Time for Everything. It’s a boom reflected in film and TV, too, notably with the release of Netflix’s Heartstopper, based on Alice Oseman’s graphic novel of the same name.
“Whenever I saw queer women represented, which was almost never, it always ended in tragedy,” says author Adiba Jaigirdar. “Even more than that, I never saw queer Muslim women represented or queer women of colour.” In a sign that this trend will continue, Jaigirdar releases her novel, Donut Fall in Love, next year. It sounds delightfully messy: Bangladeshi-Irish teen Shireen goes on a baking show with her ex-girlfriend and another girl on whom she develops a crush.
It follows Jaigirdar’s first two novels, The Henna Wars – which was included in TIME’s 100 Best Young Adult Books of All Time – and Hani and Ishu’s Guide to Fake Dating, both featuring heartwarming love stories between young queer Muslim women. Until now, people like Jaigirdar had “never been given the narrative of happiness,” she says.
Although not strictly a romcom, Ryan O’Connell’s uplifting Just By Looking at Him, published earlier this month, offers much-needed representation to LGBTQ+ people with disabilities – the main character being a gay man with cerebral palsy – while Florence Given’s Girlcrush, published in August, is described by the author as: “queer, hilarious and full of joy”. Matt Cain’s latest novel The Secret Life of Albert Entwistle follows Albert, a closeted 64-year-old postman, as he sets out to reconnect with his former boyfriend. Cain believes the increase in LGBTQ+ fiction is in part the result of “greater visibility”, which he says has “showed the general population that we’re just like them”.
He adds that “acceptance is so much higher now than it was when I was growing up in the 1980s, way higher than I ever expected it would be.”
The Secret Life of Albert Entwistle has connected with straight and LGBTQ+ readers alike, Cain says. “Queer fiction can be freeing for all kinds of people who’ve felt limited or rejected or shamed by society,” he says.
Largely because of the popularity of Netflix’s Bridgerton, there’s a new demand for queer regency romcoms. One such historical romance is Alexis Hall’s A Lady for a Duke , which has a transgender heroine. Meanwhile Lex Croucher’s Infamous, out in July, is described on the cover as “Booksmart meets Bridgerton”, and includes bisexual, lesbian and non-binary characters. Croucher’s previous novel Reputation was another regency-era romcom. “The publishing industry is coming to the realisation that there is an audience for this stuff, there is money to be made telling these stories,” Croucher says.
It was while reading Casey McQuiston’s 2019 novel Red, White and Royal Blue that, says Croucher, “made everything click into place” when it came to their own bisexuality. “I’ve seen for myself, in my own life, how much of an impact seeing those journeys reflected in fiction can have on a person,” they add. McQuiston’s hotly anticipated next book, I Kissed Shara Wheeler, a young-adult fiction romcom, came out in May.
For authors writing queer romcoms, though, there is the added complexity of deciding when to represent the traumas that many LGBTQ+ still face, such as discrimination and familial rejection. Indeed, authors quoted in this article stressed the importance of having books focusing on these issues, coexisting with the positive stories.
This was the case for Chencia C Higgins who, in her recent novel D’Vaughn and Kris Plan a Wedding, incorporates obstacles faced by character D’Vaughn who comes out to her religious family, while still ensuring that “my girls get their happily ever after”, she says. “Having queer romcoms exploding the way they’re doing has been so awesome,” Higgins says. “Queer people are out here, living and loving, and having a grand old time, and we need to see that in our books.”
Higgins is also giving much-needed representation of queer black women in a genre dominated by white authors. “For so many black queer women, they do not see themselves and they deserve to,” she says. The impact of her latest book is clear. “This is the kind of feelgood black LGBTQ romance I’ve been craving and the world could use more of,” reads one five-star online review.
Kay, meanwhile, has chosen to include some “struggles around queerness” in her next book, but says the “overall message is that there is joy and happiness to be found for everyone”. Yes, LGBTQ+ people may face additional barriers, but lots of us just want our happy ending, too – whatever form that may take.

The comic’s memoir, about trauma and incontinence, lands on stage after a long delay with wit, depth and fart jokes
A musical about trauma, fart jokes and incontinence, The Bedwetter, based on Sarah Silverman’s memoir of her New Hampshire childhood, arrives at the Atlantic Theater after a long and terrible delay. In March 2020, as New York City’s theaters closed, the show paused its rehearsals. And then, on 1 April 2020, Adam Schlesinger, the musical’s composer and a founding member of the sportive rock band Fountains of Wayne died, an early casualty of the pandemic’s first wave and the worst possible April Fool’s joke.
This gives The Bedwetter – clever, comic, small-scale splendid – a mournful metatext and a kind of terrible irony. Because The Bedwetter includes many bad jokes, nearly all of them delivered by the 10-year-old Sarah (Zoe Glick, a ball of big pubescent energy), a precocious misfit. And it is also a musical about taking the worst that life gives you, accepting it and moving on. Which is of course what The Bedwetter itself has done.
The show opens in 1980 or thereabouts when Sarah, a fifth-grader, has moved to a new town, a consequence of her parents’ divorce. Her mother, Beth Ann (Caissie Levy), can’t get out of bed. Her father, Donald (Darren Goldstein), beds every woman in town. Her big sister, Laura (Emily Zimmerman), disappears into the popular crowd and her grandmother, Nana (Bebe Neuwirth), into the bottom of a glass.
Sarah is a weirdo. And proud of it, too. She owns her hirsuteness, her dorkiness, her outre fashion sense. She is, she sings, “too Jew-y to ignore” and has a particular gift for celebrity impressions, at least when it comes to celebrity farts. But Sarah is also a bedwetter, which fills her with shame – even as it empties her of urine. Outed as incontinent in front of her classmates, she retreats from school and receives a diagnosis of clinical depression from an ethically dubious shrink who puts her on a mammoth dose of Xanax – in a number with a chorus of singing and dancing pills – and then kills himself. (This all really happened, except for the dancing tablets.)
Clinical depression isn’t the kind of thing you cure with a ballad. Neither for that matter is bedwetting. (Silverman rarely spent a dry night until she turned 16.) Which means that The Bedwetter, with a book by Silverman and the playwright Joshua Harmon, lacks a traditional narrative arc, ending in a moment of both triumph and inconclusion. Schlesinger’s brisk, bright, pert songs tend to cruise blithely by rather than lodging in the heart or brain. The physical production can feel small for its age, with sets, by Laura Jellinek that twirl around and around like dizzy ballerinas without wholly suggesting bedrooms or classrooms. Byron Easley is credited with the choreography but dancing pills aside, the dance is largely a postscript.
And yet, for all of that, The Bedwetter doesn’t feel slight. Like a good mattress it has both bounce and genuine heft. This owes in part to the knowledge of Schlesinger’s loss, but as much or more to what he has left us – an adroit musical that treats the emotional life of a child with the complexity and the seriousness it deserves. And the emotional lives of the adults, too.
Under Anne Kauffman’s direction, no character feels stock. The principal cast endows the Silverman family with real psychology and emotional depth. Even the supporting cast – Ashley Blanchet as Miss New Hampshire, Rick Crom as two shrinks, Ellyn Marie Marsh in a variety of roles – locate nuance even in big, broad comedy.
As a musical, it is both quiet and loud, crude and kind, diffuse in its structure, but clear in its aims and lucid in its understanding of psychology and growth. And even if the ending doesn’t really end anything, it still feels like completion, like success. For a show of and about so many bad jokes, that’s one hell of a punchline.

Have teenagers taken control of publishing? With some authors notching up a billion views, we look at how TikTok is electrifying the world of books – creating bestsellers, reviving classics and rescuing neglected genres
It’s four o’clock on a sunny Saturday afternoon and the Krispy Kreme doughnut stall is doing a brisk trade at Lakeside shopping centre, a huge mall in Essex. But a few metres further along, young shoppers are salivating over a different sort of treat. A girl in a silky red dress runs her fingers along the spines of nine novels by bestselling YA author Colleen Hoover, while a couple of twentysomething men in biker jackets pore over shelves of manga comics. They’re in a Waterstones that has been laid out like a pick-and-mix stall, with brightly jacketed paperbacks piled on round tables, or grouped seductively in booths, under headings such as “Romance” or “LGBTQ+”. Alice Oseman’s Heartstopper – a graphic novel series about a love affair between two schoolboys that’s now a Netflix show – has a table to itself.
All this is down to #BookTok, a niche on the platform TikTok that became a social media sensation in the early months of Covid, and has been gathering momentum ever since. “We used to rely on millennials,” says the store’s 30-year-old manager, Peter. “But now the majority of our customers are teenagers, who have money and influence and want to find their own stories. A lot of black and Asian authors are coming through. I always wanted to have an LGBTQ section and now it wouldn’t make sense not to. It’s exciting. You can see publishing changing. It’s made it fun to come into work.”
The BookTok aesthetic is fast and furious, with fans sobbing over plotlines or caressing their books in homemade clips set to music. @groovytas, a Toronto-based BookToker with 109,000 followers, knows all the tricks. “It’s the fact that she knew, no matter what he did, she’d still love him,” she recites, turning away with a despairing shrug, beneath the jacket image of a self-published romance called Addicted to You. In some videos, @groovytas teasingly holds the book she’s talking about upside down. In others, she hosts authors or muses about such crucial readerly issues as what it means to visualise a character. If you like her approach, you’ll be directed to similar creators, sucking you into a BookTok community.
At the same time as the Lakeside event, Harper Voyager, the sci-fi, horror and fantasy specialist, is hosting a weekend house party at the Welsh book town of Hay-on-Wye, with eight BookTok creators. The purpose is to launch two novels and give notice of a new YA imprint, Magpie Books. The event is billed as publishing’s first Creator House – a physical space where creators and influencers get together to generate a buzz. It’s a jolly affair, with tarot readings from YA author Juno Dawson (whose latest novel is Her Majesty’s Royal Coven) and a quiz by Saara El-Arifi (debut author of fantasy novel The Final Strife).
A jaunty 30-second #BookTok video by @abbysbooks, set to Louis Prima’s 1964 hit Che La Luna, gives a finger-clicking tour of an idyllic country cottage packed full of personally signed copies and book-themed goodies. Within days, this video has been liked more than 7,000 times. Overall, says Harper Voyager, the content generated from the weekend scored 170,000 views.
For the authors, it’s not a bad start. But in BookTok terms, it’s a drop in the ocean. Its latest Top 10, derived from views by hashtag, is headed by fantasy author Leigh Bardugo’s Six of Crows, which has notched up more than a billion views. Second place is Hoover’s It Ends With Us, just shy of 800m. In one of BookTok’s more surprising coups, Madeline Miller’s 2011 novel The Song of Achilles, a reimagining of Homer’s Iliad, takes seventh place with 323m views.
Hoover is a 42-year-old former social worker from Texas who self-published her first romantic thriller in 2012, and later sold it to Simon & Schuster, for which she is currently writing a 10th novel. She’s thoughtful, open and unfazed by success. “I got into the book world by accident,” she says. “A few readers shared my first book and it grew from there. It was a combination of good timing and good luck. I had no idea the book was considered a romance – I didn’t write to fit into a genre. It just so happened that the book was the genre readers were seeking out.”
Her Simon & Schuster stablemate, Spanish-born Elena Armas, is a more recent arrival, a bibliophile who graduated from chemical engineering to multiplatform book blogging many years ago, but didn’t start writing novels until the pandemic. She self-published her debut romcom, The Spanish Love Deception, in 2021. “At first, sales were OK, at least for someone who had low expectations,” she says. “It wasn’t until months after publication that the book jumped into the Top 100 of the Kindle store on Amazon. It was all thanks to a TikTok featuring my book that had gone viral. The concept was simple: a girl relating the plot as if it was her own experience. At the end, she added: ‘If you want to know more, you can read The Spanish Love Deception.’ Millions of views later, sales and borrows multiplied and that led agents and publishers to contact me.”
The UK editor who works with both Hoover and Armas is Molly Crawford, who traces her interest in BookTok back to noticing the phrase “TikTok made me buy it” appearing on Amazon products. “BookTok’s influence on the book industry is one of the most hopeful things I’ve seen,” she says. “TikTok should be seen as the modern distilling of the purest form of bookselling. I see it as the algorithmic nurturing of what would otherwise be organic growth. My job is to publish books readers want to read so it would be wrong to ignore the global influence BookTok has had. It revealed there was a larger appetite for some genres, particularly romance and sci-fi, than publishing was satisfying.”
It’s not only new YA authors who have benefited from the BookTok boom. At Lakeside, Waterstones has a section devoted to Penguin’s clothbound classics, because BookTokers love beautiful volumes, especially if they have sprayed edges. @billreads, a Birmingham BookToker who has notched up 3.9m likes and just self-published his first LGBTQ+ fantasy novel under the name William J Wood, rated his sprayed-edge book collection on a scale of 1-10, with a punchline of 1111/10 for a purple hardback of Frank Herbert’s Dune with the moony cover image replicated on the page edges. “It’s fudging gorgeous,” he declared.
This article includes content provided by TikTok. We ask for your permission before anything is loaded, as they may be using cookies and other technologies. To view this content, click 'Allow and continue'.
Then there is the somewhat baffling phenomenon of previously published books suddenly hitting the jackpot. James Joyce’s Ulysses has been enjoying a run in the sun in the US after fans started posting about it. A video by self-confessed book nerd @jeninsight, riffling through its pages and declaring it “really weird” to the sound of Bach’s first cello suite, racked up 27,000 likes.
The Song of Achilles, according to Peter at Waterstones, owes its sudden success to a vogue for anything mythology-related. Publisher Bloomsbury, however, pinpoints a different element: “The new generation of readers connected first and foremost to one of the greatest gay love stories of all time,” it says. “In addition, The Song of Achilles became a cathartic release for readers when so many of them, due to the pandemic and lockdowns, were missing out on pivotal, formative experiences. Sharing their emotions about the fate of Achilles and Patroclus allowed them to connect with other readers wherever they were in the world. The popularity of Madeline Miller was led by real readers in their bedrooms – not through expensive advertising, or a multimillion dollar film.”
Miller recorded a thank you to her fans, but the general wisdom in publishing is steer clear. “Tbh I don’t really DO TikTok,” says Dawson. “I have it but don’t really post.” Her approach is the same as her stance on the reader reviewing community Goodreads. “It’s not for authors, it’s for readers. If they want to engage with me or my books, that’s great. But I’m very hands off.”
Hoover agrees. “Since the beginning of my career, I’ve looked at marketing on an app as more of a thank you than a way to seek out new readers. I try to join book clubs when possible. I host giveaways and sometimes private events at my home or my bookstore. I do as much as I can to reward readers who have helped my hobby become my dream job, but I am very bad at marketing to people who don’t already read my books.”
A recent experiment to push the first volume in a new trilogy by US thriller writer Don Winslow shows the pitfalls of publishers trying to get on down with the kids. Although set in Providence, Rhode Island, in 1986, in a nod to The Song of Achilles it’s being promoted as “a contemporary Iliad”. Its launch was accompanied by readalongs. Irish dance stars Gardiner Brothers posted videos of themselves dancing with the book, which Winslow then reposted on his own channel. A TikTok fan I asked to look into it for me was damning. “It’s unclear if the video is an ad or sponsorship, as there is no hashtag. Most comments are about the dancing (ha!) and not the book. So far, no buzz at all.”
At an international bookselling summit in Venice earlier this year, Waterstones’ famously unflamboyant managing director, James Daunt, said: “The one thing that seems evident is that authenticity matters. And a lot of it is innocent humour. We’ve generally found that the people with blue hair do better than the people with sensible haircuts. It’s about fun and enjoyment and enthusiasm. And the people who do it brilliantly are of the same generation. It’s our young booksellers. And we let them get on with it.”
There is, indeed, a bookseller with blue hair in a video put out by Waterstones Lakeside to promote its manga section. But the posts that do best, says Peter, are the ones that give behind-the-scenes glimpses of booksellers’ lives and personal enthusiasms. For a branch that has always served a commercial, rather than a literary, readership, BookTok has been a lifesaver.
“When we came out of the first lockdown,” he says, “we were all tentative about how retail would be impacted. And when we came out of the second one, it exploded. I’ve been working in bookselling for 10 years and it’s the biggest demographic change I’ve seen.”
The million dollar question is how long it will last. “It doesn’t seem to be going away,” says Peter. “We now rely on the people it brings in.” Harper Voyager’s publishing director Natasha Barden has wagered a whole new imprint, Magpie Books, on the new energy it has generated. “It’s fantastic when a new social media platform launches and allows brilliant books to find a whole new audience,” she says. “Book recommendations and discoverability have always been key to success. A platform that allows for authentic, reliable recommendations at a swipe is invaluable. And no, BookTok shows no signs of slowing down.”

Gardening trends may come and go. Yet there are some once ubiquitous styles of old-school horticulture that have been desperately out of fashion for so long that even someone in their 40s, like me, has only really seen them in the yellowed pages of dusty text books. Something so iconic of their time – the outdoor equivalent of crocheted doilies – that it is almost impossible to imagine them reinvented to be relevant and practical. So when something truly great comes along that shakes you out of your preconceptions, you have to be grateful. This is where I have to take back everything I have said about alpines.
I used to very unfairly think of this enormous and incredibly diverse group of plants from the world’s mountaintops as tiny and fussy. The kind of thing that was largely invisible amid the huge “currant bun” mounds of gravel and rocks you’d see in soulless 70s suburbia. Most of these had been long abandoned by the 90s when I was a kid, but even the most pristine examples I had seen in botanic gardens always had an imbalance of plants to hard landscaping. Vast, high-ceilinged glasshouses with huge concrete beds, where you had to play a kind of botanical “Where’s Wally” to spot any precious traces of greenery.
In my defence, it seems I was not the only one who felt this way. For years, the genre which once inspired cult-like devotion has been declining in popularity, with this year’s Chelsea Flower Show only featuring a single grower where once there would have been half a dozen. Thank goodness for that one! Right by one of the entrances of the main marquee I was stopped in my tracks by Scotland’s Kevock Garden Plants, which totally blew me away with their forensic level of detail, expertly replicating rugged alpine mountainsides in miniature. In a space not much larger than my bedroom, they had created a whole other world, populated by naturalistic communities of weird and wonderful plants. Standing absorbed in front of it during a couple of hours of filming, I felt like I, too, had been miraculously shrunk down and dropped into a fantasy land.
In the same way the terrariums I am obsessed with have suddenly seen a resurgence for their ability to encapsulate the feeling of vast, exotic landscapes on a tiny scale suitable for those with only tiny indoor spaces, it hit me that alpines are ideal for creating your own miniature worlds outdoors. One of those moments when you kick yourself for not having come to such an obvious realisation years earlier.
Even if all you have is a single large dish or tray on a balcony, with these plants you can lose yourself for hours in a paradise of your own creation, with species from all over the world. Aside from their insistence on full sun and a fast drainage substrate, most are straightforward to care for. The huge glasshouses they are often sited in are to keep the winter wet off them, but if you place your pot in the rain shadow of a building, or move it under cover in winter, that won’t be something you need to worry about.
With a new generation of aquarium stores selling an array of small, finely detailed rocks that look like miniature boulders and twisted hardwood twigs that resemble jungle branches, there are now far more hardscape options to really effectively cheat the convincing scale. The possibilities here for people who long to have vast gardens but live in small spaces are endless. I am blooming excited to get exploring. Thank you everyone at Kevock, for sparking my latest adventure.
Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek

Give the green light to early summer berries and savoury tarts
While I wait impatiently for the red and blackcurrants to appear in quantity and at a reasonable price, I make the traditional juice-saturated summer puddings with gooseberries instead. The first of our short-season summer fruits, their exceptional tartness is welcome, but can be softened with a little honey and a splash of elderflower cordial. My inclination is to serve them particular version with a jug of cream – in fact I would call it essential. Gooseberries, whether in a pie or a crumble, beg for cream rather than more piquant crème fraîche or yoghurt – which is why they make such a blissful fool.
The colour of such desserts, fools, ice-cream and this version of summer pudding is soft, reminiscent of a midsummer afternoon spent in the shade of the spreading canopy of a tree. You can lift this with a sprinkling of mint sugar, which will provide not only a splash of green but also a touch more sweetness for those who need it. I bring the pudding to the table with a jug of warm gooseberry juice sweetened with honey and one of cream, too.
The pale-green theme continues with the olive paste used to fill puff pastry tarts and their cargo of warm goat’s cheese. I chose to keep this recipe vegetarian, but you could introduce a few anchovy fillets – four is enough – if you fancy a little more piquancy. The paste is not only good for this, but also to serve with ravioli or, with a little more olive oil, as a dressing for pappardelle or other ribbon pastas.
A bowl of the olive paste is a jolly useful thing to keep in the fridge. Here at home the gorgeous, citrus-and-salt paste gets used as a dip for radishes and as a spread for carta de musica – the wafer-thin Italian crispbread – oatcakes and the like, but it also makes a deeply fragrant dressing for warm new potatoes for a salad.
You can prepare the olive paste for these tarts in advance, but you can also roll, cut and score the pastry cases, too. They can be kept in the fridge for a few hours until you are ready to bake. Makes 6 thin tarts
For the tarts:flour for dustingpuff pastry 240gegg 1, beatengoat’s cheese 180g, soft
For the paste:green olives 200g, stonedbasil 25g, leaves and stemsolive oil 75glemon 1
Line a baking sheet with baking parchment. Preheat the oven to 220C/ gas mark 8.
Lightly flour the work surface and roll out the pastry into a rectangle 30cm x 22cm. Have the long side facing you.
Cut the pastry sheet into 6 rectangles, roughly 15cm x 7cm. (In other words, cut the long side in half, then cut each of those lengthwise into 3.) Transfer the rectangles of pastry to the baking sheet, then score a rectangle inside each one, 1cm from the edge. Make sure not to cut through the pastry to the baking sheet.
Brush the outer rim of each piece of pastry with a little beaten egg, taking care not to let it run down the sides – it will prevent the pastry from rising. Bake in the preheated oven for 10 minutes.
Make the olive paste: put the olives in the bowl of a food processor, add the basil leaves and their stems and the olive oil. Finely grate the zest from the lemon and add to the bowl, then squeeze the lemon and add the juice. Process to a thickish paste.
With the pastry out of the oven, use the back of a spoon to carefully press down the centre, scored rectangle of pastry on each tart. Place 3 tbsp of the olive paste into each of the hollows.
Slice the goat’s cheese into thick rounds and place 2 or 3 on top of each tart. Bake for a further 10 minutes or until the cheese starts to melt. Eat warm.
A chilled, green summer pudding, its juices warmed and sweetened with honey. I sometimes add a sprinkling of mint sugar to the pale surface of the puddings – caster and mint leaves blitzed to a verdant green – and always serve them with a jug of cream or chilled custard – absolutely essential in my book.
gooseberries 850gwater 200mlelderflower cordial 3 tbspwhite bread 6 thin sliceshoney 2 tbsp
For the mint sugar (optional):caster sugar 3 tbspmint leaves 12, medium
You will also need 4 deep china ramekins 8cm in diameter and some transparent kitchen film.
Remove the stems and dried flowers from the gooseberries, then put the fruit in a stainless steel or enamelled saucepan with the water and bring to the boil. Lower the heat and let the fruit cook for 5-7 minutes or until the fruit is opaque and soft. Remove from the heat and stir in the elderflower cordial.
Line the inside of the ramekins with plastic film with enough overhanging to fold over the top once they are filled with bread and fruit. Using an 8cm biscuit cutter, cut out 8 discs from the bread and place 1 in the base of each of four 8cm ramekins. Reserve the remainder.
Cut the remaining bread into 2cm-wide rectangles and use to line the sides of the ramekins, trimming as necessary. Fill the bread-lined ramekins with the gooseberries – pack them quite tightly and reserve any extra juice – then place the reserved discs of bread on top. Press down with a spoon to saturate the breads with juice. Fold the overhanging film over the top and place each ramekin on a tray. Place a second tray and a heavy weight on top then refrigerate overnight.
The next day, warm the reserved juice (there should be about 200ml) in a saucepan and stir in the honey. Turn the puddings out of their dishes into serving bowls or deep plates. Peel off the film, then spoon the warmed juice over the puddings and serve with cream or custard.
If you would like to make the mint sugar topping, whiz the sugar and mint in a food processor until the sugar is bright green. Sprinkle on top of the puddings as you bring them to the table.
Follow Nigel on Twitter @NigelSlater

The 2022 Glastonbury festival closed out in explosive style, with furious moshpits, stunning special guests and giant clouds of confetti
Kendrick Lamar headlines on the Pyramid stage, in a performance that blended contemporary dance, avant garde theatre and mindblowing rap prowess. Photograph: Leon Neal/Getty
Olly Alexander of Years & Years performs with Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe of Pet Shop Boys on the Other stage. Photograph: Dave J Hogan/Getty Images
The crowd watches Pet Shop Boys performing on the Other stage. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA
Diana Ross performs on the Pyramid stage. Photograph: Samir Hussein/WireImage
Charli XCX throwing (new) shapes on the John Peel stage. Photograph: Kate Green/Getty Images
Lorde performs on the Pyramid stage, with the weekend’s most spectacular stage design. Photograph: Kate Green/Getty Images
Guy Garvey from Elbow with puppet Little Amal performing on the Pyramid stage, throwing their support behind refugees. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA
Amyl and the Sniffers on John Peel stage. Photograph: David Levene/The Guardian
Olly Alexander of Years & Years performs on the Other stage. Photograph: Kate Green/Getty Images
Herbie Hancock performs on the Pyramid stage – at 82, one of its oldest ever performers. Photograph: Dylan Martinez/Reuters
Fans in fancy dress watch as Herbie Hancock plays the Pyramid stage. Photograph: Guy Bell/Alamy Live News
Turnstile on the John Peel stage, creators of the weekend’s most unhinged moshpits. Photograph: David Levene/The Guardian
Jack White, the secret special guest on Park stage. Photograph: David Levene/The Guardian
Thousands of revellers dance beneath a 50-tonne laser-spewing and fire breathing-spider, at Arcadia. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA

The actor and campaigner came to Britain from Trinidad and Tobago in 1954 and rose to join Laurence Olivier’s National Theatre company. Clint Dyer and others explain why we should remember her
Pearl Prescod’s star soared high in her day. Born in Trinidad and Tobago, she became the first Black actor to play with the National Theatre company, under Laurence Olivier, in London in 1965. She appeared in the West End and on television, recorded radio plays, worked on the cabaret circuit and was also a prominent activist alongside Claudia Jones and Amy Ashwood Garvey. So why isn’t Prescod better known today?
Partly because her career was cut short by an untimely death – she had a brain haemorrhage at the age of 46, just a year after her breakthrough National Theatre role. But those excavating her forgotten legacy today think there is more to it than that. Coming to Britain in 1954, aged 34, on a music scholarship to the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, she was part of a larger group of well-educated, highly politicised Caribbean figures who arrived in the postwar era to make similarly impressive strides in culture and in consciousness-raising around race but whose names have since been forgotten.
The Institute of Race Relations (IRR) has brought out a pamphlet on Prescod’s life as part of an endeavour to shine a light on the overlooked stories of this generation of Caribbean artists and intellectuals. There is so much to unearth in the case of Prescod’s short but glittering life and work: in 1958, she appeared at the Royal Court, in Barry Reckord’s Flesh to a Tiger – a play directed by Tony Richardson but written by a Black writer about the Caribbean with a fully Black cast, who broke from the theatrical expectation of the time to speak in their own natural accents. She campaigned with Equity to secure more roles for Black British actors who were discriminated against, even for their Caribbean accents, and she marched to the US embassy in a parallel protest to Martin Luther King’s historic 1963 march on Washington. She also featured in the 1964 civil rights stage show made for TV called Freedom Road: Songs of Negro Protest.
Her son, Colin Prescod, was born in Trinidad and lived with his aunts and grandmother until the age of 13 when he joined Pearl in her home in Ladbroke Grove, west London, where she raised him as a single mother. He remembers watching her perform at the Royal Court on his first night in London. He met Olivier, too, when his mother was cast in the role of Tituba – a slave from Barbados accused of witchcraft – in the National’s staging of The Crucible, alongside Frank Finlay, Michael Gambon and Anthony Hopkins. He was a teenager when she got the part and did not appreciate its magnitude, not least because the company had only just come into being a couple of years earlier under Olivier. “I was in sixth form at the time and was backstage in the huge dressing room as Olivier came in. My mother was keen to see her son introduced to him so she said ‘Sir Laurence, this is my son …’ and Sir Laurence says to me, ‘Aren’t you proud of Pearly?’”
Prescod told Olivier that her son was thinking of making a career in acting but that she was trying to encourage him to complete his studies instead. “Laurence Olivier said ‘Pearly’s quite right, you really should finish your studies because an actor’s is a tough life – we’re not always working.’ I had really wanted to go on to the boards but that turned my head. I decided to pay attention to my A-levels and then went on to university.”
Clint Dyer, the current deputy artistic director at the National Theatre, says Prescod’s achievement in The Crucible cannot be overestimated: “We talk about the conscious and unconscious biases within racism today but imagine what she would have received at that time, and in a company led by a man [Olivier] who blacked up to play Othello.”
How far does Dyer think we have come since Prescod’s appearance? “We’ve come so far. Since September 2021 we have staged [shows by] four Black directors and writers, three south Asian writers and directors, and more to be announced next month. I wish Pearl Prescod could have seen the development happening right now. I didn’t think I’d see it in my own lifetime.”
Many younger Black practitioners he has spoken to feel they are the first, he says, but it is essential to remember past, groundbreaking figures such as Prescod “so that we can understand the context of how we work today”. The NT has its own initiative in the Black Plays Archive, he adds, which aims to incorporate otherwise forgotten Black British texts into the canon. “We are doing readings of these plays to find if we can put them on stage and make them into classics.”
Anya Edmond-Pettitt, coordinator of the Black History Collection at the IRR, says Prescod came to Britain in mid-life with a sophisticated understanding of empire, and with no sense of separation between her acting and her political activism, like many in her milieu.
Although she migrated at the same time as the Windrush generation, Prescod’s story differs from that prevailing narrative, which may be one reason why it has been forgotten, thinks Edmond-Pettitt. “It’s not to say that [the Windrush] narrative isn’t true or important but it’s not the only story. There were people who came from the Caribbean who did not become bus drivers, hospital porters and nurses. There’s a strange blindspot in that this is the only story we have of colonial migration to this country from the Caribbean.”
Prescod was part of a group that included the actors and singers Cy Grant and Edric Connor, and Pearl Connor, who created the first theatrical and literary agency for people of colour. Colin Prescod calls the pamphlet on her life an “archival teaser” that points to the fact that there are hosts of life stories that should be formally archived. “Many other names are worthy of being remembered, such as [the folk singer] Nadia Cattouse, [the actor] Earl Cameron and Errol John, who won the Observer award for best new playwright in 1957 and played Othello at the Old Vic. But who talks about him?”
He is, he adds, curious about how the NT’s latest production will present the figure of Tituba: “They can and should do interesting and different things with that character in 2022 than they would have done back in 1965.”
The educational pamphlet Pearl Prescod: A Black Life Lived Large is available now. The Crucible is at the National Theatre, London, from 14 September.

The Grammy-nominated UK singer on her journey from guesting on dance bangers to starring in Baz Lurhmann’s Elvis, and her long battle for recognition in the white, male-dominated Americana scene
When the rumours started that Baz Luhrmann was snooping around Nashville for someone to play Sister Rosetta Tharpe in his Elvis biopic, Yolanda Quartey knew she had to step up. The country-soul singer, known as Yola, is British but is based in the heartland of US roots music. She’d grown up listening to Tharpe back in Bristol and strongly related to her story.
Until recently, Tharpe’s contribution to laying the foundations for rock’n’roll in the 1930s and 40s – with her gutsy gospel singing and claw-hammer-plucked electric guitar, a huge influence on the Memphis Flash himself – had gone largely unsung in popular culture. Quartey has experienced that erasure first hand, too. Back when the 38-year-old was trying to make it in the UK, she says: “I was told by a record company exec that nobody wanted to hear a Black woman sing rock’n’roll.” She says the film is “for all the kids that have been told, because they’re of colour, that they can’t touch a guitar”, another insult that’s been levelled personally at her.
“Even though I knew that wasn’t the case,” she says, “I had to undo the mental programming.”
At first, Quartey questioned whether she should play the part of Tharpe. But she was used to being an English transplant in a very American setting. And then she thought: “Who’s gonna do it if I’m not? I don’t know if people get to see a plus-size, dark-skinned woman on screen at all at this level. I don’t see me up there enough.”
We’re about to see Yola up there, in the big time, a lot more. Not only is she starring in one of the biggest films of 2022 but she will close Glastonbury’s Left Field stage on Sunday. It’s a crucial milestone for the singer, who has risen rapidly in the US, where she now performs with the likes of Dolly Parton and Mavis Staples. Her debut album, 2019’s Walk Through Fire and its 2021 follow-up Stand for Myself – both produced by Dan Auerbach of The Black Keyswere praised for their genre fluidity, uniting the worlds of country and soul. That high regard is reflected in her six Grammy nominations. The Brit awards have yet to catch up: she’s never been nominated. “They say: go where you’re celebrated, right?” she quips.
In Nashville, Quartey is among what’s been called a “vanguard” of Black women – including Rhiannon Giddens and Allison Russell – who all used to live together and are redefining US roots music. It’s a sphere that has traditionally overlooked people of colour and change was long overdue. “We were pissed about it,” Quartey says, “and I’m like, well: ‘Let’s all do sick shit at the same time.’” They were tired of “tokenism” and the idea that there’s only room for one Black woman at the top. “It was about supporting each other,” she says, “not subscribing to the one in, one out situation that happens all the time. We can have 50,000 white guys with a guitar but we can only have one Black lady that does, frankly, anything.”
The Grammys have started to take note – this year the best American roots song category included Quartey, Russell, Giddens and Valerie June, and was won by Jon Batiste. Progress is “far from complete” but “definitely noticeable,” says Quartey. And yet the UK falls way behind. “​​I go to a jazz and blues festival in the US, I see lots of artists of colour performing. Not here. It’s embarrassing. We’re still under the illusion that this stuff doesn’t belong in the pantheon of Black music.”
Quartey was well prepped for Tharpe, having worked at a “sample replay company” in London for 15 years. There she would create soundalikes of famous music by intimately studying the vocalists, no matter the era. “It’s like singing-acting,” she says. “I have to get into the headspace of where that person was.” Additionally, she worked as a songwriter and session vocalist, appearing on a number of UK dance singles, including Blind Faith by Chase & Status. She breaks into its vocal hook: “‘Swee-eet sens-a-ti-on’. That’s little old muggins here.”
But rather than this work being yet another example of a Black woman not receiving her fair dues by white record producers, Yola says she had a gameplan. She even turned down joining Massive Attack’s band. “I hustled for years in dance music behind the scenes, and I’m one of the only people who did that purposefully. I didn’t want to put my name on tracks because otherwise that would become my brand. I get to decide what my brand is.” Around the same time, she was also fronting the Bristol country-soul band Phantom Limb, which was more in line with the Yola you hear today. Rather than gain name association, she wanted to be able to fund her own projects. “I wanted mon-ney,” she enunciates. “MONEY!”
Quartey is witty, self-assured and has a powerhouse voice that is river-deep, mountain-high, its gorgeous texture crackling like a dusty record. In conversation, she races through topics such as art versus autocracy and the time she taught “vocal biomechanics” at Bath Spa University. But she says that, despite having all the makings of a chart-topper, it’s little wonder she made a music career in the UK first. “The psychological programming that we all receive in this country tells you a narrative about Black femininity that blasts over to music.” There is a “will” to “erase dark-skinned Black women in this country from any visual or literary narrative” where “nice things happen to us”.
She says you only need to turn on the TV to see how. “Tell me the number of times you see someone that looks just like me: slightly plus, dark, in a balanced, happy family dynamic.” Or, she adds, “just a positive image of a Black woman.”
Quartey made most of Stand for Myself around the same time as working on Elvis, and they share key themes, such as the whitewashing of rock music and taking control of your own destiny. In one of the film’s most memorable sections, we see Colonel Tom Parker insisting Presley wears a twee festive jumper for a televised special. Presley retaliates by later giving the encore performance of a lifetime in head-to-toe black leather. Perhaps it’s no coincidence that Quartey is dressed today in head-to-toe black latex. She’s had people try to put her in a metaphorical Christmas jumper before, too. “I’ve had managers like that … I’ve tolerated a lot,” she says. And then she deadpans: “The Christmas jumper is white supremacy.”
Yola is only in Elvis long enough to sing Tharpe’s Strange Things Happening Every Day, resplendent in gold satin, guitar strapped on, in a club on Memphis’s fabled Beale Street. And enough for us to hear that Tharpe discovered Little Richard (her queerness or direct influence on Elvis isn’t mentioned). But collectively, along with Richard, BB King, Big Mama Thornton and Big Boy Crudup, these artists’ presence in the film underlines that hip-swivelling music in no way started with the “king of rock’n’roll”. But also that he wasn’t as guilty of nicking Black music as some might think.
“We’ve made Elvis a bit of a whipping child of appropriation,” says Quartey, “but we haven’t had the full story. Without being a, like, appropriation apologist, he’s growing up as the token white guy in Blacksville – how are you not going to be exposed to that [music]?” The film at least faces up to the implications of these things. In one scene, Elvis tells BB King that he’d love to cover Little Richard’s Tutti Frutti and King responds that Elvis would make more money with it than Richard could ever dream of. “This movie doesn’t dance around the uncomfortableness,” nods Quartey.
Nor does she: Yola is taking over screens, muddy festival scenes and, later this summer, two shows in London, without ever shying away from saying what she thinks about subjects that are too often avoided. It’s going to be a huge homecoming. “I have a mission,” she says, “and I’m extremely bloody-minded about it.”
Yola plays Koko, London, on 20 and 21 July and headline Glastonbury’s Left Field stage on 26 June. Elvis is in cinemas from 24 June.

Got something you’d like to ask the Mission: Impossible and Deep Impact actor? Send it our way and we’ll put it to him
There’s aren’t many actors who can put “hand picked by Tom Cruise” on their CV. Scottish actor Dougray Scott was personally cast by TC to play rogue Impossible Missions Force agent and chief bad guy in 2000’s Mission: Impossible II – famous for that Cruise/Scott motorbike fighting scene. It’s a role that propelled the Twin Town and Deep Impact actor to international fame, even if it did mean he lost the role of Wolverine for 2000’s X-Men (to Hugh Jackman) after filming on MI2 overran. Scott was also apparently in the running to take over Bond in 2006’s Casino Royale, but was pipped to the post by Daniel Craig.
But let’s not worry about all that. This is a safe, happy space where we can quiz the Scot on working with John Malkovich in 2002’s Ripley’s Game; Emilia Fox and Billie Piper in 2005 British caper Things to Do Before You’re 30; and Liam Neeson in 2014’s Taken 3. On the small screen, he has appeared in everything from Taggart and Batwoman to Desperate Housewives and the 2009 BBC adaptation of The Day of the Triffids, and played everyone from Moses to Dr Jekyll/Mr Hyde.
Taking his stage name from his grandmother’s surname, Stephen Dougray Scott would very much like to draw your attention to the first ever Kingston international film festival happening in Kingston on Thames this very weekend (24–26 June), to which Scott lends his name as festival ambassador. In return, Scott has kindly offered to answer all your queries on his career, breaking the industry and what he had for breakfast. (Oats, presumably. But which are best? Quaker or Scott’s?) So pop your best question in the comments below by 12 midday on 29 June, and we’ll print his answers in Film & Music and online soon.
Kingston International film festival runs 24–26 June.

Hilariously subtitled by comedian Julia Davis, this film sees an unhappy couple go to a horny guru – played by Jemaine Clement – to fix their marriage
The titular festivities of Nude Tuesday don’t arrive until its last 20 minutes. By then, the bouillabaisse of bodies – lumpy, fleshy, knobbly – comes as no surprise after all we have witnessed: an orgy of new-age mysticism and unbridled pleasure. And a literal orgy.
This rip-snorting comedy from the New Zealand director Armagan Ballantyne situates itself on Zǿbftąņ, a fictional island hovering somewhere in the wild blue yonder of the Pacific. Ballantyne wastes no time hurtling us into the stultifying marriage of Bruno (Damon Herriman) and Laura (The Breaker Upperers’ Jackie van Beek, doubling as screenwriter), whose subtle barbs and constant bickering are conducted entirely in … gibberish.
In the pantheon of invented languages, there have been many of studied, intricate beauty: Elvish, Klingon, Na’vi. Nude Tuesday’s language is not one of them. It is lewd and crude, landing somewhere between a bad ABBA impression and backpackers at Oktoberfest. It’s as though an alien learnt Swedish entirely through Ikea’s most misjudged product names – and it is utterly delightful.
In tongue-twisting fricatives and nasal grunts, Herriman and Van Beek communicate perfectly the existential dread of middle-class life. Laura is a cog in the corporate machine who, in a mad dash to retrieve her forgotten notes for a pitch, smashes the window of her car, then delivers her presentation with a gruesome, bloodied arm. Bruno is a bumbling dad who can’t get the simplest of tasks right, all his sublimated stress suddenly coming to the fore in a screaming match with a poor bloke at the grocery store.
It is Laura and Bruno’s anniversary, and they strap in for a joyless dinner with the in-laws, made all the more awkward by a surprise present to the unhappy couple: an all-inclusive retreat for two, deep in the wilderness, that promises long-lasting self-fulfilment – both metaphysical and just plain physical.
The dispirited duo are bundled off faster than they can say marriage counselling to their sanctum in the woods: Wonderla (or ẄØnÐĘULÄ, as it’s stylised).
Nude Tuesday was shot in New Zealand, and it shows: Wonderla is a pastoral fantasy of log cabins and verdant fields, snow-capped mountaintops and rushing rivers. Except this isn’t so much a ski resort as a culty commune where debauchery reigns. Wonderla’s residents are mostly yogi types, dreadlocked, ponchoed and polyamorous in the same way student colleges are, which is to say: mostly just horny.
So Bruno and Laura – stuffy and stiff – come to experience the ways of their free-wheeling, free-balling peers – stiffied and stuffed. By the time they settle into the tantric rhythms of their orgiastic oasis, we can already see how this film might end: with the once-sheltered couple stripping away traumas and undergarments to reveal something feral and innate within themselves, to excavate the identities they’ve lost to the churn of domesticity.
It’s a feat, then, that Herriman and Van Beek – alongside a sideshow of oddballs, including the Australian TikTok star Ian Zaro as a blustering but big-hearted foil to Bruno, and Flight of the Conchords’ Jemaine Clement as their fraudulent cult leader-cum-love guru called (of course) Bjorg – keep the foregone conclusion at bay, just long enough to indulge in a raft of slapstick antics. They cup each other’s crotches as grounding exercise. There is breathwork that sounds like climaxing and climaxing that sounds like breathwork. They flail about like apes, held by the gentle embrace of nature, returning to their primal forms – swinging appendages and all. Call it the power of the hog.
Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning
There are certainly notes of The Breaker Upperers – the 2018 comedy Van Beek wrote, directed and starred in – in Nude Tuesday; both have a certain emotional agility, with the latter ping-ponging between slapstick farce and devastating catharsis without letting any moment percolate too long, lest it descend into schmaltz. And there are whiffs of Lorde’s Solar Power, The White Lotus and the folk horror Midsommar here too, infused into the film’s broad satire of the wellness industry.
But Nude Tuesday also wields a silent weapon: its subtitles, written completely independently in post-production by the British comedian Julia Davis. The cast’s performances may transcend language but the subtitles inject an omniscient – and hilarious – presence in the work, full of gleeful schadenfreude at its characters’ shortcomings (and short comings). Davis’s writing lets the film get away with its feast of anatomical jokes, which would quickly wear out were they delivered in English. And when, at last, the din quiets and we see the anatomy in all its bare-faced glory, we might just feel tempted to join this clan of naturists and throw all caution and clothing to the wind. Might.
Nude Tuesday is now screening as part of Sydney film festival. It will be released in cinemas in New Zealand on 16 June and Australia on 23 June, then will be streamable on Stan from 7 July. UK and US releases have yet to be announced

Fans of movie explosions get another chance to spend time with the character that inspired Ronald Reagan
Forty years on, here’s a rerelease of the first movie in the Rambo series from 1982: the watchable if entirely preposterous exploitation-action picture in which star and co-writer Sylvester Stallone makes his first appearance as John Rambo, the decorated Green Beret, Vietnam veteran and commando übermensch in a permanent rage at the way he and his fellow soldiers were let down. It climaxes with an entirely bizarre speech from Rambo on the subject of his PTSD, delivered in Stallone’s unintelligible slurred drone: “Igghh sawfff bodyghhh partghhs everyghrhwhere…!”
This was actually the film that came before the one that made Rambo a real movie icon, Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985), where he has to go back to Vietnam for a fantasy replay of the war on the grounds that he is searching for urban-mythic “MIA POWs”. That was the movie that Ronald Reagan watched in the middle of the 1985 Beirut hostage crisis and famously said: “Boy, after seeing Rambo last night, I know what to do next time this happens.”
As the first story begins, John Rambo is back from ’Nam and sort of walking the earth, Caine-style, looking for an old comrade and stunned to hear he has died from cancer due to Agent Orange. The film certainly does not detain its audience with any pinko-liberal whining on the subject of how Agent Orange did a fair bit of damage to Vietnamese civilians, and not just Rambo’s brothers-in-arms. Then a swaggering bully of a local police chief (Brian Dennehy) unjustly picks Rambo up for vagrancy and takes him down to the station-house where he is beaten up. Rambo busts out of there, and is pursued to a remote gorge where this special forces hombre holds out against hundreds of beta-male cops and there’s only one person who can talk him down: Rambo’s old commanding officer, Colonel Trautman, played by Richard Crenna.
Devotees of old-school 80s action will enjoy this all over again, and I like to see the Pointless Action Explosions (Rambo torches an entire gas station here for the hell of it), and of course people getting thrown through stunt sugar-glass windows, which happened all the time in that era. But for me, Rambo never had the wit or the dramatic limberness of Bruce Willis’s John McClane in the Die Hard series.
Rambo: First Blood is released on 24 June in cinemas.

First of public Capitol attack hearings delivered precision and panache – and a narrative arc designed for maximum effect
It was one of the more unexpected takeaways of the night: in the age of six-second videos and frenetic social media posts around the clock, primetime set-piece television can still land a punch.
The first of the public hearings from the US congressional committee investigating the insurrection at the US Capitol in Washington by extremist supporters of Donald Trump on 6 January last year was delivered with all the choreographed panache of an old-school TV spectacular or the Super Bowl.
The broadcast was precision-timed (ending one minute short of two hours), tightly scripted and with a narrative arc designed for maximum emotional and political effect. According to the Nielsen ratings firm, it drew 20m viewers – roughly equivalent to a presidential primary debate, and more than the 5.2m that the 2015 primetime Benghazi hearing featuring testimony from 2016 Trump rival Hillary Clinton.
It mixed never-before-seen footage, evocative witnesses and succinct delivery of pertinent, headline-grabbing quotes in a setting where politicians are often better known for rambling and repetitive speeches.
Fifty years ago, the Senate Watergate committee made TV history with its raw, spontaneously chaotic but revelatory hearings into Richard Nixon’s election subversion.
On Thursday night, by contrast, the treatment of Trump’s election subversion was polished and pre-conceived, with the committee chair, Mississippi Democratic congressman Bennie Thompson, and vice-chair, Wyoming Republican Liz Cheney, the daughter of former vice-president Dick Cheney, reading off an autocue.
So carefully were the proceedings orchestrated that they could have come across as bland and overproduced.
But by the time the two leading panel members had laid out their case against Trump’s meticulously planned coup attempt, and after the nation had been assailed by harrowing footage of the January 6 violence and testimony by a female police officer describing being caught up in a “war scene”, it was anything but.
Peter Baker of the New York Times concluded that in the entire 246-year history of the US since the declaration of independence, “there was surely never a more damning indictment presented against an American president”.
The committee has five more hearings to go this month, after more than a year of investigation behind closed doors, as it tries to build a case alleging that Trump orchestrated a criminal conspiracy to overturn his election defeat and, on that January 6, incited a far-right mob to try to stop the official congressional certification of Democrat Joe Biden’s victory.
The next four are in the mornings with the last one, on 23 June, again scheduled for primetime, 8pm in Washington.
Thursday evening’s made-for-TV conception was the work of James Goldston, an experienced TV executive and former president of ABC News. His brief from the committee was to keep the event contained and focused, targeted at drawing and holding the attention of millions of Americans.
Under his direction, even the most visceral of the material unveiled at the hearing was finely produced. Previously unseen video from the British documentary-maker Nick Quested left nobody in doubt about the violence of that day.
Police officers were shown falling to the ground and stabbed with staves as the insurrectionists, egged on by Trump and led by the extremist Proud Boys, pummeled their way into a tunnel within the Capitol compound. Caroline Edwards, the Capitol police officer, described slipping in people’s blood – not the first time in the evening that Shakespearean imagery was invoked.
The hearing was primetime TV at its most impactful. Not that social media was neglected.
Before the hearing began Zoe Lofgren, one of the Democrats on the nine-member committee, told the Guardian that the panel was determined to bring social media on board “and make sure we are finding people where they are”.
Devastating snippets drawn from the depositions of Trump’s daughter, Ivanka Trump, and her husband Jared Kushner, were clearly devised two ways – potent on television, viral online.
The clip of Ivanka in which she said she accepted the assessment of the former attorney general Bill Barr that there had been no evidence of fraud sufficient to overturn the election lasted 11 seconds – perfect for CNN, Twitter and TikTok alike.
Kushner’s haughty comment to the committee that he interpreted as “whining” threats from White House lawyers to resign in the face of Trump’s potentially illegal actions could be boiled down to an even more shareable three seconds.
Such painstaking formulation is not a guarantee of success. The committee’s main goal is to show the American people how Trump attempted to subvert democracy and to persuade voters that action must now be taken to prevent a repeat performance in 2024.
Tell that to Fox News. While the hearing was going on, it turned its airspace over to Tucker Carlson, who duly used his primetime show to denounce the proceedings as propaganda.
Carlson had his own pithy social media pitch. “They are lying, and we’re not going to help them do it,” he said.

Effort to revive fortunes of Piers Morgan-fronted rightwing channel include appointing new boss and expected relaunch
Rupert Murdoch’s talkTV has been struggling to attract an audience for its culture-war output. But staff at the channel are now worried that they have recently gained one particular viewer: Murdoch himself, who has arrived in London and is taking an active interest in his station’s fate.
The media mogul has invested tens of millions of pounds in talkTV, but after just two months on air, there are fears it could become a costly disaster unless he makes a rapid intervention, with official viewing figures dipping to zero at some points during evening broadcasts.
On Wednesday, the company appointed former Daily Mirror editor Richard Wallace as the channel’s boss ahead of an expected relaunch, which followed a senior behind-the-scenes executive quitting last week and Fox News staff being deputised to help sharpen up the channel.
The company has plastered presenter Piers Morgan’s face on billboards across the country, but his monologues and rants about woke culture – including an attempt to skewer rail union boss Mick Lynch for using a Thunderbirds baddie as his Facebook profile picture – have so far failed to resonate with audiences.
On Monday night, the flagship Piers Morgan Uncensored attracted just 64,000 viewers. Programmes that beat him in the same time slot included a documentary about the water around Alcatraz on the National Geographic channel and a repeat of 1970s sitcom The Good Life on Gold.
According to sources at talkTV, Morgan has suggested Murdoch should make a blowout bid to hire his former Good Morning Britain colleague Susanna Reid for talkTV. Reid’s agent did not deny that discussions had taken place, but declined to comment further. There is no indication that Reid is poised to leave the ITV breakfast show, although she has been off air in recent days.
Other talkTV programmes are faring worse, with just 7,000 people watching former Sun political editor Tom Newton-Dunn’s 7pm news show.
More embarrassingly, Morgan is being consistently thrashed in the ratings by ex-Ukip leader Nigel Farage on GB News. The rival rightwing channels are fighting over the same relatively small pool of viewers, but so far it looks as though GB News – despite its own disastrous launch – is consistently coming out on top by appealing to a small core British audience rather than aiming for wider appeal.
Both outlets are reportedly currently financially unsustainable, with questions over their long-term future. GB News secured funding from a range of overseas investors for its first three years, but one major shareholder, US media company Discovery, is now understood to be looking to exit.
As a result, the company needs new shareholders willing to suck up the cost of running a loss-making, ad-funded channel with a recession looming. Sources at GB News said both its HR director and commercial director have left in recent weeks.
This has led to speculation that Murdoch could choose to cut his losses, buy GB News, and unite the channel with talkTV. He has form for such ruthlessness. In the early 1990s, soon after it launched, he took his heavily loss-making Sky satellite broadcasting service and merged it with the similarly stricken rival British Satellite Broadcasting to create BSkyB.
A News UK spokesperson played down the prospect of such an outcome and said they were happy with the current outlook for talkTV, while GB News said it was not aware of any talks.
Instead, in a bid to revive viewing figures, talkTV has increasingly starting splashing the cash on guests. One leftwing journalist was begged to come on air to be grilled by Morgan; the talkTV guest booker made ever increasing offers, which could in the end have earned the individual thousands of pounds for a few minutes’ work. The person declined.
Mid-level celebrities and people briefly in the public eye have been delighted to earn over £10,000 for appearing on Morgan’s show.
Despite the availability of hard cash for people who are willing to be a punchbag for Morgan’s rants, there have been few of the breakout viral moments that characterised his earlier stint on Good Morning Britain. Staff at talkTV reported enormous delight when a trans activist swore at Morgan on air and walked off the set because clips of the incident lit up Twitter.
talkTV has lost some senior staff, with more predicted to follow – either for opportunities elsewhere or as part of a forthcoming clearout and relaunch. Vivek Sharma, the channel’s executive producer, who was a veteran of ITV’s daytime lineup, quit last week for a new job. There has been substantial involvement of staff from Murdoch’s US Fox News channel to try to train presenters and fix problems with the output.
One particular issue is talkTV’s dual identity as a big-budget channel bolted on to an existing radio station, talkRadio. The vast majority of talkTV’s output consists of filming shows that were already broadcasting on talkRadio, which had attracted a loyal audience on a small budget.
This has led to growing tensions between the two teams, with the radio staff feeling they are being let down by their high-spending TV colleagues. One irate member of the old talkRadio team pointed out that while the station’s bosses have issued press releases claiming Morgan’s show is a global success on social media platforms, it is the old talkRadio content – such as interviews with conspiracy theorist David Icke – that dominates the most-viewed list on YouTube.
Still, talkTV continues to invest in new staff, with job roles available for an additional forthcoming 10pm television show. Jeremy Kyle is due to host a programme now that the public outcry over a recent documentary about his former daytime TV show has died down.
Murdoch hosted his summer party at the Serpentine gallery in London on Monday night, where the guests included the prime minister, Boris Johnson. He has already watched first hand as one of his newspapers, the Times, became embroiled in a row about deleting a story without explanation. Staff at talkTV are hoping they aren’t part of a similar vanishing act.

A selection of the best images from the Queen’s platinum jubilee, including racing from Epsom
Sun 5 Jun 2022 13.47 BST
Last modified on Sun 19 Jun 2022 20.19 BST

Beyond 2022 project recreates documents and maps lost during 1922 Four Courts battle
When the Public Record Office of Ireland was reduced to rubble and ashes in the Irish civil war, seven centuries of precious historical documents were lost.
Exactly 100 years later, the public will be able to step back in time into the six-storey Victorian building in Dublin to experience it as it was on the eve of its destruction in June 1922 via an immersive 3D experience, and access many of those records thanks to a pioneering global project reclaiming Irish history.
The National Archives at Kew in London is among 70 archives and institutions worldwide to have sourced and digitally contributed replacement and duplicate documents and maps as part of the Beyond 2022 project, led by Trinity College Dublin.
Many have been excavated from long-forgotten dusty boxes and cabinets to recreate, as near as possible, those documents lost to Ireland during the Four Courts five-day battle that began on 28 June 1922.
They include 13th-century rolls of animal skin parchment records of Irish exchequer payments, written by medieval clerks, copies of which were fortuitously also kept in London, and a 1798 yeomanry return from the Irish rebellion of that year.
In total, 150,000 records and more than 6,000 maps are available, spanning an arc of Irish history from 1174 up to 1922, including Ireland’s first census of 1766, surveys during the Cromwellian era, and records on how Ireland was governed by the English crown in the middle ages. All are now retrievable and accessible for free.
The building itself has been faithfully digitally recreated from a 1914 photograph, and using information in the 1919 book, Guide to the Public Records Office, by then head archivist Herbert Wood, which provided essential inventory on almost everything subsequently lost.
“It was the major cultural calamity of 20th-century Ireland,” said the Trinity College historian Dr Peter Crooks, who headed the five-year state-funded project. “And a devastating blow to history.”
Computer wizardry means visitors and can pick from hundreds of virtual shelves just as they were left on the eve of the battle. AI programmes have scanned and translated handwritten records, many in Latin, French or Irish, to form a searchable database of more than 50m words.
Dr Paul Dryburgh, medieval records specialist at the National Archives in Kew, said copies of Irish medieval exchequer records were kept in London as the crown was concerned about corruption in Dublin Castle. “Royal officials would have to come over from Dublin with their parchment rolls, their receipts, their little wooden tally sticks,” he said. “Those were copies of the documents in Dublin.
“The documents in Dublin haven’t survived. But their counterparts did because the English exchequer kept all their records over the centuries.”
Dr Neil Johnston, the head of early modern records at Kew, said: “Here at Kew, I reckon, there’s a least a quarter of a million Irish or Irish-related documents.”
Of the project, Johnson said: “Some things were hiding in plain sight, other things we didn’t know we had. All of a sudden there’s a whole treasure trove when you start to look, squirrelling around, opening boxes. A whole myriad of treasure troves have emerged from materials, some of which haven’t been opened in 300 or 500 years.”
The Virtual Record Treasury of Ireland will be a vast and growing treasury of replacement documents newly discovered in partner archives.
Speaking before the launch, the taoiseach, Micheál Martin, said: “The Virtual Record Treasury is an enduring and meaningful legacy for our decade of centenaries. It belongs to the people of Ireland, democratising access to our rich archival heritage and making our shared history accessible for everyone.
“It is an invaluable historical resource for people of all traditions across the island and for everyone of Irish heritage around the world. It is an immense achievement and testament to the commitment and dedication of the Beyond 2022 project team.”
Leo Varadkar, the tánaiste, said: “This is a really exciting project which opens new doors into Irish history. It brings together a wealth of information from around the world to illustrate what happened in Ireland, and helps to fill in the blanks arising from that infamous 1922 fire in the Public Record Office.”

Shelling in the town of Lysychansk, Russian conscripts depart from Omsk, the March for Our Lives rally in Houston, protests in Quito and Ladies Day at Royal Ascot: the most striking global images this week
Fri 17 Jun 2022 20.06 BST
Last modified on Fri 17 Jun 2022 20.48 BST

The artist blazed into Portugal’s 1998 abortion referendum with powerful images of women in backstreet clinics. But there is no blood, no gore – just feeling. The works may have helped swing a later vote
In 1998, the year of a Portuguese referendum debate on abortion, Paula Rego poured her fierce, formidable passion into 10 large paintings set in backstreet abortion clinics. These were a direct gesture of protest at the cruelty of anti-abortion laws. Focused on individual women positioned on single beds in improvised operating theatres, the paintings of the Abortion series are so dark and claustrophobic that you can almost feel the heat and stickiness, and smell the adrenal sweat.
Rego pulls the focus of the abortion debate back to the woman’s experience. There is no blood, no gore, no biological nastiness to see here: this is all about feeling, both physical and psychological. First-hand discussion of abortion remains taboo even 24 years later – Rego’s works carry us into the heart of this unseen, unspoken terrain.
Working with Lila Nunes, her close collaborator and model since 1985, Rego constructed characters for each picture. In one, a sophisticated woman in a red patterned dress leans back on a plastic sheet on the single bed, her parted legs slung awkwardly over the back of folding chairs standing in for obstetric stirrups as she waits for the surgeon. In another, a girl in a British school uniform (purchased by Rego from John Lewis) lies curled in a tight ball on a tatty leather sofa, gripping her white knuckles around a folded blanket.
There are stoic women squatting over plastic buckets or old-fashioned chamber pots, enduring another of life’s undignified necessities. Others lie back on the bed, legs splayed and skirts hitched up, as though waiting for a lover to return.
Wearing a red bandana, a muscular woman sits with her back to the wall, pulling her legs up, ready, and holding our gaze. Rego’s women are not victims. She did not construct this series around pain, shame and grief, although all are here. Instead she presents experiences of abortion as nuanced as the characters themselves. There is space here for ambiguity and the weird contradictions of being human and imperfect – speaking of the works, Rego said that physical pain and the erotic are tied inseparably together. She is painting abortion back into daily life.
The women in these paintings endure the physical pain, indignity and risk of an illegal abortion because it represents freedom, as it had for Rego herself, pregnant as a student at the Slade school of art in the 1950s. Without an abortion she would have been sent back to her mother in Portugal, and we would have been robbed of this extraordinary artist’s work.
The Abortion paintings were first shown at the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation in Lisbon, and Rego made etchings so that these powerful images could be widely distributed. They were published in a number of Portuguese newspapers in the run-up to a second referendum on abortion in 2007. Many believe they were pivotal in the vote’s success.

The best of this week’s wildlife pictures, including a poisonous frog, an alligator lizard and a walrus called Stan
Fri 17 Jun 2022 08.20 BST
Last modified on Fri 17 Jun 2022 10.13 BST
Photograph: Robin Loznak/ZUMA Press Wire/REX/Shutterstock
Photograph: Johan Nilsson/TT News Agency/AFP/Getty Images

The special edition of Margaret Atwood’s novel was auctioned by Sotheby’s and is made of Cinefoil, a treated aluminum product
A specially commissioned, unburnable edition of Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale has been auctioned for $130,000, Sotheby’s announced on Tuesday.
Proceeds will be donated to PEN America, which advocates for free expression worldwide. The 384-page book consists mainly of Cinefoil, a specially treated aluminum product, and was announced last month at PEN’s annual fundraising gala.
To help promote the initiative, Atwood agreed to be filmed attempting – unsuccessfully – to incinerate a prototype with a flame thrower.
“I’m very pleased that the one-of-a-kind Unburnable Book of ‘The Handmaid’s Tale’ has raised so much money for PEN America,” the Canadian author said in a statement.
“Free speech issues are being hotly debated, and PEN is a sane voice amidst all the shouting. The video of the book being torched by me and refusing to burn has now had a potential 5bn views. We hope it raises awareness and leads to reasoned discussion.”
The fireproof book was a joint project by PEN, Atwood, Penguin Random House and two companies based in Toronto, where Atwood is a longtime resident: the Rethink creative agency and The Gas Company Inc, a graphic arts and bookbinding specialty studio.
The Handmaid’s Tale, first released in 1985, is a dystopian novel about a cruel patriarchy known as the Republic of Gilead. It has been subject to various bannings since publication.

The 10-day search in the Amazon for Indigenous expert Bruno Pereira and journalist Dom Phillips came to an end on Wednesday. Their deaths have horrified Brazil and underline the dangers faced by those defending the country's environment and Indigenous communities. Jonathan Watts, the Guardian's global environment editor and Phillips's friend, provides insight into their lives, their work and their legacy
Gary Calton, Source: Gary Calton / Getty / AP / Reuters
Fri 17 Jun 2022 12.50 BST
Last modified on Fri 17 Jun 2022 15.43 BST

‘I didn’t want to sing it – and made such a mess of the high notes that the engineer had to remove all my swearing’
We were a DIY band who had a jazz-funk hit with Southern Freeez, but we broke up because I kept having arguments with the bass-player. When we got back together a year later, we decided to get a producer to sort us out. Top of the list was Arthur Baker, who was making all these great dance records in New York. We persuaded indie label Beggars Banquet to get us flights and put us up in a grubby hotel in Manhattan. We just turned up at Arthur’s place – a bunch of scruffy, idealistic kids who’d come all the way from London, and he felt sorry for us.
It was 1982 and New York was very exciting. Clubs like Dancetaria and the Fun House were playing all the early hip-hop and electro stuff. There was a revolution happening and we had landed in the middle of it. Sampling was coming in and Arthur had drum machines. Together we made the album Gonna Get You, a hotchpotch of jazz-funk and this new electronic music. IOU was the last track we did together.
Today, you’d do it on computers, but IOU was all played manually, except for the drum machine. Arthur told us what he wanted. There was a cheap glockenspiel in the studio that he wanted played over the hook line, so Andy Stennett, our synth player, hit it with a stick, while playing the piano and doing the surging synth part that’s since been sampled many times.
We had used a guest vocalist for the track Southern Freeez and assumed that Arthur would bring in an American singer for IOU. But he said: “John should sing this.” I didn’t want to – and made such a mess of the high notes that I swore into the microphone. But Arthur liked my voice and the engineer removed the swear words.
Don Letts directed the video in London. We’d seen kids breakdancing and body-popping in New York’s Washington Square Park, so we got some kids to street dance to a beat box in Islington. With the kids on BMX bikes the video really captures that era. Top of the Pops made me re-record the song for the broadcast. I had a bad cold but someone told me that gargling whisky would help me hit the high notes. I didn’t do too badly that time.
Freeez had sent me some records but I never listened to them. Then they showed up at my office unannounced. I was in the midst of working with Rockers Revenge and New Order, while also trying to make a follow-up to Planet Rock by Afrika Bambaataa and the Soulsonic Force. But I felt bad for them so I did a deal giving my label Streetwise US rights to what we recorded.
We wrote the bones of an album, but I didn’t feel we had a single or something that fitted what was happening in the clubs, so I came up with the bassline and chords for IOU. At first it was an instrumental, not a song. Then I went to a Chinese restaurant, listened to the track on the way back, and came up with the chorus in the cab.
We only had a few days to finish it before they went back to London. John Robie – who’d co-written Planet Rock – played the main synth riff. My DJ friend John “Jellybean” Benitez came up with the idea of sampling the “AEIOU” chorus and playing it as if it was a solo. It was a collaboration, with me as overseer.
John did the vocals at Vanguard Studio, on the way to the airport with his cases packed. I knew, given the high register, that people would think it was a girl singing, which was an interesting flip on people like Annie Lennox and Alison Moyet who were subverting female stereotypes. When I played the finished record at the Fun House, people went crazy. IOU was huge in New York and reached No 2 in the UK. We were inspired by new technology. Today, when I hear people like the Weeknd, I can trace it back to what we were doing 40 years ago. I still play IOU in clubs.
Upon a Time in NYC, a compilation of John Rocca’s proto-house music, 1982-87, is out now on Beggars Arkive.

Elected on promises of reform, Alex Villanueva is now derided as the ‘Trump of LA’ while fueling controversy after controversy
Los Angeles county voters are headed to the polls on Tuesday to decide the fate of a scandal-plagued sheriff who critics have derided as the “Donald Trump of LA”.
The Los Angeles county sheriff, Alex Villanueva, runs the largest county sheriff’s office in the US and manages one of the world’s largest jail systems, overseeing thousands of officers who patrol nearly 200 southern California towns and cities.
Villanueva was a little-known lieutenant when he was elected in 2018, becoming the first candidate to unseat an incumbent LA sheriff in more than a century. The first Spanish speaker to hold the job, he won office with the support of some Democrats and progressive groups after campaigning to bring about reform and accountability within the department.
But during the last four years, he has baffled erstwhile supporters, adopting a “tough on crime” approach, rejecting outside efforts to address misconduct, lashing out at critics and the media, spreading racist tropes about crime, and becoming a favorite among some far-right pundits. He has been at the center of a steady stream of scandals, in a department that has a long history of abuse, misconduct and corruption cases.
In 2013, 18 sheriff’s deputies faced criminal charges surrounding the systematic beatings of incarcerated people, and the former top sheriff and the second-in-command were later sentenced to prison in obstruction and corruption cases.
Villanueva’s critics – which include elected officials across California, civil rights groups, families affected by police brutality, his current and former staff, and the county’s inspector general – describe a culture of violence and impunity that has worsened under his tenure.
“He learned from Trump how to use his public platform to divide people and make people afraid,” said Anne Irwin, director of Smart Justice California, an advocacy group.
Villanueva fulfilled his campaign pledge to bring body cameras to the department, and he also restricted federal immigration authorities’ access to jails.
But the department has also been rocked by many major scandals. Villanueva has received national scrutiny over reports of “deputy gangs” – cliques of officers with matching tattoos and names like the Banditos, Executioners and Grim Reapers, who are accused of promoting brutality and racist policing.
The inspector general, the top watchdog for the sheriff’s department, has identified more than 40 such groups within the department. But Villanueva has consistently denied their existence.
He has defied subpoenas by the inspector general, has demanded the county’s board of supervisors stop using the phrase “deputy gangs”, and has ordered the department’s “civil rights and public integrity” unit – reportedly known internally as Villanueva’s “secret police” – to investigate officials who speak out.
Separately, a whistleblower has claimed Villanueva personally directed a cover-up of an incident, captured on film, in which jail guards knelt on the head of a handcuffed man for three minutes.
A former adviser to the sheriff further alleged that Villanueva lied when he said he only saw the film months after the incident, but instead watched the footage with him days after it happened.
Villanueva’s response to the allegations echoed his approach to the deputy gangs reports. At a controversial press conference, he announced he was investigating the leak and displayed the photo of two critics and the LA Times journalist who had first revealed the footage: “These three people have some important questions to answer,” he said.
Meanwhile, the sheriff’s department has faced consistent scrutiny for its high number of police shootings, including the killing of Dijon Kizzee, a 29-year-old man who was fleeing on a bike after officers tried to stop him for a “vehicle code” violation, and for reports of brutality by guards inside LA county jails.
Critics have accused the sheriff of aggravating tensions within the county with aggressive actions, such as sending armed deputies to do homeless “outreach” in a region facing rising tensions over encampments, but where the department does not typically have jurisdiction. And he has faced backlash for spreading baseless accusations, recently claiming, without any evidence, that the inspector general investigating him was a “Holocaust denier”.
“He acts lawlessly,” said Stephanie Luna of Villanueva. Luna’s nephew, Anthony Vargas, was 21 when he was killed by LA sheriff’s deputies in 2018. Her family has frequently protested against the sheriff and says the department has retaliated by harassing them and other families, showing up at their events, threatening them and following them. “His deputies have no regard for public safety. He is emboldening his deputies to act this way because there is a lack of consequence.
“People are trying to hold him accountable for the misconduct that’s happening in the sheriff’s department, and instead of being willing to investigate the claims, he’s actively dismissing them and alleging they’re non-existent.”
Villanueva has directly criticized the advocacy of Vargas’s family on multiple occasions. In an interview with the Guardian last week, he dismissed the family’s harassment claims and said he was speaking out against a “whole cottage industry of activists that want to defund or abolish the sheriff’s department”.
“I don’t begrudge any mother who lost her son,” he added.
The sheriff brushed aside the complaints against the department and the lawsuits brought against him, saying they were brought by people who were “actively sabotaging the department since the day I was sworn in”.
The sheriff also said the reports of deputy gangs in the department was a “problem of perception, not reality”.
“Are there people within the organization that we’re unaware of yet that may be involved in something? I’m pretty sure, especially in an organization of our size, of course there are,” he said.
Yet he contended the concerns were “driven by trial attorneys and opportunistic politicians” and a “cabal of people” creating a “false narrative”.
He said he had terminated 148 employees for excessive force, making false statements and other misconduct since taking office. “But I can’t line up people and shoot them and bury them in a grave,” he said. “I don’t know what else they want me to do.”
He disputed he had targeted his opponents with investigations: “There’s nothing inappropriate about us investigating crime,” he said, adding he had no interest in complying with “political subpoenas”.
The sheriff added he considered himself a “moderate Democrat”, and said he felt that Democratic leadership in LA county and the state of California had become “extreme hard left … socialist, ultra-progressives”.
Villanueva again didn’t provide any evidence for his claim that Max Huntsman, the inspector general, was a “Holocaust denier”, a claim Huntsman said was “deeply offensive” and untrue. Instead, he asked why there was no outrage when Huntsman called him a “criminal”, before his PR representative interjected to stop questions about the matter.
Villanueva is battling eight challengers in the 7 June primary: six current and former sheriff’s department officials, a state parole agent and a retired Long Beach police chief.
Most of his opponents lack name recognition, some have ties to the department’s scandals, and most have failed to win over the sheriff department’s many critics. Most critics instead are advocating “anyone but Villanueva”. But with critics failing to rally behind one challenger, some pundits predict Villanueva could perform well at the polls.
If Villanueva earns more than 50% of the vote, he will secure re-election, otherwise the top two winners will face off in November.
Vincent Miller, an attorney representing more than a dozen whistleblowers from within the department who have alleged retaliation, said Villanueva was “destroying careers”, adding that deputies were fearful of the potential of another term: “They know that if he gets re-elected, it’s going to feed his illusions that he doesn’t have to answer to anybody.”

Celebrated Portuguese-born British artist died peacefully after short illness, says Victoria Miro gallery
This video has been removed. This could be because it launched early, our rights have expired, there was a legal issue, or for another reason.
Paula Rego, the internationally celebrated Portuguese-born British artist known for her visceral and unsettling work, has died age 87.
The Victoria Miro gallery announced Rego’s death on Wednesday, saying: “She died peacefully this morning, after a short illness, at home in north London, surrounded by her family. Our heartfelt thoughts are with them.”
The painter, who recently had a retrospective exhibition at Tate Britain, rose to prominence after exhibiting with the London Group in the 1960s alongside David Hockney. In the following years she spent her career focusing on women’s rights, and abortion in particular.
Having grown up in a privileged family in Portugal under António de Oliveira Salazar’s fascist dictatorship, Rego was fascinated by fairytales, and her political paintings span themes of power, possession, childhood and sexual transgression.
It is with immense sadness that we announce the death of the Portuguese-born, British artist Dame Paula Rego at the age of 87. She died peacefully this morning, after a short illness, at home in North London, surrounded by her family. Our heartfelt thoughts are with them. pic.twitter.com/hFXdIZeTtb
In an interview with the Guardian in 2019, Rego, who had previously spoken about her own abortions, said that “making abortions illegal is forcing women to the backstreet solution”.
She added: “I’m doing what I can with my work but both men and women need to stand up to this. It affects men, too. You don’t get pregnant on your own, do you?”
Rego, an only child, was born in Lisbon in 1935. Her father, José, worked as an electronics engineer, and her mother, Maria, studied art but never practised as an artist.
Following a TB diagnosis at the age of three and at a doctor’s advice to leave Lisbon, Rego’s parents built a house in Estoril, where she lived surrounded by trees and sea air, as well as her grandparents’ summer house in Ericeira. In her early years, Rego was cared for by her grandmother and an aunt, as her parents lived in England where her father worked.
Beginning drawing from the age of four to “entertain herself”, Rego knew she wanted to be an artist by the age of eight, despite discouragement from teachers. Later sent to England, Rego said her parents “gave me everything”.
“They gave us a place to live and supported us for as long as they could. They looked after the children. They had faith in my work,” said Rego.
Known primarily for her subversive paintings, pastel drawing and prints inspired by folklore, Rego became the first associate artist in the National Gallery, which solidified her place as one of Britain’s greatest living painters and figurative artists worldwide. In 2010, she was made Dame by the Queen and described the honour as a “great recognition”.
Her work is valued in the millions of pounds, a film has been made about her, and a gallery named Casa das Histórias: Paula Rego (House of Stories), in the coastal town of Cascais, outside Lisbon, is one of the few dedicated to a living artist. But it was not until 1987 that Rego had her first major exhibition in Britain.
Having studied at the Slade School of Fine Art at 17 under Lucian Freud, Rego met the artist Victor Willing, who later became her husband. Falling pregnant at 20, she returned to Portugal which she described akin to “going back to prison, to a bourgeois life I detested”. In 1963, the couple bought a house in London’s Camden Town, and spent summers in Portugal.
After Slade, Rego said she “seized up and got into a terrible depression. I couldn’t keep following the rules; I had to break out”. In 1965, her first solo show in Lisbon was praised for its startling freedom of expression. In 1966, Willing was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis; he died in 1988. A year later, Rego was shortlisted for the Turner prize.
Some of Rego’s most highly regarded work was inspired by her relationship with Willing. In The Family (1998) shows a woman and her daughter dressing a seated man unable to help himself.
In her Tate Britain retrospective, placing Rego among a handful of contemporary female artists who have achieved comparable status, other notable works included the Dog Women series, a collection of pastel works portraying women behaving as dogs.
In Dog Woman (1994), inspired by a Portuguese fairytale, Rego asked her model Lila Nunes, the woman who had nursed her husband, to “crouch down and be a woman with her mouth open as she’s about to swallow something”.
Of her more political and eloquently shocking work, the harrowing abortion series depicts women doubled over after having had an illegal abortion. The works were created in response to an abortion referendum to liberalise Portuguese law in 1998, and was credited with helping sway public opinion.
Remembering her late husband, Rego previously told the Guardian: “Grief is always there, it doesn’t get easier. I thought about falling in love again many times, but that’s nobody’s business.”
After the announcement of Rego’s death, tributes started pouring in. “It is a national loss,” Portugal’s president, Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, said on Wednesday. “For many decades Paula Rego was not just very important in Portugal and in England, where she lived and where I visited her in her studio in 2016, but rather throughout the world.”
In Cascais, officials said Thursday would be a day of mourning. “Portuguese culture has lost one of its most important and irreverent creators, someone who distinguished herself as a woman, human being and artist,” the mayor, Carlos Carreiras, said.
Tate art gallery’s director, Maria Balshaw, described Rego as an “incredible important figure” to Tate, and described holding her retrospective last year as a “true privilege”.
“She was an uncompromising artist of extraordinary imaginative power, who uniquely revolutionised the way in which women’s lives and stories are represented,” said Balshaw. “For many, many women, including myself and countless colleagues at Tate, she was the greatest of trailblazers and a vivid personal inspiration.”
When Rego was asked in 2021 what continued to matter most to her in her work, she curtly replied: “Simply doing it matters.”
Rego is survived by three children, whom she and her husband raised in Ericeira, Portugal, and, later, in London, and five granddaughters.

For young actor Anson Boon, playing Johnny Rotten Danny Boyle’s Pistol is a dream come true. But what did punk teach him about himself?
Something is clearly wrong, I realise, as Anson Boon sips peppermint tea in a plant-filled café in east London, relishing one of the last moments of calm before his career blows up. The 22-year-old actor can soon be seen playing the punk icon Johnny Rotten in Pistol, Danny Boyle’s new six-part Sex Pistols biopic on Disney+. It’s the sort of role that will define how he’s seen for years to come: menacing, volatile, a little dangerous. And yet, how to put this? He’s so nice! So un-punkishly pleased to be here. The kind of boy my mum would love, all “Yes mate!” and “I love my pubs!” and “I’m moving up in the world” (in reference to the fact that his tea comes in an actual pot).
“I feel a bit like Hannah Montana sometimes,” he says, a reference to the Disney Channel sitcom in which Miley Cyrus played an ordinary school girl with a popstar alter ego. “Like, I get to do these cool things and go to photoshoots and fly to LA and stuff like that and that’s when I’m Hannah… Then I go back home to Peterborough and I’m back with my mates that I’ve been to school with and they’re all builders and plumbers and stuff and I love it.”
Which is not a comparison I can see endearing the young lad to Lydon, who has done everything in his power to stop the biopic from happening, including taking his former bandmates to court (and losing) and complaining that Disney has created a “middle-class fairytale”. But Boon, as it emerges, is very far from your typical middle class thespian, and there is something impressively self-willed about the way he has made himself one of the hottest young English actors around.
No one in his family or circle has ever done anything remotely like acting, he says. He’s wearing Comme des Garçons sneakers, a green military jacket and a hip Japanese T-shirt that his dad bought him (“I have a very cool dad”), together with his grandad’s signet ring and his nan’s chain. Family is clearly important to him. His mum was one of four siblings whose entire family lived in a single room in a house in Tottenham until they were relocated to a council house in Peterborough in the 1960s. “They were what you call an overspill family. You can kind of follow the M1 and the A10 north of London and all of the towns along the way are hubs of old working-class Londoners that went to start a new family in their new council house, back when you actually got a house.” The other side is from farming stock. Anson’s grandad is still growing potatoes at 85 (he employs Anson’s younger brother), while his dad runs a small business selling garage equipment, which employs various aunts and uncles, too. Boon’s principal passions outside acting are Tottenham Hotspur FC and “shit pubs”, in particular the Antwerp Arms near the Spurs ground. “It’s literally five doors down from the house with that one bedroom that my mum grew up in. Spurs bought shares in that pub to keep it afloat. That’s our club!”
What made him want to be an actor? “Honestly, I have no idea, mate!” He reckons it might have been watching Tom Hanks in Forrest Gump. Or Dirty Dancing. But he does know it’s what he’s always wanted to do – he’s always made people laugh by doing stupid impressions. His mum has a picture of the Hollywood sign that he drew when he was six. When I ask him who his heroes are now, he reels off Gary Oldman, Cillian Murphy, Matthew McConnaughey. But when he left his comprehensive school at 16 he had no connections in the acting world or really a single clue what he was doing.
He did, however, have the internet. He made his way into the industry by watching how-to videos that various casting agents had uploaded on to YouTube. “I asked for a proper camera to do auditions for Christmas when I was 17 and I bought myself some blue wallpaper because they say blue is flattering for self tapes,” he says. “I didn’t go to drama school, so I had it in my head that if I wanted people to take me seriously and if I wanted people to bring me in for serious auditions then I had to commit to looking serious about it.”
I tell them that, having interviewed a few next-big-things about the challenges of boarding school, and the burdens of having parents who are also actors, this is all refreshing. “Actually, my mum’s head of Apple TV,” he jokes. “Nah, it’s not that vibe! I mean I had a really nice childhood, and my parents are so great and so supportive. But I’m definitely aware of what it’s like to not grow up with those things.”
His first really decent role came in the late Roger Michell’s 2019 family ensemble drama, Blackbird, an experience that resulted in him, Susan Sarandon and Kate Winslet all getting matching tattoos (a blackbird, on his inner arm). “I was kind of like a sponge when I was 18, 19, working with these people, taking in all the best parts of their process.” Roles in Sam Mendes’s First World War drama 1917 and the play Master Harold and the Boys at the National Theatre followed, before he was invited to audition for an “Untitled Danny Boyle Series” midway through the first Covid lockdown.
He made it through the first round of general auditions before he was asked to film himself again, this time for the role of John Lydon. He got his mum to film him recreating Lydon’s own audition for the band: an improvisation on Alice Cooper’s I’m Eighteen in front of Sex Pistols guitarist Steve Jones and manager Malcolm McLaren in Vivienne Westwood’s boutique. “That scene is so pivotal because it’s like now or never, this is the chance,” says Boon. “My parents were like: ‘Are you sure you want to go that hard for your audition?’ I said: ‘Do you know what? I feel like I’m either definitely going to get it or they’re going to say what the fuck?’”
And here began the stuff of boyhood dreams. Boon was airlifted out of lockdown for long discussions in the pub with Boyle, meetings with Steve Jones, Chrissy Hynde, Vivienne Westwood and the rest, plus three months of “bandcamp”. Rehearsals took place at the old ITV studio overlooking the Houses of Parliament on the Thames, where Boon and the rest of the band were required to learn the full Pistols set list to near professional standard because Boyle wanted all the music to be played live on set. “I think we formed a bit of a brotherhood for life,” Boon says.
The series, based on Lonely Boy, the 2016 memoir by Jones, looks to have the career-launching potential of Boyle’s 1996 classic Trainspotting, which propelled Ewan McGregor, Kelly Macdonald, Robert Carlyle and Johnny Lee Miller towards stardom. Here, Toby Wallace is magnetic as Jones, and you might recognise Thomas Brodie-Sangster, the kid from Love Actually, as manager McLaren (or “the most evil man in the world,” as Lydon once called him.)
The Sex Pistols story is already one of the most fabled in rock’n’roll: the filth, the fury, the C-word on ITV, that gig that inspired everyone in Manchester to form a band, the Silver Jubilee, the BBC ban, Sid and Nancy, death, disorder, defiance, etc. But the focus on Jones gives Pistol a less familiar centre of gravity, emphasising the child abuse, rejection and delinquency that gave rise to the band’s music. The script, by Baz Luhrmann’s long-term collaborator Craig Pearce, won’t delight every punk fan, but taken as a whole is a sincere attempt to chart punk’s seismic impact on British culture. The thing that the director wanted to impress most on his young cast was just how boring England was until the Sex Pistols came along. “I think it was perhaps the first thing he ever said to me after I was cast,” Boon says. “And he kept reminding us of that, just how dull it was [at the time], and just how outrageous this boy with bright orange spiky hair and a bright pink blazer with safety pins and Tic Tac lids stuck on to it really was.”
Boon and his castmates soon discovered that the idea that anyone can play punk is a myth. “I mean, the way John sings is not easy,” says Boon, who had no prior musical experience. But they all had a sense they were getting somewhere when Jordan (Pamela Rooke), the model and muse credited with creating the punk look, dropped by the rehearsal rooms one afternoon and asked them to play for her.
“That was like big nerves,” says Boon. “I said: ‘What song do you want us to play?’ She said Holidays in the Sun, which is one of the hardest ones. So we did it and her reaction was just like more than we could’ve hoped for. She said: ‘I feel like I’ve just watched them again.’” She thanked him with a present of a face mask made from vintage Vivienne Westwood fabric and a small acting note. “She said: ‘Just make sure you curl your toes in a bit more because John was a bit pigeon-toed.’” Rooke died earlier this year – the face mask means even more to him now.
It feels cruel to interrupt Boon’s reminiscences of what was clearly the time of his life to point out that the idea of a biopic of the Sex Pistols (to be screened on Disney+, no less) is something Lydon himself has taken as a grave personal insult. I read Boon out a few of the comments that Lydon has made since his failed attempt to stop the series left him facing financial ruin: “Disney has stolen the past”…“Middle-class fantasy”… “Rewriting history”… “It would be funny if it wasn’t tragic.” What’s Boon’s response to all that?
He has clearly anticipated the question and, at first, his answer seems prepared. “First of all, Danny comes from a working-class background,” he says. “To me he’s a true hero because he really wants to respect the voices of working-class people.” But then the emotion cracks through. “I love John,” he says. “I’m really sorry that John feels this way; we really wanted him to be involved. I would’ve loved to speak to him. I thought I was going to speak to him. But the fact that he wasn’t involved genuinely spurred me on to keep trying to respect his voice and chase authenticity in my performance.”
Boyle told each cast member that it was their job to know more about their character than anyone else, including him. So Boon spent every spare moment “running the John department” reading Lydon’s three memoirs, YouTubing all the Lydon interviews he could find (including the one where he outed Jimmy Savile as a paedophile in 1978, allegedly leading to him being banned by the BBC), as well as all the concert footage. “He never stutters: that’s one thing I noticed about him early on. He’s such a wordsmith, so intelligent and quick-witted. He always says he spent a lot of time in the library growing up.”
He had to remind himself, in the end, that he was making a drama as opposed to a documentary. “But what lets me sleep at night is the fact that I know that I actually really like this man. I am a huge fan of his. Nothing I ever did in my performance came from a place of anything other than respect and admiration.”
Boon recently read that Lydon intends to watch the series and he hopes that if he does, it will finally vindicate the whole thing. “I’ve left so many clues and hints that I hope he will see. I completely learned to be left-handed. I only ever ate foods I know he loved; I always drink his favourite beer. I made sure that every detail down to the last gig where possible was correct.” And if he still hates it? Well, so be it. Lydon didn’t get where he was by being nice. When he issued his most recent denouncement of the project, Boon texted his fellow cast member, Talulah Riley, who plays Vivienne Westwood: “Is it weird that this endears me to him even more? Like, he says all these hateful things and I love it because that is Johnny Rotten. That’s the guy I love and I admire.”
The world is about to open for Boon. But he has no intention of leaving his parents’ home in Peterborough any time soon: he’s too attached to his nights out in Flares with his mates; his Spurs; the freedom of ordinariness. He is currently single (“You’re not gonna get me on women!”). And, as it stands, his biggest extravagance is: “I like a really wanky, fruity IPA – I’m partial to one of them, yeah.”
He has left the next few months deliberately free. But the experience of being a Pistol is informing his approach. “I find myself saying no to things a lot less now. Life is so short. Who cares what people think about you? I think I was more uptight before this job. Now I just say yes – just don’t give a fuck. That’s what punk taught me.”
Pistol is now streaming on Disney+
Stylist Helen Seamons; fashion assistant Peter Bevan; production Alex Oley; grooming Petra Sellge at the Wall Group using Daimon Barber grooming range.

Sister-in-law hid one dedicated to Gauguin because of ‘anger at the French artist’s attacks on his former friend’
Shortly before Vincent van Gogh cut off his left ear and had a breakdown after quarrelling with his fellow artist, Paul Gauguin, in the French city of Arles in 1888, he created a pair of extraordinary paintings. One, Gauguin’s Chair, depicts a couple of books and a lit candle discarded on an ornate armchair. The other, Van Gogh’s Chair, shows a tobacco pipe and pouch on a rustic wooden chair and is instantly recognisable as one of the most famous paintings in the world.
Now, the mystery of how the diptych of paintings came to be split up – and why the picture of Gauguin’s chair was kept in the family collection while Van Gogh’s Chair was sold off – has finally been solved.
The answer lies in the decision of Johanna Bonger, who inherited the paintings as the widow of Van Gogh’s brother, Theo, not to exhibit the masterpieces together in the decades after Van Gogh’s death in 1890 due to her “dislike of Gauguin”.
While she was happy to lend out Van Gogh’s Chair to exhibitions, she kept Gauguin’s Chair back, abandoning the work to obscurity, research by a Dutch academic has revealed.
It was not until 1928, three years after she died, that Gauguin’s armchair was first selected for an exhibition. By that time, Van Gogh’s Chair was already famous and had been sold to the Tate.
“Johanna never showed Gauguin’s Chair, while Van Gogh’s Chair was promoted as a really important piece of art,” said Louis van Tilborgh, senior researcher at the Van Gogh museum and professor of art history at the University of Amsterdam, whose research was published in the Dutch art journal Simiolus and highlighted by the Art Newspaper.
Van Tilborgh told the Observer that he thinks the reason Bonger did not want to exhibit the painting was that she disliked Gauguin after the French artist publicly belittled his former friend. “Gauguin, very early on, spread the word that Van Gogh was not only mad but also that he, Gauguin, had to teach Van Gogh how to paint. I think Bonger knew that and my conclusion is that, for that reason, she didn’t want to put those two pictures together.”
Exhibiting the painting might have lent credence to the suggestion that Van Gogh was a disciple of Gauguin’s, and therefore an inferior artist. “Probably, by not showing the two works together, she wanted to avoid discussion about it.”
Van Gogh painted the pictures after inviting Gauguin, whom he deeply admired but hardly knew, to live with him in Arles and work on great art together. He purchased 12 “exceedingly simple” wooden chairs but only one ornate, luxurious armchair, which he placed in Gauguin’s room.
“In art historical literature, they have always been described as empty chairs. And the emptiness was connected to the fact that art historians and psychoanalysts believe Van Gogh predicted he and Gauguin would split up,” Van Tilborgh said.
Van Gogh wrote a letter to his brother about his work on the paintings, describing them as “rather droll”. Due to a mistake concerning the date of that letter, for nearly a century it was thought Van Gogh had painted the chairs immediately after Gauguin announced their temperaments were incompatible and Gauguin was thinking of moving out.
The date of this letter was corrected in 1984. But art historians have continued to suggest Van Gogh created the paintings in a state of dread and anxiety that Gauguin would abandon him and their studio collaboration, and their partnership would fail.
In fact, Van Tilborgh points out that Van Gogh completed the diptych long before Gauguin’s announcement, and the chairs are not empty but occupied by the belongings of their owners, indicating what they do to relax.
“It’s all about interpretation. Of course, you can say the chairs are empty, because there is nobody sitting in them. But, in principle, they are not empty. There are things on them, which suggest their owner’s presence.” He thinks Van Gogh painted the chairs in an optimistic frame of mind. “They symbolise a studio and a partnership, which gave him hope.”
After Gauguin left and Van Gogh was released from hospital, the injured artist deliberately added the tobacco pipe and pouch to his own – at that time, entirely empty – chair, ensuring his presence in the room of the painting was at least as obvious as Gauguin’s, whose chair already had the books and candle on it.
“He must have thought: ‘My own chair is empty. But I’m the only one who is here.’ So he had to add something to make this much more clear.”
Van Gogh then signed Van Gogh’s Chair but not Gauguin’s Chair, which – since Gauguin was no longer around to sit in it – he then described in a letter to his brother as “empty”. Van Tilborgh said: “He makes his picture of his own chair more important, because he has stayed.”
This status of Gauguin’s Chair as an unsigned painting might have been a factor in Bonger’s decision not to exhibit it, said honorary professor at the University of Edinburgh, Belinda Thomson, an art historian who specialises in the work of impressionists and post-impressionists. “She may have held it back, thinking it was one of the paintings Vincent didn’t consider to be important.”
Thomson thinks Van Tilborgh makes a “very compelling” argument that the chairs are not as “empty” as experts previously thought. “The dating of these chairs, well before the indications that the relationship was going wrong, just puts a different light on it. It makes them seem a much more positive, much more optimistic statement of their relationship.”
Given Van Gogh’s description of them as “drole” in French, she thinks they could almost be seen as slightly tongue-in-cheek or amusing, rather than paintings that depict a sense of longing, emptiness or failure. “It’s hindsight to make that reading. At the time they were painted, Van Gogh and Gauguin are getting along well.”
Later, when Van Gogh added a tobacco pipe and pouch to Vincent’s Chair, she suspects he was trying to make his own chair – which was, after all, one of 12 – just as personal and individual as Gauguin’s Chair. “It gives an equivalence between them.”
Richard Thomson, also a professor in the history of art at Edinburgh University,said he thought Van Tilborgh’s research could lead art historians to rethink not only other pictures of Van Gogh’s but his relationship with Gauguin. “It’s too easy to say Van Gogh and Gauguin fell out, and it was all very difficult and fraught, but here is a subtler, more complicated and I think deeper interpretation.”
This article was amended on 24 June 2022 to include reference to the Art Newspaper.

The official combat painter died in 1942 when his plane went down. Now his inspiring life story is the subject of a major documentary
The letter was dated 30 August 1942 and posted from Iceland. Eric Ravilious, one of the official war artists, wrote to his wife, Tirzah (“Tush”), of “an unbelievable lunch of caviar, paté and cheese”. He then described the island’s lunar-like craters before ending: “Would you like a pair of gloves, sealskin with fur on the back? Draw around your hand on writing paper so I can get the size. Goodbye darling. Hope you feel well again.”
The letter is read out by his one surviving child, Anne Ullmann, in Eric Ravilious: Drawn To War, which goes on general release – a rarity for an art film – on 1 July. His “Goodbye darling” was tragically apposite as, three days later, Ravilious’s plane went down over the sea. The letter reached his wife after his death.
A toddler when her father died and now 81, this is Ullmann’s first broadcast or filmed interview. She reveals moving letters between her parents, and how in the 1980s she discovered an unknown hoard of her father’s works, including many depicting submarines, in the bedroom of his best friend, the artist Edward Bawden.
This find began a resurgence of interest in Ravilious, who after the war was virtually forgotten for half a century. As Alan Bennett remarks in the film: “Now he is so loved. Nevertheless, he is a shared secret.”
It was seeing a poster of Ravilious’s Train Landscape at school that transformed Bennett into a devotee. Decades on, he reminisces about the evocative Englishness of other 1930s works such as Tea at Furlongs and The Westbury Horse.
Grayson Perry, whose childhood was spent in the same part of Essex where the Ravilious family eventually settled and where their neighbour was Bawden, said: “He takes simple subjects and turns them into masterpieces.”
The film’s award-winning director, Margy Kinmonth, who made previous TV documentaries about LS Lowry and Prince Charles’s paintings, said: “Yes, some might struggle over Ravilious’s name, but when they see his work, it is so recognisable.”
Known initially for his pastoral settings, Ravilious became one of the first second world war artists in a scheme established by Kenneth Clark, then director of the National Gallery. And it is Ravilious’s war letters that, largely because of his death – he was the first war artist to perish – have such resonance. Some of Tush’s survive too. All were left to their three children.
Ravilious wrote from near Norway in April 1940 of “bitter fighting” and “how the sun has not shone much by day or night”. Tush responded about “how terrifying it must be witnessing real war”. She told him that HMS Glorious was sunk in June 1940 with 1,500 British sailors drowned. “I’ll be so relieved to have you back,” she wrote, adding that their son John “was almost hit by a bomb in a field”.
By summer 1940, Ravilious was on a submarine, which he loved to draw and paint despite the cramped conditions. Based on the south coast, he sent several letters to Tush amid the German bombardment: “It’s pandemonium with all the shelling and yet I feel a stir in me that it really is possible to like drawing war activities.”
Tush gave birth to Anne in April 1941, but later that year wrote of a lump on her left breast. Ullmann said: “My father asked to be transferred from Yorkshire, where he was then based, to Essex. My mother needed a mastectomy and then an abortion as it was not felt safe to have another child.” She had become pregnant when Ravilious had been on leave to see his newborn.
Despite her problems, in mid-1942 Ravilious was posted to Iceland. The film tells how Tush felt she could not stop him, though she knew her husband might never return. “I lifted Anne up to wave a final goodbye,” she wrote in her diary. It proved to be a “final goodbye”, as Ravilious died on 2 September. Ullmann recalls in the film being told later “by the lady who lived down the lane, of her coming to my mother with a parcel of his effects. Included were his red spotted handkerchiefs. My mother was weeping her eyes out.”
Tush then had to write 49 times over two years to the War Office to get a widow’s pension before it was accepted that her husband was not just missing but formally dead. It was all the more awful because she had been left with three youngsters and deteriorating health. She died in her 40s of cancer in 1951.
“Somehow we then got on with our own lives,” said Ullmann. But as she and her brothers grew up, and, after the death of their stepfather (Tush had remarried in 1946), they wanted to find out more about their father. Ullmann wrote in the 1980s to Bawden, still residing in the same house in Essex. “He sent a very nice letter back.” Amazingly, Bawden told her that he had kept a large cache of Ravilious’s works under his bed.
After the discovery, the children began resurrecting their father’s career. Exhibitions were mounted, culminating in a large show at the Dulwich Picture Gallery in 2015, while prices for his work soared.
“Being a war artist was not a soft option,” said Bennett. “Painting was Ravilious’s active service – and he gave his life for it. Not quite a martyr’s death, but it preserves and elevates him.”

A Christmas tree that can receive text messages has been unveiled at London's Tate Britain art gallery.
The spruce has an antenna which can receive Bluetooth texts sent by visitors to the Tate. The messages will be "unwrapped" by sculptor Richard Wentworth, who is responsible for decorating the tree with broken plates and light bulbs. It is the 17th year that the gallery has invited an artist to dress their Christmas tree. Artists who have decorated the Tate tree in previous years include Tracey Emin in 2002.
The plain green Norway spruce is displayed in the gallery's foyer. Its light bulb adornments are dimmed, ordinary domestic ones joined together with string. The plates decorating the branches will be auctioned off for the children's charity ArtWorks. Wentworth worked as an assistant to sculptor Henry Moore in the late 1960s. His reputation as a sculptor grew in the 1980s, while he has been one of the most influential teachers during the last two decades. Wentworth is also known for his photography of mundane, everyday subjects such as a cigarette packet jammed under the wonky leg of a table.

French musician Jean-Michel Jarre is to perform at a concert in Copenhagen to mark the bicentennial of the birth of writer Hans Christian Andersen.
Denmark is holding a three-day celebration of the life of the fairy-tale author, with a concert at Parken stadium on 2 April. Other stars are expected to join the line-up in the coming months, and the Danish royal family will attend. "Christian Andersen's fairy tales are timeless and universal," said Jarre. "For all of us, at any age there is always - beyond the pure enjoyment of the tale - a message to learn." There are year-long celebrations planned across the world to celebrate Andersen and his work, which includes The Emperor's New Clothes and The Little Mermaid. Denmark's Crown Prince Frederik and Crown Princess Mary visited New York on Monday to help promote the festivities. The pair were at a Manhattan library to honour US literary critic Harold Bloom "the international icon we thought we knew so well".
"Bloom recognizes the darker aspects of Andersen's authorship," Prince Frederik said. Bloom is to be formally presented with the Hans Christian Andersen Award this spring in Anderson's hometown of Odense. The royal couple also visited the Hans Christian Anderson School complex, where Queen Mary read The Ugly Duckling to the young audience. Later at a gala dinner, Danish supermodel Helena Christensen was named a Hans Christian Andersen ambassador. Other ambassadors include actors Harvey Keitel and Sir Roger Moore, athlete Cathy Freeman and Brazilian soccer legend Pele.

Artists' secret postcards on sale
Postcards by artists including Damien Hirst and Tracey Emin have sold just hours after the opening of the Royal Academy of Arts annual Secrets sale.
The identity of the artist remains unknown until each work is bought and the signature is revealed on the back. "There are still some big names left, such as Mario Testino," said RCA spokeswoman Sue Bradburn. All postcards are priced at £35. The sale opened at 8am on Friday and will close at 6pm on Saturday. Ms Bradburn said there was a big queue at the start of the sale but it had now gone down.
She said the people that had bought the famous name postcards had arrived early and had spent time studying each work. "They would have known what to look for." The exhibition has been open for viewing since 19 November. Film director Ken Loach, fashion designer Hussein Chalayan and former Blur guitarist Graham Coxon have all designed postcards for the sale. Some of the contributing artists are students or recent graduates of the Royal College of Art and other leading art colleges. Money raised from the sale will go towards the RCA's Fine Art Student Award Fund which supports students with grants and bursaries. The famous sale is now in its 11th year.

Sundance to honour foreign films
International films will be given the same prominence as US films at next year's Sundance Film Festival, with movies dominated by the theme of war.
The independent film festival will feature two new international cinema competitions, during its 20-30 January season in Utah. Forty-two films will debut at Sundance, including The Liberace of Baghdad by British director Sean McAllister. The prestigious festival was founded by actor Robert Redford in 1981.
"We have always had an international component, but from next year they will enter a jury competition," festival director Geoffrey Gilmore said. "We wanted to give world cinema more emphasis and have now put it on par with the American dramatic and documentary competitions." Twelve films competing in the new world cinema documentary category focus on countries and people under siege.
The Liberace of Baghdad features an Iraqi pianist hiding in a hotel as he waits for a visa, while Finnish film The Three Rooms of Melancholia looks at the war in Chechnya. Shake Hands With The Devil: The Journey of Romeo Dallaire tells of a UN mission to Rwanda during the 1994 genocide, while French-Israeli production Wall looks at Israel's controversial security wall separating it from the Palestinian territories. The 16 films competing in the new world cinema dramatic category include works from Germany, South Korea, Angola, China, Denmark and Australia.
Several Hollywood stars feature in the festival's American independent drama category, including Keanu Reeves and Benjamin Bratt. Vince Vaughn stars in quirky movie Thumbsucker while 21 Grams actress Naomi Watts plays a budding Hollywood actress in Ellie Parker. The top Grand Jury prize at this year's festival went to low budget sci-fi thriller Primer, written and directed by Shane Carruth. Morgan Spurlock earned the directing award for Super Size Me, which became an international box office hit.

Day-Lewis set for Berlin honour
Actor Daniel Day-Lewis is to be presented with an award for his career in film at the Berlin Film Festival.
The 47-year-old, whose credits include his Oscar-winning performance in My Left Foot, will be presented with the Berlinale Camera award on 15 February. The honour, awarded since 1986, honours figures in cinema that the festival feels "particularly indebted to". Man to Man, a historical epic starring Kristin Scott Thomas, opens the German festival on 10 February. A candid documentary about the life and career of singer George Michael, A Different Story will also be screened at the 10-day event. '
Day-Lewis has competed four times at the Berlin Film Festival, with films In The Name Of The Father (1994), The Crucible (1997), The Boxer (1998) and Martin Scorsese's Gangs Of New York (2003). The festival praises him for his "sensational start" with roles in My Beautiful Launderette and costume classic A Room With A View, and a "great number of celebrated roles" in subsequent productions. Japan's oldest film studio will also be honoured along with Day-Lewis. Shochiku film studios, which was founded 110 years ago, will become the first cinematic institution to receive the Berlinale Camera award. Famous Japanese directors including Akira Hurosawa have had films produced at the studio.

Downloads enter US singles chart
Digital music downloads are being included in the main US singles chart for the first time.
Billboard's Hot 100 chart now incorporates data from sales of music downloads, previously only assigned to a separate download chart. Green Day's Boulevard of Broken Dreams is currently number two in Billboard's pop chart, and tops its digital chart. Download sales are due to be incorporated into the UK singles chart later this year.
Digital sales in the US are already used to compile Billboard's Hot Digital Sales chart. They will now be tallied with sales of physical singles and airplay information to make up its new Hot 100 chart. Its second new chart - the Pop 100 - also combines airplay, digital and physical sales but confines its airplay information to US radio stations which play chart music. In addition to Green Day, other artists in the current US digital sales top 10 include Kelly Clarkson, The Game and the Killers.
Sales of legally downloaded songs shot up more than tenfold in 2004, with 200 million track purchased online in the US and Europe in 12 months, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) reported last month. In the UK sales of song downloads overtook those for physical singles for the first time at the end of last year. The last week of December 2004 saw download sales of 312,000 compared with 282,000 physical singles, according to the British Phonographic Industry. The UK's first official music download chart was launched last September, compiling the most popular tracks downloaded from legal UK sites - including iTunes, OD2, mycokemusic.com and Napster. Westlife's Flying Without Wings - a 1999 track reissued for the occasion - was the first number one of the UK download chart.
A spokesman for the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) said the first combined UK download and sales chart was due to be compiled "within the first half of this year". "Work is going on across the music business right now to make sure the new chart works to plan," he said. The BPI spokesman described the UK music download chart, compiled by the Official Charts Company, as having been "a great success" since its launch. "It has provided a focus for the industry and has really driven interest in downloads among music fans," he said.

Glasgow hosts tsunami benefit gig
The top names in Scottish music are taking part in a benefit concert in aid of the victims of the Asian tsunami.
All 10,000 tickets for Saturday's concert, featuring Franz Ferdinand, Belle and Sebastian and Travis, at Glasgow's SECC sold out in 36 hours. Mull Historical Society, Deacon Blue, Idlewild, Texas, Mogwai and Teenage Fanclub are among the other acts performing at the concert. Organisers hope to raise at least £250,000 from the show.
It follows a Cardiff gig starring Eric Clapton, Keane and Jools Holland, which raised more than £1.25m. And it is taking place on the same night as a tsunami benefit show in Bristol, which will see Massive Attack and Portishead share a stage for the first time. Colin MacIntyre, of Mull Historical Society, was playing another gig on the same day but said he was determined to make the Glasgow benefit. He said: "I think we were all affected by seeing the reports coming from the Far East. "We all know somebody who was there, but more than that it was that we had never seen a wave of destruction, a natural disaster, like this in my generation. "I'm lucky as an artist to be able to perform at something like this."

Pop band Busted to 'take a break'
Chart-topping pop band Busted have confirmed that they plan to "take a break", following rumours that they were on the verge of splitting.
A statement from the band's record company Universal said frontman Charlie Simpson planned to spend some time working with his other band, Fightstar. However they said that Busted would "reconvene in due course". The band have had eight top three hits, including four number ones, since they first hit the charts in 2002. Their singles include What I Go To School For, Year 3000, Crashed The Wedding, You Said No, and Who's David?
The band, which also includes members Matt Jay and James Bourne, made the top ten with their self-titled debut album, as well as the follow-up, A Present For Everyone, in 2003. They won best pop act and best breakthrough act at the 2004 Brit Awards and were nominated for best British group. Most recently they topped the charts with the theme from the live-action film version of Thunderbirds, which was voted Record Of The Year on the ITV1 show. The band have capitalised on a craze for artists playing catchy pop music with rock overtones. The trio are seen as an alternative to more manufactured artists who are not considered credible musicians because they do not write their own songs or play their own instruments. However, recent rumours have suggested that Simpson has been wanting to quit the band to focus on Fightstar. He now plans to take Fightstar on tour.

Streets have 'album of the year'
The Streets, aka British rapper and songwriter, Mike Skinner have topped a poll to find the year's best album.
A Grand Don't Come for Free beat Keane's Hope and Fears in second place with Franz Ferdinand's self-titled album third, in the Q magazine poll. Skinner uses blunt beats under streetwise lyrics about such things as falling in love and drink and drugs. Q Magazine said: "A Grand Don't Come for Free captured the country's mood in a way no one could have predicted." A Grand Don't Come for Free is the second album from The Streets. It followed Original Pirate Material. Q Magazine also had praise for the runners-up in the poll. Keane's Hopes and Fears, was described as a "revelatory debut" which showed "they had songwriting flair to spare". It also said Franz Ferdinand's album sounded "natural, unforced (and) under-produced". Rock band U2's latest album How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb came fourth while Razorlight's Up All Night was in fifth place. Others notables on the list included Dizzee Rascal in at number 12 and The Zutons at 20. Estelle came in at 39, Joss Stone was 40th and Jamelia took the 44th place.

Manics in charge of BBC 6 Music
The Manic Street Preachers are to take over the helm of BBC digital radio station 6 Music for a week in December.
The Welsh band, whose hits include Design For Life and If You Tolerate This, have already chosen which records to play between 6 and 12 December. Their albums of the day include Who's Next by The Who and U2's Joshua Tree. The group will also perform their own live session. They follow in the footsteps of Radiohead, who took over the station for a week last year.
Bass player Nicky Wire will join Phil Jupitus on his morning show on Monday 6 December, while vocalist and guitarist James Dean Bradfield will appear on Andrew Collins' afternoon show on Thursday 9. The group have also chosen documentaries to air, such as The Leonard Cohen Story and Guitar Greats - Jimmy Page. The live concert session tracks they have picked include The Specials' Rat Race recorded at Hammersmith Odeon in London and Public Enemy's Fight The Power and Rebel Without A Pause. The band will also answer questions e-mailed in by 6 Music listeners.

Media seek Jackson 'juror' notes
Reporters covering singer Michael Jackson's trial in California have asked to see questionnaires completed by potential jurors.
Lawyers for news organisations said it was "really vital" for the responses of 250 potential jurors to be made public "to serve as a check on the process". Santa Barbara County Superior Court is due to consider the request on Monday. Mr Jackson denies child molestation. It is estimated his trial will cost Santa Barbara county up to $4m (£2.13m).
Meanwhile Michael Jackson's mother has said she is "100% certain" her son did not commit the child abuse charges he faces. The court is currently selecting 12 jurors and eight stand-by jurors for the trial, a process delayed until at least Thursday after a member of the star's legal team was hit by family illness. Defence lawyers argued against the bid by Associated Press and other news organisations to have potential jurors' responses made public.
"The release of the completed jury questionnaires does not serve any purpose other than to add to the sensationalist coverage of this case," a motion by Mr Jackson's lawyers stated. The estimated total costs of the trial, expected to last five months, range from $2.5m (£1.33m) to $4m (£2.13m) of local taxpayers' money. Those estimates do not include costs to the city of Santa Maria, the Superior Court or for the investigation and prosecution of the case. The cost of security and other needs around the courthouse has been estimated at $40,000 (£21,000) per day, said Jason Stilwell, a special projects manager at the county administrator's office.
Mr Jackson, 46, denies plying a boy with alcohol and molesting him. His mother Katherine Jackson told US TV network Fox News on Sunday that her pop star son told her he was innocent. "I believe that for one reason - I know his character," she said. "He loves children. You don't molest anything that you love." Describing Mr Jackson as "a good person", the mother-of-nine said she feared he would not be given a fair trial. "I can't sleep thinking about what these wicked people might try to do to him," she said.

Band Aid retains number one spot
The charity single by Band Aid 20 has held on the chart top spot for a second week, strengthening its chances of becoming the Christmas number one.
Do They Know It's Christmas, featuring artists including Chris Martin and Jamelia, held off Kylie Minogue to remain the week's biggest single. Next week's chart will reveal who will have the festive chart-topper Minogue's latest release I Believe in You went in at number two, pushing down Ice Cube's You Can Do It to three. Destiny's Child also slipped one place to four with Lose My Breath, followed by Girls Aloud at five with the Children in Need record I'll Stand By You.
The only other new entry in the top 10 came from Robbie Williams track Misunderstood, a new track written for his Greatest Hits album. There were no new releases in the entire top 40 album charts as record companies put out all the big releases early hoping to cash in on the lucrative Christmas market. U2's How to Dismantle a Bomb remains at number one for a third week in a row, followed by Williams' Greatest Hits. Opera band Il Divo have moved up one place with their eponymous album to number three. Maroon 5's album Songs About Jane has moved up to number seven despite being released 47 weeks ago. And the Abba Gold greatest hits album has crept back into the top 40 more than nine years after it was first released.

Rap boss arrested over drug find
Rap mogul Marion "Suge" Knight has been arrested for violating his parole after he was allegedly found with marijuana.
He was arrested in Barstow, California, on Saturday following an alleged traffic offence. He is expected to be transferred to a state prison while a decision is made on whether he should be released. Mr Knight, founder of Death Row Records, served a 10-month jail term in 2004 for punching a man while on parole for an assault conviction. Police said Mr Knight was stopped on Saturday after performing an illegal U-turn and a search of his car allegedly found marijuana.
He is also accused of not having insurance. A 18-year-old woman in the car was arrested for providing false information and having a fake ID card. She was later released. It was his second alleged violation, having previously served half of a nine-year sentence for breaking the terms of his parole. Mr Knight, 39, was jailed in October 1996 following his involvement in a fight with a rival gang just hours before rapper Tupac Shakur was killed in a Las Vegas drive-by shooting. He was driving Shakur's car at the time and was shot in the head. At the time he was on probation for assaulting two musicians. Mr Knight, a former bodyguard, set up Death Row records in the early 1990s with Shakur and Dr Dre among his protegees. But the label has always been dogged by allegations it supports gang culture and fuels the east and west coast rap rivalry.

Neeson in bid to revive theatre
Hollywood film star Liam Neeson has held a dinner party in New York to promote Belfast's Lyric Theatre.
The Ballymena-born actor said that the theatre on Ridgeway Street was in a "very dilapidated condition". Lyric chairman David Johnston has said that rebuilding the theatre, at a cost of £8m is the only answer. Mr Neeson said that the idea was to get a bunch of "healthy, wealthy Irish Americans" in one room and ask them to help with fundraising.
The Oscar-nominated actor, whose films include Schindler's List, Michael Collins and Star Wars: The Phantom Menace, said: "The Lyric is too important to the cultural and social life of Northern Ireland for this building to crumble and fall apart. "It gave me a start professionally. Mary O'Malley, the founder of the theatre, gave me my future. "In those days, in the mid-70s, when I was there, we were doing a play every four weeks. "Belfast was not a pretty town to be living in. "There was serious trouble, as you know, but this theatre was like a Belisha beacon of light and hope six nights a week, doing everything from Shakespeare to Yeats to O'Casey with a group of actors and actresses that affected me very deeply and still do." The Lyric began 50 years ago but the doors opened at its present site on the Stranmillis embankment overlooking the River Lagan in 1968.
As well as Liam Neeson, it also launched the careers of Adrian Dunbar and Stephen Rea and playwrights such as Martin Lynch and Gary Mitchell. Speaking to BBC Northern Ireland before the event at New York's SoHo House, Mr Neeson said that his spirit belonged to the Glens of Antrim. And he said that there was one figure from his childhood that he would love to portray on the big screen - Ian Paisley. He said that the DUP leader and preacher was a "very dynamic, extraordinary figure". Neeson used to listen to his sermons on a Friday night in Ballymena. He said: "What an orator. He was from that old school of bible-thumping righteousness. But it was so dramatic. I found him very powerful. "I'd love to get a chance to play him some time."

Elton plays Paris charity concert
Sir Elton John has performed at a special concert in Paris to raise money for the victims of the Asian tsunami.
The British singer played to a 2,700-strong audience on Sunday at the French capital's Bastille opera house. The concert was also part of an attempt to bring a broader range of events to the famous venue. Money raised will go to the Fondation pour l'Enfance (Foundation for Childhood) which aims to rebuild a children's shelter in Sri Lanka. Sir Elton played hits from his vast back catalogue to a sell-out crowd which included former French president Valery Giscard d'Estaing and his wife Anne-Aymone. The veteran pop star played piano accompaniment throughout the concert which lasted for three hours without an interval.
He told the crowd: "Throughout the years, I've done a lot of drugs and alcohol. It's true that I was a nightmare, impossible. For the last 14 years I've been normal. Now my drug is called David" - a reference to David Furnish, his partner. The crowd, who greeted each song with a standing ovation, also included French singer Charles Aznavour and British ambassador Sir John Holmes. Sir Elton has also teamed up with Phil Collins to record a version of Eric Clapton's 1991 hit Tears In Heaven to raise money for the relief fund. A release date has yet to be set for the recording, which was organised by Sharon Osbourne.

Elvis set to top UK singles chart
Rock 'n' roll legend Elvis is set to top the UK singles chart on Sunday, 27 years after his death.
The re-release of hit song Jailhouse Rock was out-selling X Factor winner Steve Brockstein's cover of Against All Odds by 2,000 copies on Tuesday. If the record does make the top spot, it will be Elvis' 19th UK number one. The last time he topped the charts was with the remix of the little-known song A Little Less Conversation, which was number one in June 2002. If Jailhouse Rock does reach number one on Sunday, it will be the 999th in the history of the UK pop charts. The song first topped the charts in 1958. Chart analysts say Elvis could score the 1000th number one as well. His record One Night will be released the following week, followed the week after by A Fool Such As I, as part of his record company SonyBMG's new Elvis campaign. It has called it "the most ambitious singles release campaign in the history of the UK record industry".

Wal-Mart is sued over rude lyrics
The parents of a 13-year-old girl are suing US supermarket giant Wal-Mart over a CD by rock group Evanescence that contains swear words.
The lawsuit, filed in Washington County, alleges Wal-Mart deceived customers by not putting warning labels on the cover. Trevin Skeens alleges Wal-Mart knew of the offending word because it had censored it on its music sales website. Wal-Mart said it was investigating the claims but had no plans to pull the CD. Wal-Mart has a policy of not stocking CDs which carry parental advisory labels. Mr Skeens said he bought the Anywhere But Home CD for his daughter and was shocked to hear the swearing when it was played in their car.
"I don't want any other families to get this, expecting it to be clean. It needs to be removed from the shelves to prevent other children from hearing it," said Mr Skeens of Brownsville. The lawsuit seeks to force Wal-Mart to censor the music or remove it from its stores in Maryland. It also seeks damages of up to $74,500 (£38,660) for every customer who bought the CD at Maryland Wal-Marts, and also naming record label Wind-Up Records and distributor BMG Entertainment in the legal action. "While Wal-Mart sets high standards, it would not be possible to eliminate every image, word or topic that an individual might find objectionable," Wal-Mart spokesman Guy Whitcomb told the Herald-Mail of Hagerstown.

Pete Doherty misses bail deadline
Singer Pete Doherty will have to spend the weekend in jail because he could not come up with £150,000 bond money for his bail on time.
The former Libertines singer had been granted bail with curfew restrictions at Highbury Corner Magistrates Court on charges of robbery and blackmail. But his lawyer said the money could not be raised on time. Mr Doherty, 25, was arrested following an alleged incident in a London hotel on Wednesday evening. Musician Alan Wass, 23, also of north London, appeared in court accused of the same offences.
Magistrates imposed a range of bail conditions on Mr Doherty including a curfew between 2200 and 0700, except when he attends a drug rehabilitation centre. He was told he would not be able to leave his home without being accompanied by a security firm. He must also surrender his passport and report daily to a local police station. Mr Wass was also given a curfew and told to surrender his passport. Mr Doherty left The Libertines at the end of June 2004, but continued performing with his band Babyshambles. The singer, who has been linked to supermodel Kate Moss, was arrested after police were called to the Islington hotel in response to claims that a man had been assaulted. A man in his 30s was later taken to University College Hospital, London, with facial injuries, before being discharged. A lawyer representing Mr Doherty and Mr Wass said outside court the pair strenuously denied the charges.

Rapper Snoop Dogg sued for 'rape'
US rapper Snoop Dogg has been sued for $25m (£13m) by a make-up artist who claimed he and his entourage drugged and raped her two years ago.
The woman said she was assaulted after a recording of the Jimmy Kimmel Live TV show on the ABC network in 2003. The rapper's spokesman said the allegations were "untrue" and the woman was "misusing the legal system as a means of extracting financial gain". ABC said the claims had "no merit". The star has not been charged by police.
The lawsuit, filed in Los Angeles on Friday, says the woman's champagne was spiked and she was then assaulted. The rapper's spokesperson said: "Snoop will have the opportunity to prove in a court of law that [the alleged victim] is opportunistic and deceitful. "We are confident that in this case, [the alleged victim's] claims against Snoop Dogg will be rejected." The lawsuit names Snoop Dogg - real name Calvin Broadus - plus three associates, The Walt Disney Company and its parent company ABC Inc.
The woman waited two years to sue because she was trying to negotiate a settlement with the media companies, her lawyer, Perry Wander, said. Disney and ABC "failed to provide a safe working environment for my client," he said. The legal action comes after the rap star sued a woman who claimed they tried to blackmail him to keep quiet about an alleged assault. The 32-year-old rapper has enjoyed six US top 10 albums since bursting onto the music scene with hit songs like What's My Name? and Gin and Juice in 1993.

Legendary music studio to close
The New York music studio where John Lennon spent his final hours is to close next month.
The Hit Factory, which opened 37 years ago, has played host to some of the biggest stars in music, including Paul Simon, Madonna and David Bowie. However, the rise in digital recording has affected business at the studio, which is relocating to smaller premises in Miami. Lennon recorded his final album Double Fantasy at the studio in 1979.
The studio was founded by Jerry Ragovoy in 1968. In 1975 it was sold to fellow producer Edward Germano, who turned it into a 100,000 square foot studio with seven recording rooms and live mastering suites. His first client was Stevie Wonder, who recorded part of his classic album Songs In The Key Of Life there. Other well-known albums to be recorded or partially recorded at the studio include Bruce Springsteen's Born In The USA, the Rolling Stones' Emotional Rescue and Paul Simon's Graceland. Michael Jackson, Billy Joel, Jay-Z and Beyonce are also among artists who have used the Hit Factory in the past, as well as 50 Cent who survived an attempt on his life as he left the premises in 2000. The studio made history in 1994 when it won a record 41 Grammy nominations for songs recorded, mastered or mixed there, including the soundtrack to the Whitney Houston film The Bodyguard.

Rapper Jay-Z becomes label boss
Rap star Jay-Z is to become a record company executive after being put in charge of one of hip-hop's most influential labels, Def Jam.
Jay-Z, who said he would make no more music after 2003's The Black Album, will become the company's president and chief executive from January. Def Jam's parent company, Universal, made the appointment after buying Jay-Z's Roc-A-Fella label. Def Jam's artists include LL Cool J, DMX, Ludacris, Ja Rule and Ashanti. Jay-Z will continue to run Roc-A-Fella, which he founded with Damon Dash in 1995 and has Kanye West and Beanie Sigel on its roster. Universal said on Wednesday it had bought the 50% of Roc-A-Fella it did not already own.
Antonio "LA" Reid, chairman of The Island Def Jam Music Group, said: "I can think of no-one more relevant and credible in the hip-hop community to build upon Def Jam's fantastic legacy." He hoped Jay-Z would "move the company into its next groundbreaking era", he added. Jay-Z, real name Shawn Carter, said: "I have inherited two of the most important brands in hip-hop, Def Jam and Roc-A-Fella.
"I feel this is a giant step for me and the entire artist community." One of the most successful and respected rap stars of the last eight years, Jay-Z's hits have included Hard Knock Life, Dirt Off Your Shoulder and 03 Bonnie and Clyde with his girlfriend Beyonce Knowles. He said he would retire after The Black Album, but has just released an album and been on an ill-fated tour with R Kelly. Def Jam was founded in 1984 by Russell Simmons and producer Rick Rubin and signed artists including Run-DMC, The Beastie Boys and Public Enemy.

REM concerts blighted by illness
US rock band REM have been forced to cancel concerts after bass player Mike Mills was taken to hospital suffering from "severe flu-like symptoms".
The band were forced to cut short Monday night's show in Sheffield, and have cancelled Tuesday's Glasgow date. Mills could "hardly stand up, let alone play", said an REM spokesman, who added he is now "resting" in hospital. The remainder of the band played a short acoustic set on Monday. Tuesday's gig has been rescheduled for 15 June. Those who had a ticket for the show in Glasgow are being advised to retain their ticket stub so they can attend the new date. The band's spokesman said that they would review their remaining dates on a "day-to-day basis", based on doctors' advice to Mills. "Obviously we all want Mike to get better, and clearly we all want to play the shows. Rest assured we will do so as soon as possible," he said.
The band were still hopeful they would be able to make their Wednesday date, added the spokesman. REM played accoustic versions of their hits Losing My Religion, I've Been High, Leaving New York and The One I Love to the Sheffield Arena audience on Monday. The band had originally been scheduled to play four dates in the UK as part of a world tour. In 1995 former drummer Bill Berry collapsed in Switzerland while the band was on tour, having suffered a ruptured aneurysm. He made a full recovery, only to leave the band two years later.

Ring of Fire hit co-writer dies
Merle Kilgore, co-writer of the country hit Ring of Fire, has died of congestive heart failure aged 70.
He started out as a singer and songwriter before going into music management, looking after country star Hank Williams Jr. He wrote Ring of Fire with June Carter Cash, the future wife of Johnny Cash who went on to score his most popular hit with the track. Kilgore had heart surgery in 2004 and was also diagnosed with lung cancer. His death has been attributed to treatment he was undergoing for the cancer. His first self-penned top 10 hit was Dear Mama in 1959.
One of the first songs he wrote for other artists was Wolverton Mountain, which sold 10 million copies when recorded by Claude King. He then wrote Ring of Fire with June Carter Cash, which was about her unrequited love for Johnny, who she later married. It was first recorded by her younger sister Anita Carter before Johnny went on to make such a success of it. June Carter Cash previously said it upset her husband when Kilgore talked about the song without crediting her and believed he should not have been credited on it. Last year, Kilgore turned up an awards dinner in a wheelchair expecting to honour Hank Williams Jr, but instead he was the surprise recipient of a lifetime achievement award from the International Entertainment Buyers Association.

To mark the 60th anniversary of the birth of reggae star Bob Marley, Rob Partridge - Marley's former head of press at Island Records - remembers the man behind the legend.
Partridge worked with Marley from 1977 until the Jamaican musician's death in 1981.
: "I joined Island Records in 1977 and the first week I was there I worked on his show at the Rainbow Theatre. It was one of the last dates he did in London."
: The album Exodus came out in 1977 and that provided five hits and confirmed his global superstar status. "By 1979 he was the biggest touring attraction in the world. I remember going to see dates in Milan and Turin and they were enormous concerts."
: Bob was one of the most mesmeric people I've ever had the privilege to work with. "He must have had an iron will to succeed. Bob was a very driven individual. You realised from the start there was a manifest destiny within him that he believed in. He didn't suffer fools gladly. At the risk of stating the obvious, he was an extraordinary song writer and his stage act was perhaps the greatest I've ever seen. I saw him many times."
: "I recall in 1978 he came to the UK for Top of the Pops and a Daily Mirror journalist did a half-hour interview. It was interrupted to do a rehearsal. He came back into the dressing room to resume the interview but saw a World Cup match on TV.
"He sat down in front of the TV and after 10 minutes it was obvious he wasn't going to move. That was the end of it. The Mirror had a very truncated interview. "The last time I saw him was in London in 1980. I arranged for him to play four days of football indoors in Fulham. "Bob was a good player. We are talking about Jamaican-style football. He was an attacking midfield player. His team assembled wherever his gigs were. We played in Brazil against some World Cup-winning players."
: It was always a struggle for him to connect with Black America. Reggae did not correspond with disco in the 70s. But Bob in the 1990s became one of the great icons in America and the Third World. "In 1991, ten years after his death, he sold more records than at any time during his life. "We saw Black America taking Bob into their hearts for the first time."
: "Bob, in worldwide terms, is the greatest music star there has ever been. If you went to Africa he would be recognised everywhere, in places John Lennon or Elvis wouldn't be. "No disrespect to the other artists but a case can be made for him as the greatest, the best and the most influential artist in popular music."
: Well 1981 was to be the year he toured Africa with Stevie Wonder. He had only performed in Zimbabwe and Guinea before. "Of course the 1981 tour never happened, but the whole of Africa would have embraced him. We can't speculate but he was at the height of his powers and just 36 years old. I had no sense his career was going to go downhill."
: "Bob was endlessly optimistic about the way Africa would turn out. He realised that nothing was perfect but he had total belief in the power of mankind. "I'm sure if he were alive today he would believe Africa would firstly become politically free and secondly be able to defeat the Aids epidemic."
: "The final tune of his final album was Redemption Song - one of the most incredible classics of all time."

Levy takes Whitbread novel prize
Orange Prize winner Andrea Levy has seen her book Small Island win the Whitbread Novel of the Year Award.
She is now favourite to win the overall prize after beating Booker winner Alan Hollinghurst's The Line of Beauty. Geraldine McCaughrean has picked up the children's fiction award for the third time for Not the End of the World. All the category winners go through to compete for the Whitbread Book of the Year title, which carries with it a £25,000 prize. A panel of judges including Sir Trevor McDonald, actor Hugh Grant and writer Joanne Harris will meet up on 25 January to decide the overall winner, with the announcement being made later that evening.
Bookmaker William Hill has placed London-based Levy's novel as the 6/4 favourite to win.
Small Island, Levy's fourth novel, is set in post-war England and centres on a landlady and her lodgers. One is a Jamaican who joined British troops to fight Hitler but finds life difficult out of uniform when he settles in London. The judges, who included authors Jenny Colgan and Amanda Craig, were full of praise for her writing. "What could have been a didactic or preachy prospect turns out to hilarious, moving humane and eye-popping. It's hard to think of anybody not enjoying it," wrote the judges. The first novel section was won by Susan Fletcher for Eve Green, beating the favourite Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell by Susanna Clarke. Fletcher has recently graduated from graduated from the University of East Anglia creative writing course. Waterstone's fiction writer buyer Suzie Doore said: "It is great to see Susan Fletcher win in the first novel category. As a relatively unknown author this award will give her exposure to a wider and mass audience that she may not have reached and is a perfect example of the influence of the Whitbread. "Fresh out of university she is certainly one to watch."
In the biography category it was John Guy's The Life of Mary Queen of Scots that was picked as winner. The judges called it "an impressive and readable piece of scholarship, which cannot fail but leave the reader moved and intrigued by this most tragic and likeable of queens". Guy has published many histories, including Tudor England. He is a fellow at Clare College, Cambridge and became a honorary research professor of the University of St Andrews in 2003. Michael Symmons Roberts' fourth collection of poems scooped the poetry award. His works mixes mysticism, erotica and philosophy through life, death and resurrection. As well as writing poetry, Symmons Roberts also makes documentary films. Children's winner McCaughrean, who went into magazine publishing after studying teaching, previously won the Whitbread Prize in 1987 with A Little Lower than Angels and in 1994 with Gold Dust. She has previously been the winner of the Blue Peter Book of the Year.

Belle named 'best Scottish band'
Belle & Sebastian have been named the best Scottish band of all time after a three month-long public poll.
The group beat Travis and Idlewild into second and third place respectively. Franz Ferdinand, who recently picked up five Brit Award nominations, ended up in 15th place, while the Eurythmics wound up at a lowly 38. Other Scottish acts, such as the Mull Historical Society who also featured in the top 50, performed at a party in Glasgow where the result was announced. Scottish-based band Snow Patrol, who finished 14th in the vote and have been nominated for a pair of Brit Awards, were among the performers who covered well-known Scottish pop songs at the party on Wednesday night.
Indie stalwarts Belle & Sebastian have enjoyed a chart career stretching back to 1997. They were the surprise winners of the Brit Award for best breakthrough act two years later. Scottish bands from earlier musical eras also made it into the final list, including 1970s tartan boy band the Bay City Rollers and goth favourites the Jesus and Mary Chain.
Scottish magazine The List recently compiled a list of the top 50 Scottish bands of all time, but left the final decision to the public. The magazine's music editor Mark Robertson said: "The idea behind the project was simple - to rediscover the very best of Scottish music, from the finest musical talent spanning from the age of 70s rock through to 80s pop, right up to today's international stars." "Everyone has strong opinions about this and we wanted to open it up to the public to decide," he added. BBC Radio Scotland presenter Vic Galloway, who has been involved in the project, said it had been "great fun" to look back at Scotland's musical heritage and take note of up-and-coming Scottish acts.

Dance music not dead says Fatboy
DJ Norman Cook - aka Fatboy Slim - has said that dance music is not dead, but has admitted it is currently going through a "fallow patch".
The commercial failure of the latest albums by Britain's two biggest dance acts - Fatboy Slim's Palookaville and The Prodigy's Always Outnumbered Never Outgunned - has been coupled with the closure of many "superclubs," and the folding of three dance music magazines. Last month the Brit Awards announced they would no longer be awarding a Best Dance Act prize, with the Brits committee announcing that "dance music is no longer where it's happening in music." These developments lead some to suggest that dance was finished as a popular music genre. Cook acknowledged that much change in the dance world in the four years since his last album, Halfway Between The Gutter And The Stars, but he stressed this did not mean the dance scene was permanently over. "Every week when I was making the album, I was reading articles about the demise of dance music - and obviously that affects you somewhat," he told BBC World Service's The Ticket programme. "I personally don't believe it's either dead or going to die, but it's going through a bit of a fallow patch. "So I think, consciously or subconsciously, reading every week that dance music was dead I would think 'right, scrub that track then'."
Although his album sales in the UK are down - Palookaville stayed in the UK top 75 for just three weeks - Cook has achieved recent global success with his beach parties. And event on Brighton sea front in 2002 attracted 250,000, people, while a later one in Rio achieved a crowd of 360,000. The DVD of the Rio set was the biggest seller of that year.
"With a crowd that big, if the weather's nice, the atmosphere before I even go is so good that about halfway through the first record I think 'I've got them'," Cook said. "I'm always really really nervous before the big ones - they had to give me Valium before Rio, because two hours before I was literally just pacing the floor. "For some reason, especially now I've got a reputation for it, the atmosphere and the joie de vivre that's already going on means all I have to do is play 'up' records." He promised more such parties in more locations around the world - despite problems after the Brighton event, which ended in chaos with many revellers finding themselves stranded as transport ground to a halt. One man also died of a heart attack, and a woman fell to her death during the free party. "We're having to widen our horizons from just beaches, because there's landlocked countries that want to get involved," Cook said. "We're doing Rio at the carnival, at the Maracana, and Sao Paolo - our new gig is famous football stadiums."
The DJ admitted, however, that his massive worldwide success had a downside, with intense media interest in his personal life. In particular, he said he had struggled to cope with tabloid intrusion during the temporary break-up of his marriage to Radio One presenter Zoe Ball, after she was linked with DJ Dan Peppe.
"The tabloid thing has been difficult at times," Cook said. "Especially the me-and-Zoe-Gate - it's quite scary." He said that he had been "determined" that what had happened with Ball did not affect the album. "At first I was doing deliberately jolly tunes so that people wouldn't think I was depressed," he explained. "Then I thought, 'that's not right'." And he highlighted a bizarre coincidence - that one song written before they split had turned out to have a great deal more meaning than intended. "I said to Zoe, 'I did this track called My Masochistic Baby Went And Left Me, do you mind if it's on the album?'" he recalled. "She said, 'yeah, it's hilarious, because your masochistic baby did leave you'." Cook also added that he had some ways of coping with the intense paparazzi pressure, which accumulates at the end of the private road he lives on - where Paul McCartney is a neighbour. "It's almost like prisoners rattling the bars with their mugs," Cook explained. "If there's a pap at the end of the road, everyone knocks on each other's doors - Paul comes round, and we warn him, because we don't know who they're after."

The new video of former Westlife singer Brian McFadden has been pulled after a Dublin school complained about being associated with his song Irish Son.
St Fintian's High School says it is clearly identified in the video, while McFadden never went there. McFadden makes claims that he was beaten at his own school in the song's lyrics, saying it had "cell blocks". The performer's record label Sony BMG has withdrawn the video and issued replacements to television stations. The label believed the school name was fictitious until they received the complaint. They have said the reference to the school was unintentional and coincidental.
The head of Christian Brothers' school St Fintian's, Richard Fogarty, said the video implied that the 24-year-old pop star had attended his school and was abused there. "The school has always treated its pupils with respect," Mr Fogarty said in a statement. McFadden makes specific references to the Christian Brothers in his song, but did not attend St Fintian's. Corporal punishment was outlawed in Irish schools in 1982 when McFadden was two years old.
McFadden, whose debut solo album is released next week, has said that every song is autobiographical and "a true story". Alcoholism and domestic violence are among the other topics dealt with in his songs, half of which have been written with Robbie Williams' former collaborator, Guy Chambers. McFadden, who quit chart-topping group Westlife in March, went to number one in September with his first solo single Real To Me. He enjoyed 12 chart-toppers with the boy band before parting company with them.

Byrds producer Melcher dies at 62
Record producer Terry Melcher, who was behind hits by the Byrds, Ry Cooder and the Beach Boys, has died aged 62.
The son of actress Doris Day, he helped write Kokomo for the Beach Boys, which was used in the movie Cocktail, earning a 1988 Golden Globe nomination. He also produced Mr Tambourine Man for the Byrds, as well as other his such as Turn, Turn Turn. Melcher died on Friday night at his home in Beverly Hills, California, after a long battle with skin cancer. He joined Columbia Records as a producer in the mid-1960s, and also worked with Gram Parsons and the Mamas and the Papas.
Earlier in his career, Melcher had hits as part of duo called Bruce & Terry, with future Beach Boy Bruce Johnston, which evolved into the Rip Chords group. Melcher also worked closely with his mother, producing The Doris Day Show and helping to run her charitable activities. In 1969 his name became linked with the Charles Manson murders, which saw the deaths of actress Sharon Tate and four of her friends at a home which Melcher once rented. Rumours circulated that Melcher - who knew Manson - was the killer's real target, because he had turned him down for a record contract. But Los Angeles police discounted the rumours, pointing out Melcher had moved to Malibu, and Manson knew of his new address.

Snow Patrol feted at Irish awards
Snow Patrol were the big winners in Ireland's top music honours, the Meteor Awards, picking up accolades for best Irish band and album on Thursday.
The Belfast-born, Glasgow-based band collected the prizes at the ceremony at Dublin's Point Theatre. Westlife won the award for best Irish pop act, voted for by the public, beating former member Brian McFadden. Franz Ferdinand picked up best international band and album while Paddy Casey collected best Irish male. Singer-songwriter Casey beat Brian McFadden and Damien Rice. Juliette Turner was named best Irish female.
In the international categories, Morrissey beat Eminem, Usher and Robbie Williams to best male while PJ Harvey pipped Kylie Minogue, Joss Stone, Anastacia and Natasha Bedingfield to the female crown. The 8,000 fans at the ceremony were treated to performances from US rapper Snoop Dogg, Brian McFadden with Delta Goodrem and The Thrills featuring Rolling Stones star Ronnie Wood. Snow Patrol's success came after a year in which they made a chart breakthrough with their third album Final Straw. "I think a lot of bands should go through a wee bit of a kicking before the make a success," singer Gary Lightbody and drummer Jonny Quinn said. "It has been good for us, but also hard for us over the past six years." Snow Patrol will support U2 on their European tour later this year - but U2 were not nominated for best Irish band and album.

Doves soar to UK album summit
Manchester rock band Doves have entered the UK album chart at number one with their new release, Some Cities.
The trio replace flamboyant US act Scissor Sisters at the top. The album follows single Black and White Town, which reached number six. R&B star Nelly has the new number one single with Over and Over, which sees him team up with Tim McGraw. Girls Aloud, Akon and Kaiser Chiefs all have new singles in the top ten, as do Futureheads and Usher.
The latest Elvis Presley re-release, (Marie's The Name) His Latest Flame, entered the chart at number three, one place ahead of Girls Aloud's Wake Me Up. Hip-hop performer Akon's Locked Up is at number five, while hotly-tipped Leeds band Kaiser Chiefs have their second chart hit at number six with Oh My God.
Futureheads' cover of Kate Bush's Hounds of Love entered the chart at number eight, while Usher's Caught Up was a new entry at number nine. In the album chart, operatic quartet Il Divo's eponymous debut rose 23 places to number six, while crooner Tony Christie's Definitive Collection is a new entry at number 10, making it the highest-charting album of the singer's career.

Downloads enter US singles chart
Digital music downloads are being included in the main US singles chart for the first time.
Billboard's Hot 100 chart now incorporates data from sales of music downloads, previously only assigned to a separate download chart. Green Day's Boulevard of Broken Dreams is currently number two in Billboard's pop chart, and tops its digital chart. Download sales are due to be incorporated into the UK singles chart later this year.
Digital sales in the US are already used to compile Billboard's Hot Digital Sales chart. They will now be tallied with sales of physical singles and airplay information to make up its new Hot 100 chart. Its second new chart - the Pop 100 - also combines airplay, digital and physical sales but confines its airplay information to US radio stations which play chart music. In addition to Green Day, other artists in the current US digital sales top 10 include Kelly Clarkson, The Game and the Killers.
Sales of legally downloaded songs shot up more than tenfold in 2004, with 200 million track purchased online in the US and Europe in 12 months, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) reported last month. In the UK sales of song downloads overtook those for physical singles for the first time at the end of last year. The last week of December 2004 saw download sales of 312,000 compared with 282,000 physical singles, according to the British Phonographic Industry. The UK's first official music download chart was launched last September, compiling the most popular tracks downloaded from legal UK sites - including iTunes, OD2, mycokemusic.com and Napster. Westlife's Flying Without Wings - a 1999 track reissued for the occasion - was the first number one of the UK download chart.
A spokesman for the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) said the first combined UK download and sales chart was due to be compiled "within the first half of this year". "Work is going on across the music business right now to make sure the new chart works to plan," he said. The BPI spokesman described the UK music download chart, compiled by the Official Charts Company, as having been "a great success" since its launch. "It has provided a focus for the industry and has really driven interest in downloads among music fans," he said.

Top gig award for Scissor Sisters
New York band Scissor Sisters have won a gig of the year award for their performance at this year's V Festival.
The award was voted for by listeners of Virgin Radio, which compiled a top 10 which was mostly dominated by newcomers on the music scene this year. The quirky disco-rock band beat The Red Hot Chili Peppers who came second for their Hyde Park performance in June. Virgin Radio DJ Pete Mitchell said: "This year has seen an amazing array of talent come into the mainstream." He added: "The Scissor Sisters are one of the most original, eccentric bands to come through and it's no surprise the British public are lapping up their performances." Newcomers Keane came in third place for their August gig at the V Festival, followed by Maroon 5 and Snow Patrol.
Music veterans The Who and David Bowie, both earned places on the list, at number eight and 10 respectively. At number seven was Oxfam's Make Fair Trade gig at London's Hammersmith Apollo in October, which featured performances by REM, Razorlight and Coldplay's Chris Martin. Glasgow's Franz Ferdinand earned a place at number nine for their home-town performance in April. The annual survey was voted for by nearly 4,000 listeners.

Brits return Keane to number one
Brits success has helped return Keane's award-winning album Hopes and Fears back to the top of the UK album chart.
The debut album, which took the best British album title at the Brits on Tuesday, moved up seven places from number eight to number one. Also capitalising on Brits success were the Scissor Sisters whose eponymous album moved three places to number two. U2's latest single Sometimes You Can't Make It On Your Own took the top spot in the singles chart, ahead of Elvis. The track, from their current album How To Dismantle An Atomic Bomb, pushed Eminem's Like Toy Soldiers from number one to number three.
Elvis' Wooden Heart, which entered the chart at number two, is the sixth in a series of 18 reissues to mark the 70th anniversary of Presley's birth. There are currently six re-released Elvis' tracks occupying spots in the top 40 singles chart including Are You Lonesome Tonight at number 20, It's Now or Never at number 27 and Jailhouse Rock at number 37. Soldier, by Destiny's Child, Ti and Lil Wayne, debuted at number four, while Almost Here, the duet from former Westlife star Brian McFadden and Delta Goodrem, fell from number three to number five. There was more follow up to Brits success for Franz Ferdinand won best rock act and best British group last week. Their self-titled album moved from 13 to number four. Last week's number one album Tourist, by Athlete, fell to number three.

Charity single for quake relief
Singers including Sir Cliff Richard and Boy George are recording a charity single to help raise funds for victims of the Asian tsunami.
They hope the song will raise more than £2m for the relief fund. The song, titled Grief Never Grows Old and described as a melancholy ballad, was written by radio DJ Mike Read. Former Boyzone singer Ronan Keating may also take part if a studio can be found close to where he is holidaying in Switzerland. Other music stars being approached include Robin and Barry Gibb of The Bee Gees, jazz sensation Jamie Cullum, Chris Rea and Olivia Newton-John.
Sir Cliff has recorded his vocal part in Barbados, while Boy George has recorded his in New York. Read wrote the song before the Boxing Day tragedy but had thought it was too gloomy to release. Now he plans to have it recorded by a collection of pop stars under the name One World Project. "It's a natural home for it because people kept saying to me, 'it's such a good song', but it's such a sad song," Read said.
He said the song was a slow ballad and would work with around 10 singers, rather than a "sing-along" like the Band Aid 20 single raising money for famine relief in Africa. The backing track has already been recorded and organisers hope it can be finished within the next week to get it into record shops as soon as possible. Read went to the Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC), which is co-ordinating the British relief effort, with the idea the day after Boxing Day. "I was totally shocked at the enormity and suddenness of the disaster and in tears on seeing the orphaned children wandering aimlessly in search of their parents," he said. Read said all the funds raised by the record would go to the DEC. "I'd only be pleased in terms of what it meant for sales if it got to number one," he added. The charity welcomed the news of the single and said money raised would help its agencies working in the affected region to rebuild survivors' lives and livelihoods.

Young book fans have voted Fergus Crane, a story about a boy who is taken on an adventure by a flying horse, the winner of two Smarties Book Prizes.
Paul Stewart and Chris Riddell's book came top in the category for six- to eight-year-olds and won the award chosen by after-school club members. Sally Grindley's Spilled Water, about a Chinese girl sold as a servant, was top in vote of readers aged nine to 11. Biscuit Bear by Mini Grey took the top award in the under-five category. Winners were voted for by about 6,000 children from a shortlist picked by an adult panel.
The prize, which is celebrating its 20th year, is billed as "the UK's biggest children's book award". Fergus Crane includes text by Stewart and illustrations by Riddell, who also created The Edge Chronicles together. As well as the six to eights prize, it won the 4Children Special Award voted for by after-school club members. Julia Eccleshare, chair of the adult judging panel, said children's literature had "never looked stronger" in the prize's 20 years. "This award counts because the final choice of winners is made by children, who are the toughest critics of all," she said. "This year's young judges chose the winners from an exceptionally strong and varied shortlist which showcases the very best in children's books today." Previous winners have included JK Rowling, Jacqueline Wilson and Dick King-Smith.

Franz man seeks government help
Franz Ferdinand frontman Alex Kapranos has called for more government help for musicians, while taking part in an Edinburgh Lectures discussion.
"For any cultural output to thrive there needs to be some kind of state input to that as well," he said. But Kapranos warned against musicians being too closely linked with MPs, at the University of Edinburgh event. "I think the role of musicians is to question politicians rather than to go to bed with them," he said.
Kapranos joined the prestigious lecture series to discuss Scotland's role in making 21st Century music. "There are elements of our musical output which require sustenance because they aren't self-sufficient," he said. "But so-called commercial music would benefit from investment as well." He warned musicians against being allied to a particular party, however. "I don't know if having tea with politicians is always a good idea."
Kapranos and his Glasgow four-piece band have been nominated for five prizes at next week's Brit Awards, including best group and best album. Their self-titled debut album won last year's Mercury Music Prize and spawned three top 20 singles. He told the 300-strong audience at the University's Reid Hall that musicians should listen to a wide range of music and should not be restricted by stereotypes. "We say 'I like this'. Because I listen to Nirvana and Korn I am a troubled individual, I'm riddled with angst because I listen to Chopin and Debussy, I listen to Kylie Minogue and Scissor Sisters because I'm upbeat and I like to party, I listen to Wagner because I like the smell of napalm in the morning." Kapranos said there was a general "hostility" towards classical music, adding: "There is very little done to break that hostility other than Classic FM."
He concluded: "We define ourselves as a nation by the way we encourage our creativity." Fellow speaker and classical composer James MacMillan agreed: "We need to rediscover our ability to listen." Previous speakers at the Edinburgh Lectures series have included former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev and author Professor Stephen Hawking. Kapranos described his appearance on Wednesday as "more daunting by a long way" than their upcoming Brits performance. "I don't really care about the Brits," he said. "It's going to be great to go down but I have actually had to exercise part of my brain tonight."
I think the government should do more to help up-and-coming artists be discovered by scrapping the entertainment licences for live venues. Also they should do more to help independent record labels have a louder voice within an industry dominated by commercialised major labels.
Rather than expecting the government - i.e. the taxpayer - to fork out, why don't some of the megastars put something back in? Some of Britain's wealthiest people are musicians who have raked it in from albums, concerts etc. There are far more important demands on government funds.
If they can fund football, why not fund music?
Areas of the arts are funded by government and lottery grants, so why not music? We already have the opera receiving huge grants and it would clearly be beneficial for diversity in music to have the same opportunities in other areas of the music. The only problem would be how to judge what merits state cash.
The government has enough problems funding schools and health services. If Alex Kapranos genuinely thinks a multi-billion pound industry should also have government funding then his own education was seriously lacking and more money should be put into that.
As a Scot living in England, I appreciate the value of Scottish music and culture being a success, so I can see no problem with it! Franz Ferdinand, Travis and Snow Patrol are just recent examples of the success Scottish music can have in the world, so we should do what we Scots are good at and support our own goods!
I think the issue is more fundamental: should the government be spending money on subsidising a multi-million pound industry when health and education are in such a sorry state? The answer is most definitely no. Those people who are lucky enough to pursue their passion to get their pay cheque shouldn't be looking for government subsidies. I know that if I was lucky enough to be able to pursue my dream of show jumping I would want to finance myself until I was in a position to pursue corporate sponsorship.
Yes the government should fund music - it brings joy to the masses.
There are already thousands of state-funded musicians out there sitting around, twiddling their thumbs on the "new deal". Getting the government even more involved would only waste money that could be put to better use.
As long as the Government was funding real talent it would be a great move. I would hate to see more Pop Idol-type funding of music though, as it would only serve to reinforce the stereotypes that Alex talked about.
Only if the proposals make financial sense. Franz Ferdinand must be paying serious amounts of tax on their record sales - if they'd had a government grant to get started they'd have more than paid it back by now, so the Treasury would be making far more than it paid out. However, the government has better things to spend its money on than to give charity to everyone who decides they're a musician. The government shouldn't "fund" music - it should "invest" in music and those investments should be treated like any other investment.
I think the government needs to provide facilities and for young groups and bands to form and practise. The equipment is not cheap and can be well beyond the means of many people. However, I do feel this should be the extent of their role, to provide the conditions for the talent to flourish and let it go from there.
I do agree that the government should help to fund music but there is also a responsibility held by record companies! They generally always opt for the tried and tested and tend not to want to break any moulds or risk losing any money which ultimately, the directors are in the business for! If labels were more willing to put money forward towards smaller breakthrough acts then the government wouldn't have to fork out a great deal.
Yeah, why not? Music should be government funded, particularly the work of modern composers and veteran bands/artists and stuff. Pop music pretty much rules the earth, so more attention should go to the other fraternities
I agree with funding the arts to make it more accessible to the public but I am not convinced that pop music requires financial support from the taxpayer. There is a great deal of money generated through pop music - perhaps a tax on pop could be ploughed into the public performance of other forms of music for everyone to enjoy. Perhaps we could financially penalise really bad Pop Idol-style music - that is, the music industry sector without any artistic merit or originality whatsoever and that which is specifically designed to line the pockets of music producers. Call it a tax on music "pollution", if you like.
Though I really like Franz Ferdinand, I have to disagree with Mr Kapranos. Once government gets their hand into the private sector, it will destroy the creative and possibly controversial avenues the artist pursues. Many years ago, this was the case with the US NEA, when the government started to question what was considered art for the money they were allotting. The solution Mr Kapranos should pursue would be privately-funded organizations, like Save the Music in the US.

Hard act to follow for OutKast
US rap duo OutKast's trio of trophies at the MTV Europe Awards crowns a year of huge success for the band.
The latest triumph adds to the three Grammys and four American MTV gongs won earlier in this year. Andre 3000 and Big Boi's album Speakerboxxx/The Love Below has been critically acclaimed since its release and sold in large quantities around the world. The double album - which saw the pair produce one disc each - topped the charts in the US at the same time as single Hey Ya! It took another track from the exponents of southern hip-hop - The Way You Move - to displace it from the top spot. The Georgia pair's year of critical and commercial triumph leaves them with a tough act to follow - what can be next for a musical act that has done it all?
G Money, a presenter on the BBC's urban music station 1Xtra, thinks a hiatus is inevitable after such a sustained period of exposure - giving the band time to think about other interests. "They might be more appearances outside the band, such as producing for other artists, while they have a number of fringe music projects. "Andre 3000 would like to go into acting, so we might see him a film, while Big Boi already has a dog-breeding business," says the DJ.
"But in a couple of years they will be back with another album which will be a collaboration unlike their double CD. "Their greatness has become clear with Speakerboxxx/The Love Below. We haven't seen the last of them," he adds. OutKast's musical career spans 10 years and they have enjoyed commercial and critical success in the past, with their debut Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik going platinum. But it took until 2001 for the pair to score their first hit in the UK with Ms Jackson, while their album Stakonia saw their fame spread beyond the US.
1Xtra's G Money says it took the latest album, released in 2003, for him to be "assured of their genius". "They have always been experimental, some of it has worked and some hasn't," he adds. But G Money acknowledges that making the next move for a band that has reached a pinnacle can be tough. "What can you do next when you've done it all?" he says. With ten years of success behind them and worldwide fame, it seems that OutKast is not a name that is likely to be forgotten in a hurry.

Sir Paul rocks Super Bowl crowds
Sir Paul McCartney wowed fans with a live mini-concert at American football's Super Bowl - and avoided any Janet Jackson-style controversies.
The 62-year-old sang Hey Jude and other Beatles songs in a 12-minute set at half-time during the game in Florida. Last year, Jackson exposed a breast during a dance routine, causing outrage among millions of TV viewers and landing the CBS TV network a fine. Sir Paul, however, did nothing more racy than remove his jacket as he sang. Organisers were widely considered to be playing it safe this year by booking 62-year-old Sir Paul for his second Super Bowl show.
Three years ago, he was invited to perform at the first Super Bowl after the September 11 attacks and performed his specially-written song Freedom. This time, he started off the show, at the Alltel Stadium in Jacksonville, Florida, with the Beatles numbers Drive My Car and Get Back. He then performed a mellow version of Live And Let Die, the James Bond theme he recorded with the band Wings. Finally, he closed the show with a rousing version of Hey Jude. The former Beatle resisted any temptation to refer to Janet Jackson's headline-grabbing performance last year, instead keeping banter between songs to a minimum in order to squeeze as much music as he could into his slot. The singer removed his black jacket halfway through the show - but any fans hoping for a second "Nipple-gate" were to be disappointed as he kept his red sweatshirt on underneath.
Earlier, the Black Eyed Peas and Alicia Keys had provided the night's other high-profile entertainment by performing in a pre-game show. Black Eyed Peas singer Fergie was dressed in a tight orange top and purple hotpants, but nothing in her performance was likely to upset TV watchdogs. After the controversy last year - which saw CBS fined a record $550,000 (£292,000) by federal regulators - Super Bowl organisers had turned to producer Don Mischer to oversee this year's half-time show. His previous production credits included Olympic opening and closing ceremonies. The Super Bowl is watched by an audience of 144.4 million in the US, with many of the people watching are said to tune in specifically to see the entertainment put on around the event. Michael Jackson, Aerosmith, Diana Ross, Gloria Estefan and Phil Collins are among the stars who have previously graced the Super Bowl stage.

Rock group Korn's guitarist quits
The guitarist with US rock band Korn has quit the music business, saying he made the decision after experiencing a religious awakening.
Brian 'Head' Welch told a radio station in California that his bandmates respected his decision to leave. A replacement guitarist has yet to be named by Korn, who are currently at work on their eighth studio album. Welch added that he would appear at a church in Bakersfield to explain how he "got to this place in life". The remaining members of Korn, who are known for their hardcore brand of rock, said they hoped Welch "finds the happiness he is looking for".
The 34-year-old made reference to the band's aggressive brand of music and its young fans in his parting statement. "Anger is a good thing, and if kids want to listen to Korn, good, but there's happiness after the anger," he told his local radio station in Bakersfield. "I'm going to show it through my actions, how much I love my fans," added Welch. Korn have enjoyed a moderate degree of chart success in the UK, with 10 singles breaking into the Top 40. Their best performance to date in the UK has been 2002's Here To Stay, which reached number 12, while their album Untouchables, released in the same year, made it to number four.

Vibe awards back despite violence
The US Vibe awards will be held again next year despite a stabbing which happened during the ceremony.
Vibe magazine president Kenard Gibbs said the attack earlier this month in Santa Monica was "sickening". He said not holding the awards would be counter to the work the magazine has done to promote hip hop music. Rapper Young Buck has been charged after allegedly stabbing a man who hit Dr Dre as he was about to receive a lifetime achievement award.
The rapper, whose real name is David Darnell Brown, is due in court on 20 December after being arrested on one charge of attempted murder and a second charge of assault with a deadly weapon. The performer is one of the members of 50 Cent's G-Unit group, which is signed to Dr Dre's record label. The man who was stabbed, Jimmy James Johnson, suffered a collapsed lung and is in a stable condition at a Los Angeles hospital. Mr Johnson allegedly approached Dr Dre, who was seated at a table in front of the stage, and appeared to ask for an autograph before punching him. During the ensuing scuffle - which involved many of the 1,000-strong crowd - Mr Johnson was stabbed as he was being dragged away by security staff,

A formula for the ultimate Christmas single has been revealed by chart bible British Hit Singles and Albums.
The recipe includes a reference to Father Christmas, sleigh bells, a children's choir and a charity element. The song should also include Christmas in the title, wishes for peace on earth and lots of airplay at office parties. "There are common musical elements linking nearly all the big Christmas number ones of recent times," said editor David Roberts. The book's analysts commissioned chart prank group Moped to create the first Christmas single using the whole formula - the song is called Gonna Have a No 1 This Christmas by Moped Vs Santa.
"Everybody says that Christmas number ones are formulaic, but Gonna Have a Number One this Christmas is the first song to crack the formula and combine all these elements into one ultimate Christmas track" said Mr Roberts. "Surprisingly, there's no Santa listed among the 8,000, top 75 chart performers in the book, so this is our chance to help Santa to his rightful place in British recording history." Big festive hits over the years include Band Aid's Do They Know It's Christmas?, Slade's Merry Christmas Everybody, Wham's Last Christmas and Sir Cliff Richards' Mistletoe and Wine. Band Aid 20's remake of Do They Know It's Christmas is set to be confirmed as number one in the charts on Sunday.

Glastonbury fans to get ID cards
Fans who buy tickets for this year's Glastonbury festival will be issued with photo ID cards in an attempt to beat touts, it has been confirmed.
The cards will include a photograph of the ticket-holder plus an electronic chip with their details to prevent tickets being sold on or forged. Tickets for the June event are expected to go on sale in April. "There is only one place in the world where you will be able to get tickets," festival organiser Michael Eavis said. "That will be the official source. If you get them anywhere else, you won't get in." Fans not wanting to carry the entrance card could present their passport or driving licence instead, he added.
More than 153,000 people are expected to travel to Mr Eavis' Somerset farm from 24-26 June, but the event's rising popularity has meant an extremely high demand for tickets in recent years. When the ID card idea was floated, Mr Eavis' daughter Emily said it would be "quite a big step in terms of ticketing for events" if implemented and they were "going as far as we can" to cut touting. "As long as it's approached in the right way, it might really work, it might really change the system," she said. In 2004, all 112,000 tickets for the public sold out in 24 hours. They were personalised with the names of purchasers, who were asked to bring identification, such as a driving licence, passport or household bill. But some forgot to take the right information while some touts simply offered to supply their own bills along with the ticket bearing their name. No details of this year's line-up have been confirmed but rumours have suggested U2 and Coldplay may be among the headliners.

Queen recruit singer for new tour
The remaining members of rock band Queen are to go on tour next year with former Free and Bad Company singer Paul Rodgers taking Freddie Mercury's place.
Guitarist Brian May has said he expects to be on the road with Rodgers and drummer Roger Taylor from April. May said: "Suddenly the Queen Phoenix is rising again from the ashes and will take precedence over... our lives." Queen have played with many different singers since Mercury's death in 1991 but have reportedly not toured. May performed with Rodgers at a concert to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Fender Stratocaster guitar in London in September.
"We were both so amazed at the chemistry that was going on in [Free hit] All Right Now, that suddenly it seems blindingly obvious that there was 'something happening here,'" May wrote on his website. They teamed up again for a concert to mark their induction into the UK Music Hall of Fame, and were joined by Taylor. "The show went so incredibly well from our point of view, and we got so many rave reactions from out there, we decided almost then and there that we would look at a tour together," May wrote.
Queen went to number one in 2000 with a version of We Will Rock You sung by boy band 5ive and they have also played with Robbie Williams, Will Young and Bob Geldof. Queen bassist John Deacon has currently retired from the stage. Rodgers was singer with early 1970s rockers Free, who had a global hit with All Right Now, before forming Bad Company, a successful "supergroup" with members of King Crimson and Mott the Hoople. He has also been in The Firm with Led Zeppelin's Jimmy Page and The Law with The Small Faces and The Who drummer Kenny Jones.

U2 to play at Grammy awards show
Irish rock band U2 are to play live at the Grammy Awards presentation in the US next month, organisers have said.
Other acts to play include soul singer Alicia Keys, country singer Tim McGraw and punk band Green Day at the event on 13 February in Los Angeles. U2 are nominated twice for their recent single Vertigo, including a nomination for best rock song. This year the Grammys have been dominated by rap star Kanye West, who is in contention for 10 awards. US comedian Ellen Degeneres and singer Christine Milian will present awards at the event. Last week Grammy producers announced the show will be hosted by rap star and Chicago actress Queen Latifah. It will be held at the Staples Center. U2 had number one success in the album charts on both sides of the Atlantic in November when their latest studio album, How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb, topped the US and UK charts. The band, who are also dominated for best international album at this year's Brit Awards, are to undertake a major world tour this year, their first for four years.

Rock band U2 break ticket record
U2 have smashed Irish box office records with ticket sales for their Dublin concerts, after more than 150,000 were sold within 50 minutes.
Tickets for the two concerts at the city's Croke Park stadium were released at 8am on Friday morning. "Nothing like it has ever been seen in Ireland before," said Justin Green, spokesman for organisers MCD Promoters. "We could have sold a million tickets." The Dublin dates on June 24 and 25 form part of the worldwide Vertigo tour. The tour begins in San Diego on 28 March and will cover 13 US cities. The band will also play 24 European gigs, finishing in Lisbon in August.
Mr Green said that ticket outlets had been "bombarded" by U2 fans. "Unfortunately there's thousands and thousands of disappointed fans all over the country which is disappointing, but there's only two dates confirmed," he said. Many fans camped on the streets of the Irish capital for three days to ensure they were first in line at Ticketmaster in St Stephen's Green Shopping Centre, where the tickets went on sale on Friday. However the majority of tickets, priced at between 59.50 and 80 euro each, were sold online. Earlier this week, Bono announced that the band would play two shows at the venue, which holds almost 80,000 people, due to the phenomenal demand for tickets.

Mutant book wins Guardian prize
A book about the evolution of mutants and the science of abnormality has won the Guardian First Book Award 2004.
Armand Marie Leroi, a lecturer at London's Imperial College, scooped the £10,000 prize for Mutants: On the form, varieties and errors of the human body. "It is profoundly cultured and beautifully written in the very best tradition of popular science writing today," said judge Claire Armistead. The award recognises and rewards new writing across fiction and non-fiction. A panel of literary experts, including novelists Hari Kunzru and Ali Smith, director Sir Richard Eyre and comedian Alexei Sayle chose the winner from a five-strong shortlist.
The shortlist included Susanna Clarke's Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell, a novel about the magic arts at the turn of the 19th Century and The Places In Between, Rory Stewart's account of his trek, on foot, across Afghanistan. "What we found so impressive about Armand Marie Leroi's book was the scope of its reference, its elegance and its inquisitiveness," said Ms Armistead, chair of the judges and the Guardian literary editor. "While the subject matter of Mutants unsettled some involved in the judging process, the overwhelming majority found it fascinating," she added. Her words were echoed by Iris director Sir Richard Eyre who called Marie Leroi's work "extraordinarily thought provoking". The award, for first time authors, is open to books from genres including fiction, poetry, biography, memoir, history, politics, science and current affairs. Previous winners include White Teeth by Zadie Smith, in 2000, which went on to become a bestseller.

Rock star Ozzy Osbourne has been praised by police for "very courageously" tackling a burglar who stole jewellery from his house.
The singer grabbed an intruder who then jumped 30ft (10m) from a first floor window as the star gave chase at his Buckinghamshire home on Monday. "I acted on impulse," Osbourne said. "In hindsight, it could have been a lot worse. It could've got really ugly." A £100,000 reward has been offered for information leading to a conviction. His wife Sharon, who called the police, said her wedding rings were taken from her bedside table as she slept.
The heavy metal star said he could have met the same fate as late Beatle George Harrison, who was repeatedly stabbed in a break-in in 1999. "I could have been badly injured or shot or anything," Osbourne said. "I just thank God that no-one got injured." He added he was glad the intruders were not hurt. "I wouldn't want anyone to get injured." The singer did not want to talk in detail about his actions but when asked whether he would do the same again replied: "Is the Pope a Catholic?" The incident happened at 0400 GMT on Monday in Chalfont St Peter. Detective Inspector Paul Miller of Thames Valley Police said it appeared a man used a ladder to get into the house through a first floor bedroom window. "Whilst selecting items of jewellery, the burglar was disturbed by Ozzy who very courageously tackled this burglar and pursued him from the house," he said. Ozzy said he was "just coming to grips" with what had happened and his opinion of the UK had been lowered after 12 relatively trouble-free years in the US.
"We lived in Los Angeles where people get shot every day and have been trailed by lots of different stalkers - and yet we come back to England and I'm very disappointed." At a press conference on Tuesday, Sharon Osbourne gave details of nine stolen items. They included a diamond wedding ring and two handmade wedding bands Ozzy gave her when they renewed their vows two years ago. She said she wished she had worn them at night. "I always take them off and put them beside my bed and that's where they were, right beside me on my bedside table." Also taken were a pearl necklace and a sapphire bought as an investment for their daughters described by Sharon as "one of the only 24-carat sapphires that is absolutely pure".
A daisy chain necklace that was a 20th anniversary present and a Franck Muller watch Sharon said was one of only 10 made were also stolen. She expressed her anger at the person who "hasn't worked and wants to take what's yours". "But the thing is, we worked for everything. I came from Brixton. Ozzy came from not a very nice part of Birmingham and everything we've got we have worked our arses off for." "If I choose to make an investment for my kids in whatever way I choose to make it, that's my business and I worked for every God damn penny." Ozzy also lamented two years in which the family has been plagued by problems, including his critical injury in a quad bike accident, his wife's colon cancer, their childrens' drug problems and now the burglary.
On Sunday night, the Osbournes had been celebrating the birthday of singer Sir Elton John's partner David Furnish. Police described the intruder as well-built, about 5' 10" tall and said he was wearing a ski-mask, a light-coloured jacket and trainers. They believe he may have injured himself when he jumped from the window. There is no description of his accomplice. Police think the pair were driving a large vehicle, possibly a van, and are keen to hear from anyone who may have seen one leaving Chalfont St Peter at speed. Police appealed for public help to find the perpetrators and stolen items on 0845 8 505 505 or 0800 555 111.

New York rockers top talent poll
New York electro-rock group The Bravery have come top of the BBC News website's Sound of 2005 poll to find the music scene's most promising new act.
The Bravery, who have been compared to The Cure and New Order, were the most heavily-tipped act in the survey of 110 impartial critics and broadcasters. Rock band Keane won Sound of 2004 while US rapper 50 Cent topped Sound of 2003. Other new artists in this year's list include London indie group Bloc Party at second and UK rapper Kano third. The Bravery played their first gig in 2003 and have since supported bands including The Libertines, Interpol and Echo and the Bunnymen.
They were the subject of a record company bidding war in 2004 and their debut single, Unconditional, caused a huge buzz when it was released in the UK in November. Singer Sam Endicott said he felt "great" about coming top of the Sound of 2005 list. "Anyone that says they don't want a zillion screaming fans is a jackass, a liar," he said. One of the experts to tip The Bravery was The Times' music critic Paul Connolly, who said they were "spiky but in love with pop". Chris Hawkins, host of BBC 6 Music's chart show, said the band had "great guitars and a mastery of the electro-clash sound". "The Bravery are proof alone that New York City is still home to hot new talent," he said. Nigel Harding, head of music at London rock radio station Xfm, said every track from their live set "sounded like a potential single".
Unconditional reached the summit of the station's listeners' chart within a fortnight of its first play, which Mr Harding described as "an unheard of achievement for a debut single".
Q magazine reviews editor Ted Kessler said they were "pretty-boy New York clothes horses" with "an unusually nimble ear for concise, yearning pop in the mould of Duran Duran or The Strokes". Other pundits to take part in the survey included BBC Radio 1 DJ Trevor Nelson, NME editor Conor McNicholas, Top of the Pops presenter Fearne Cotton, Glastonbury organiser Emily Eavis and BBC Radio 2 music editor Colin Martin. Elsewhere on the top 10, second-placed rock band Bloc Party began their rise after supporting Franz Ferdinand and UK garage MC Kano, in third, is signed to The Streets' record label. US rapper The Game is hip-hop great Dr Dre's latest protege while Leeds group Kaiser Chiefs came fifth with a promise to lead a Britpop revival. In last year's survey, Keane were followed by Franz Ferdinand, Razorlight and Joss Stone in the top five - all of whom were virtually unknown outside the music industry at that point.
Boy band McFly were sixth while Scissor Sisters, who had the UK's best-selling album of 2004, were seventh. In the survey, the pundits were asked for tips for three acts they thought were capable of reaching the top in their chosen genre, either in terms of sales or critical acclaim. The artists could be from any country and any musical genre, but must not have had a UK top 20 single, been a contestant on a TV talent show or already be famous for doing something else, such as a soap actor. Those tips were then counted and compiled to make the top 10.

Blair buys copies of new Band Aid
Prime Minister Tony Blair purchased two copies of the charity single Band Aid 20 in Edinburgh on Friday.
Staff were surprised when the Prime Minister walked into HMV at 0900 GMT, accompanied by aides and local police. "When Mr Blair came in unannounced, we were all pretty gobsmacked," said HMV manager Clive Smith. "Our customer helper approached him... it was only then we realised he wanted to buy copies of the Band Aid single, rather than the latest Eminem album." Predicted chart-topper Do They Know it's Christmas? is expected to sell at least 300,000 copies by the time the new chart is announced on Sunday. However, the new version of the 1984 single is not going to be released in the US, despite being sold in many countries around the world. US record shops are stocking an import version of Do They Know It's Christmas, which is said to be selling very well in Los Angeles and New York. The original track was released in the US, and reached number 13 in the singles chart. British stars who appear on the current recording, such as Dido and Coldplay's Chris Martin, are well-known to music fans across the Atlantic, along with U2 frontman Bono.
Record company Universal is responsible for the global distribution of the single, which will be available across Europe, Asia, South America and Canada. But music fans in the US are still able to access the song and download it on Band Aid 20's official website. In 1985, a group of high-profile American stars known as USA For Africa came together to record their own fund-raising single, We Are The World. The song was written by Lionel Richie and Michael Jackson, with Quincy Jones as producer. It topped the US charts for three weeks and went on win Grammy awards for best record and song.
Dionne Warwick, Diana Ross and Tina Turner were among the line-up of performers. It is predicted that the Band Aid 20 song will sell 300,000 copies in the UK by the time the new chart is announced on Sunday. The record is also tipped to become this year's Christmas number one, as the original version did in 1984. Proceeds from the sales are going towards relief for the Darfur region of Sudan and to combat HIV and Aids across Africa.

Eminem beats Elvis to number one
Rapper Eminem has denied Elvis his fourth number one of the year, after his song, Like Toy Soldiers, stormed to the top of the singles charts.
The track claimed the top spot ahead of The King's latest re-release, Are You Lonesome Tonight. It is the fifth in a series of 18 reissues to mark the 70th anniversary of Presley's birth. Almost Here, the duet from former Westlife star Brian McFadden and Delta Goodrem, went in at number three.
Like Toy Soldiers, from Eminem's Encore album, is sampled from Martika's 1980s hit Toy Soldiers. It takes a swipe at hip-hop feuds and follows the success of Just Lose It. Last week's number one, Elvis's It's Now or Never, slipped 13 places to number 14, but all five of his re-released songs are in the Top 40. One World Project Tsunami fundraiser, Grief Never Grows Old, slipped four places to number eight. Featuring Cliff Richard and Boy George, the song was written by former DJ Mike Read. In the album charts, Athlete's latest offering Tourist claimed the top spot, toppling the Chemical Brother's Push The Button Down, which fell to number six.

Sir Paul rocks Super Bowl crowds
Sir Paul McCartney wowed fans with a live mini-concert at American football's Super Bowl - and avoided any Janet Jackson-style controversies.
The 62-year-old sang Hey Jude and other Beatles songs in a 12-minute set at half-time during the game in Florida. Last year, Jackson exposed a breast during a dance routine, causing outrage among millions of TV viewers and landing the CBS TV network a fine. Sir Paul, however, did nothing more racy than remove his jacket as he sang. Organisers were widely considered to be playing it safe this year by booking 62-year-old Sir Paul for his second Super Bowl show.
Three years ago, he was invited to perform at the first Super Bowl after the September 11 attacks and performed his specially-written song Freedom. This time, he started off the show, at the Alltel Stadium in Jacksonville, Florida, with the Beatles numbers Drive My Car and Get Back. He then performed a mellow version of Live And Let Die, the James Bond theme he recorded with the band Wings. Finally, he closed the show with a rousing version of Hey Jude. The former Beatle resisted any temptation to refer to Janet Jackson's headline-grabbing performance last year, instead keeping banter between songs to a minimum in order to squeeze as much music as he could into his slot. The singer removed his black jacket halfway through the show - but any fans hoping for a second "Nipple-gate" were to be disappointed as he kept his red sweatshirt on underneath.
Earlier, the Black Eyed Peas and Alicia Keys had provided the night's other high-profile entertainment by performing in a pre-game show. Black Eyed Peas singer Fergie was dressed in a tight orange top and purple hotpants, but nothing in her performance was likely to upset TV watchdogs. After the controversy last year - which saw CBS fined a record $550,000 (£292,000) by federal regulators - Super Bowl organisers had turned to producer Don Mischer to oversee this year's half-time show. His previous production credits included Olympic opening and closing ceremonies. The Super Bowl is watched by an audience of 144.4 million in the US, with many of the people watching are said to tune in specifically to see the entertainment put on around the event. Michael Jackson, Aerosmith, Diana Ross, Gloria Estefan and Phil Collins are among the stars who have previously graced the Super Bowl stage.

J-Lo and husband plan debut duet
Singers Jennifer Lopez and husband Marc Anthony, a Latin pop star, are to perform a duet at this month's Grammy Awards in Los Angeles.
Anthony became Lopez's third husband in June 2004. He won a Grammy in 1998 and is nominated for two more this year. The 13 February ceremony will also include a rendition of The Beatles' Across The Universe by Bono, Stevie Wonder, Norah Jones and Brian Wilson. The song will go on sale online to raise money for the tsunami aid effort. The awards show will also feature performances from U2, Green Day, Alicia Keys and Kanye West - but the Lopez and Anthony duet is likely to be one of the biggest talking points.
Anthony, born in New York to a Puerto Rican family, is reported to be the biggest-selling salsa artist of all time. He is nominated this year for best Latin pop album and best salsa/merengue album. The tsunami tribute song will also feature Alicia Keys, Velvet Revolver and Tim McGraw. Fans will be able to download it for $0.99 (£0.53) from iTunes, or purchase the video from the CBS TV network's site. Kanye West, the rapper who leads the awards with 10 nominations, will perform alongside John Legend, Mavis Staples and the Blind Boys of Alabama. There will also be a tribute to Ray Charles featuring Bonnie Raitt and Billy Preston and a celebration of southern rock with Tim McGraw, Gretchen Wilson, Lynyrd Skynyrd, Dickie Betts and Elvis Bishop. Ray Charles, who died in June 2004, has seven posthumous nominations. Alicia Keys and Usher share eight nominations each.

Beastie Boys win sampling battle
US rappers Beastie Boys have won their long-running battle over the use of a sample in their song Pass the Mic.
The punk-rappers used three notes of music from flautist James Newton's Choir in their track from 1992. Although the group had paid a licence fee for the sample, Mr Newton said his copyright had been infringed. But the US Court of Appeal upheld its original decision that the group did not have to pay an additional fee to license the underlying composition. The Beastie Boys - Michael Diamond, Adam Horowitz, and Adam Yauch - are considered to be one of early pioneers of sampling music.
Sampling, now a standard practice among musicians, involves taking a segment of one track and using it in a different song. A three-judge panel of the court held in 2003 that the band had abided by copyright protections by paying a licence fee for a sample of Mr Newton's recording. That finding upheld a lower-court dismissal of the case in favour of the Beastie Boys. "We hold that Beastie Boys' use of a brief segment of that composition, consisting of three notes separated by a half-step over a background C note, is not sufficient to sustain a claim for infringement of Newton's copyright," Chief Judge Mary Schroeder wrote in her opinion. Mr Newton is a critically acclaimed jazz and classical flutist, composer, performer, and university professor. Mr Newton and the Beastie Boys were not available for comment.

Pupils to get anti-piracy lessons
Lessons on music piracy and copyright issues are to be taught to secondary school pupils in the UK.
The lessons, aimed at 11 to 14-year-olds, will introduce them to copyright - including the issues of downloading from the internet and the illegal copying of CDs - and its role in protecting creativity.
Music piracy, including illegally swapping music online, costs the UK music industry millions every year and has been blamed for a decline in world-wide CD sales. British Music Rights (BMR) - which was formed to represent the interests of songwriters and composers - worked with education experts to put together a learning pack.
Songwriter Guy Chambers, who has worked with stars including Robbie Williams, has thrown his support behind the scheme. He said as well as educating children about music piracy, it would also protect young people planning a career in the music industry from "unscrupulous" individuals. At a debate in London to launch the scheme, Chambers said: "I think it is important that young people receive practical and engaging learning in schools. "These lessons will give them an insight into how the creative industries work which will help them in possible future careers." The education pack, which has already been requested by more than 1,600 secondary schools, is aimed at giving children an understanding of copyright in relation to the music industry. It will also teach children about the importance of royalties and raises awareness of different careers in the music industry, particularly in the digital age.
Henri Yoxall, general manager of British Music Rights, told BBC News schools had been crying out for a resource to help them educate pupils about the issues. The scheme - which is an extension of BMR's Respect the Value of Music campaign - is also being backed by singer-songwriters Feargal Sharkey, Lucie Silvas and Grammy Award-winning composer David Arnold. Silvas said: "I think it is so important that students gain an understanding of how the music industry works when they are at a young age. "I wish I had been given an opportunity like this when I was at school." Emma Pike, director general of British Music Rights, said: "We believe that copyright is an essential part of teaching music in schools. It is vital that the creatives of the future know how to turn their ideas into value. "Copyright education has always been important... creatives are facing more challenges and more opportunities from technological change. "Technology is allowing people to create music and distribute their music to the public in a whole host of new ways."

Spector facing more legal action
Music producer Phil Spector is facing legal action from the mother of the actress he has been accused of killing.
Donna Clarkson, whose daughter Lana was found dead in Mr Spector's home in February 2003, is seeking unspecified damages in a civil action. The legal action accuses Mr Spector of murdering the actress at his LA home. Mr Spector is currently free on $1m (£535,000) bail and is awaiting trial. The 64-year-old has denied the killing, saying her death was accidental.
Ms Clarkson's legal action, filed in Los Angeles Superior Court, also accuses Mr Spector of negligence and battery, alleging he "grabbed, hit, fought with and restrained" Lana Clarkson before shooting her to death. Her lawyers said in a statement: "The Clarkson family had hoped that there would be some resolution with regard to the criminal proceedings before moving forward with the civil action. "However, Ms Clarkson and her family understand that the fair administration of justice takes time and in light of the numerous changes Mr Spector has made in his legal defence team over the last two years, Ms Clarkson was forced to file the action before (the statute of limitations expired) on 3 February 2005." Mr Spector, known for his work with the Beatles, has claimed that Lana Clarkson committed suicide. His lawyers, led by Bruce Cutler, have vowed to prove him innocent at trial.
Mr Cutler said: "Phil did not cause the death of this woman, he's not criminally responsible and he's not civilly responsible either. "But I'm not surprised they filed a suit for money, that seems to be de rigueur nowadays." A Los Angeles Superior Court judge is expected to set a trial date later this month for Spector, who was indicted on murder charges in September. Roderick Lindblom, one of Ms Clarkson's lawyers, said: "Our intent is to let the criminal proceedings go forward and not do anything that would interfere with the prosecution."

R&B singer Usher is leading the race for the Billboard awards with nominations in 13 categories, including best male.
Alicia Keys has 12 nominations for the awards, which will be held on 8 December at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas. Other multiple nominees include Maroon5, OutKast, Kanye West, R Kelly, Gretchen Wilson, Hoobastank and Jay-Z. Soul singer Stevie Wonder will receive Billboard's Century Award, the magazine's highest honour for creative achievement, at the ceremony.
The awards will be hosted by American Idol presenter Ryan Seacrest, and will feature performances by Usher, Gwen Stefani, Nelly and Green Day. Usher and Keys will be battling it out for prizes including artist of the year, Hot 100 songwriter of the year and Billboard 200 album of the year for their respective albums Confessions and The Diary of Alicia Keys. Maroon5 and OutKast are also up for artist of the year, while OutKast's Speakerboxxx/The Love Below is a finalist for Billboard 200 album of the year, alongside Josh Groban's Closer. The awards honour the year's leading artists and songs as determined by their performance on Billboard's weekly charts.

Arthur Hailey: King of the bestsellers
Novelist Arthur Hailey, who has died at the age of 84, was known for his bestselling page-turners exploring the inner workings of various industries, from the hotels to high finance.
Born in Luton, Bedfordshire, on 5 April 1920, Hailey was the only child of working class parents, They could not afford to keep him in school beyond the age of 14. He served as a pilot with the Royal Air Force during World War II, flying fighter planes to the Middle East. It was an occupation that was later to feature in his authorial debut, the television screenplay Flight into Danger. Hailey emigrated to Canada in 1947, where he eventually became a citizen. He wanted to be a writer from an early age, but did not take it up professionally until his mid-thirties, when he was inspired to write his first screenplay while on a return flight to Toronto.
"I fell to daydreaming. I visualised the pilots at the controls and wondered what would happen if they both got sick. Could I fly the airplane? I was a rusty wartime pilot who hadn't flown for nine years... " Hailey later recalled. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation bought Flight into Danger for $600 (£318) and it was shown on TV in April 1956. It was later memorably spoofed in the 1980 comedy Airplane!, starring Leslie Nielsen. Hailey worked as a screenwriter for a couple of years, before turning to novels. He went on to produce 11 best-selling books, which were published into 38 languages in 40 countries. Flight into Danger was adapted to become Hailey's first novel, Runaway Zero-Eight in 1958. The Final Diagnosis and In High Places followed, both achieving a popular following. But it was not until Hotel, in 1965, that Hollywood came calling. The hit novel took four years to write, and stayed on national best-seller lists for a full year. It was turned into a movie in 1967 and later adapted into a glossy soap in the 1980s, starring James Brolin. Airport (1968) arguably remains Hailey's best-loved work and prompted the disaster movie genre. The thriller follows events in the sky, and on the ground at a snow-logged airport, when a terrorist boards an airplane with a bomb.
The book was adapted into a hit film in 1970, starring Burt Lancaster as the harassed aiport manager and Dean Martin as a womanising pilot, alongside Jean Seberg and Jacqueline Bisset. In a testament to the popularity of the fledgling disaster genre - three sequels followed. The writer was known for his painstaking research into the professions around which each novel was centred, drawing his characters "from real life" and taking up to three years to produce each book. "I have never been able to write quickly or easily. I am too self-critical for that. I am never satisfied," he once said. In 1969, he moved to Nassau in the Bahamas, with his wife Sheila. Wheels (1971), The Moneychangers (1975) and Overload (1979) followed. Despite a lukewarm response from critics, and few literary accolades, Hailey was at the height of his fame in the seventies and continued to attract the attention of Hollywood producers. Strong Medicine, Hailey's blockbuster focusing on the pharmaceutical industry, was turned into a film in 1986, starring Sam Neill, Douglas Fairbanks Jr and a panoply of former soap stars. The 1997 novel Detective proved to be Hailey's final book, when at the age of 77 he decided to retire. Hailey's health began to deteriorate in recent years, twice undergoing heart surgery. He suffered a stroke just two months ago. He died in his sleep on Wednesday, after dinner with his wife and two of his six children at his home in New Providence island. "He had a wonderful life. His greatest ambition was to see his name on a book and he certainly achieved that," said his wife, Sheila.

Eminem secret gig venue revealed
Rapper Eminem is to play an intimate gig in London on Saturday, following a show on the River Thames on Friday.
The US star will play just two songs at a night showcasing his label Shady Records at the Islington Academy. Eminem performed on HMS Belfast on Friday, which is docked on the River Thames, where he filmed two songs for BBC One's Top of the Pops. He arrived in the UK on Friday following his appearance at the MTV Europe Music Awards in Rome. Other rap acts who may appear at the Islington gig include Stat Quo, Proof, DJ Green Lantern, Swift and Obie Trice.
Eminem's latest album soared to the top of the US chart after just three days on sale in record shops. Encore is now a chart-topper on both sides of the Atlantic following its debut at number one in the UK. The fourth album from the rap star was on sale for two days before it outsold all of its rivals. The album was released early in an effort to combat both physical and online piracy.
Eminem's album includes the track Mosh, which is a tirade against US President Bush and the presence of US troops in Iraq. The rapper was criticised earlier this year after a performance on BBC One's Top of the Pops in April led 12 viewers to complain he was "lewd" and "offensive". The complaints about the star grabbing his crotch were upheld by the BBC. "The performer had been asked to tone his act down after rehearsal but ignored this request during the live broadcast," a BBC statement read. "Although his gestures were part of the rap culture, they had gone beyond what is expected."

Beatles suits sell for $110,000
Four suits worn by the Beatles on their Please Please Me album cover have sold for $110,00 (£59,000) at a US auction.
But some of Elvis Presley's earliest recordings - including takes of All Shook Up - failed to sell at the Bonhams and Butterfields two-day sale. A private collection of six tape recordings of Presley valued at between $30,000 (£16,000) and $50,000 (£27,000) did not meet their reserve price. A signed Presley photograph managed to fetch $2,115 (£1,140).
Auction spokesman Erik Simon said the Presley tapes were withdrawn because "they did not meet the minimum price set by the owners".
He said the family of sound engineer Thorne Nogar did not want to divulge the price they had set or the offers they had received. The RCA tapes date from September 1956 to September 1957. The "pre-masters" include a take of Jailhouse Rock, religious songs, material for his first Christmas album, and banter between Presley, members of his band and Mr Nogar.
"We've had them for a lot of years, and I think the people should enjoy them. And frankly, we could use the money," Mr Nogar's son Stephen, 57, said before the auction. Mr Nogar, who died in 1994 aged 72, always used to make two tapes of sessions as a back-up in case RCA producers wanted to make late changes to songs. "He called them his 'ass-saver' tapes," his son said. The quality is said to be noticeably crisper than that of a new vinyl record. Because the family does not own the copyright to the music, the tapes could only be sold for "personal enjoyment" and cannot be copied for commercial gain. The auction made a total of $1.1m (£600,000).

OutKast win at MTV Europe Awards
US hip-hop duo OutKast have capped a year of award glory with three prizes at the MTV Europe Music Awards in Rome.
They won best group, best video and best song for hit Hey Ya! after getting five nominations. R&B singer Usher won best male and best album for Confessions, while UK rock band Muse were named best alternative act and best British artists. OutKast will add their awards to the four they won at the US MTV Awards in August and three Grammys in February. Not only was Hey Ya! one of the biggest global hits of last year, but OutKast have been widely acclaimed as one of the most exciting and innovative acts in music. Their double CD album Speakerboxxx/The Love Below, which saw Andre 3000 and Big Boi each produce one disc, was hailed as the album of 2003 by many critics.
Andre 3000 thanked fans "for supporting OutKast throughout the years". "We really appreciate it," he said. "I hope you don't get tired of us, but we only do what we do." Also competing for best group had been the Beastie Boys, the Black Eyed Peas, D12 and Maroon 5. And Anastacia, Britney Spears, Maroon 5 and Ludacris had been on the shortlist for best song.
OutKast did lose out in the contest for best album - which was won by Usher, another award favourite. Usher, who performed a duet with Alicia Keys, also beat off competition from Justin Timberlake, Jay-Z, Nelly and Robbie Williams to take the best male crown. He had four nominations going into the ceremony, with seven artists nominated in three categories.
Eminem's group, D12, were surprise winners in the best hip-hop category, beating the Beastie Boys, Jay-Z, Kanye West and Nelly. Eminem told the crowd: "D12 finally won an award, thank you very much." The rapper opened the show with a performance of his songs Like Toy Soldiers and Just Lose It, for which he was joined on stage by a crowd of children. The Black Eyed Peas - who had a global hit with Where is the Love? - picked up the prize for best pop act, beating Anastacia, Avril Lavigne, Robbie Williams and Britney Spears. Spears was named best female, sending a message of thanks on video saying the award "means so much to me". Alicia Keys, Anastasia, Avril Lavigne and Beyonce Knowles had featured alongside her in that contest.
Linkin Park singer Chester Bennington described their prize for best rock band as "quite an honour" while Muse said their win for best alternative act was "a real surprise for us". Muse were also named best UK and Ireland act, ahead of Franz Ferdinand, Natasha Bedingfield, Jamelia and The Streets. Referring to the fact that winners of 11 of the 12 main awards were from the US, Muse singer Matt Bellamy said: "There needs to be more European bands." The 11th annual awards were hosted by hip-hop artist Xzibit and watched by 6,000 people at the Tor Di Valle arena, plus millions more on TV around the world. The ceremony featured performances from the Beastie Boys, who entered the stage on bicycles and skateboards, No Doubt singer Gwen Stefani being lowered from a giant clock and Nelly doing a duet with Pharrell Williams. MTV also organised a huge open-air concert featuring Anastacia and The Cure outside the Italian capital's ancient Colosseum, with some estimates putting the attendance there at 200,000. Last year's big winner at the MTV Europe Awards, held in Edinburgh, Scotland, was Justin Timberlake, who walked away with three trophies.

Oasis star fined for German brawl
Oasis singer Liam Gallagher has been fined 50,000 euros (£35,000) after a fight in a German hotel two years ago.
Gallagher was arrested along with drummer Alan White and three other members of the band's entourage after the brawl in Munich in December 2002. The band said they were victims of an "unprovoked attack" in a nightclub. But police said Gallagher kicked an officer in the chest and had large amounts of alcohol and drugs - possibly cocaine - in his blood. Gallagher lost two front teeth in the fight, which led to the band abandoning their German tour. His brother and bandmate Noel was in bed at the time.
"The process has stopped by paying 50,000 euros," said Anton Winkler, spokesman for the Munich prosecutor. At the time, police said a "physical altercation" broke out among the musicians at about 0200 local time. That led to one of the group being "jostled" and falling onto the table of five Italian guests - causing the fight, they said. The fight continued outside, where "one of the officers was kicked in the chest with full force by Liam Gallagher... and suffered minor injuries", they said.

Disputed Nirvana box set on sale
A box set featuring 68 unreleased Nirvana tracks has gone on sale in the US, after years of legal wrangles.
With the Lights Out was intended to be released in 2001, to mark the 10th anniversary of the album Nevermind. It was blocked by Courtney Love, the widow of Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain, who did not want unreleased song You Know You're Right on the box set. The dispute between Love and surviving band members Krist Novoselic and drummer Dave Grohl was settled in 2002. Work began on the box set in 1998, but legal battles put the project on hold. The legal fight centred on a studio recording of the unreleased track You Know You're Right, regarded by fans as one of the unreleased gems of Nirvana. The set, released on Tuesday, features three CDs and a DVD of rare performance and rehearsal footage. The DVD also includes the first performance of Smells Like Teen Spirit, the track that launched Nirvana on to the international stage in 1991. "The band wasn't always pretty, or always in tune. This is not Nirvana unplugged. It's Nirvana unedited," said Cobain biographer Charles Cross. The band's development ended tragically when songwriter Kurt Cobain committed suicide in April 1994.

Usher leads Soul Train shortlist
Chart-topping R&B star Usher is leading the field at this year's Soul Train Awards, with five nominations.
The singer, whose album Confessions has sold close to eight million copies in the US alone, is already in the running for eight Grammy Awards. Newcomer Ciara - who recently beat Elvis Presley to the UK number one spot - has four nominations, while Alicia Keys has three. The Soul Train Awards ceremony will take place in Hollywood on 28 February.
Usher has already swept the board at the American Music Awards with four titles, including two best album awards. His Soul Train nominations include best male R&B-soul album and best male R&B-soul single for Confessions Part II. Usher's work with rappers Ludacris & Lil Jon won him nominations for best R&B-soul or rap music video and best R&B-soul or rap dance cut for the song Yeah!, while his duet with Keys, My Boo, earned the pair a nod for best R&B-soul single. Keys' album The Diary of Alicia Keys was also up for best R&B-soul album by a female. Her song If I Ain't Got You received a best single nomination in the female R&B-soul category. Newcomer Ciara's four nominations include best female R&B-soul album and best R&B-soul or rap by a new artist. Beyonce, Prince, Destiny's Child, Jill Scott and New Edition all received two nominations each. The Soul Train Music Awards, which started 18 years ago, celebrates artists in R&B, hip-hop, rap and gospel music.

US charity anthem is re-released
We Are The World, the American charity anthem inspired by the success of Band Aid, has been re-issued to raise money for Aids research and tsunami victims.
More than 40 stars sang as group USA For Africa, including Lionel Richie, Diana Ross, Ray Charles, Bob Dylan, Michael Jackson and Bruce Springsteen. It topped the charts in the US and UK, raising millions of dollars for African famine relief. The re-release also marks the 20th anniversary of the original recording. It has been re-issued as part of a two-disc DVD set, which will also feature footage from the recording session of the track in January 1985. The single was originally released in the US on 7 March 1985 and sold 800,000 copies in its first week. It went on to win Grammys for song of the year and record of the year.

Queen recruit singer for new tour
The remaining members of rock band Queen are to go on tour next year with former Free and Bad Company singer Paul Rodgers taking Freddie Mercury's place.
Guitarist Brian May has said he expects to be on the road with Rodgers and drummer Roger Taylor from April. May said: "Suddenly the Queen Phoenix is rising again from the ashes and will take precedence over... our lives." Queen have played with many different singers since Mercury's death in 1991 but have reportedly not toured. May performed with Rodgers at a concert to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Fender Stratocaster guitar in London in September.
"We were both so amazed at the chemistry that was going on in [Free hit] All Right Now, that suddenly it seems blindingly obvious that there was 'something happening here,'" May wrote on his website. They teamed up again for a concert to mark their induction into the UK Music Hall of Fame, and were joined by Taylor. "The show went so incredibly well from our point of view, and we got so many rave reactions from out there, we decided almost then and there that we would look at a tour together," May wrote.
Queen went to number one in 2000 with a version of We Will Rock You sung by boy band 5ive and they have also played with Robbie Williams, Will Young and Bob Geldof. Queen bassist John Deacon has currently retired from the stage. Rodgers was singer with early 1970s rockers Free, who had a global hit with All Right Now, before forming Bad Company, a successful "supergroup" with members of King Crimson and Mott the Hoople. He has also been in The Firm with Led Zeppelin's Jimmy Page and The Law with The Small Faces and The Who drummer Kenny Jones.

Band Aid 20 single storms to No 1
The new version of the Band Aid song Do They Know It's Christmas? has gone straight in at number one in the UK singles chart.
The charity record is also tipped to be this year's Christmas number one. It features vocals from the likes of Chris Martin, Dido, Robbie Williams and the Sugababes. The original version - which was the Christmas number one in 1984 - sold 750,000 copies in its first week and 3.5 million in total. It was released in the US, and reached number 13 in the singles chart. However, Band Aid 20 is not going to be released in the US, despite being sold in many countries around the world. US record shops are stocking an import version of Do They Know It's Christmas, which is said to be selling very well in Los Angeles and New York.
British stars who appear on the current recording, such as Dido and Coldplay's Chris Martin, are well known to music fans across the Atlantic, along with U2 frontman Bono. Record company Universal is responsible for the global distribution of the single, which will be available across Europe, Asia, South America and Canada. But music fans in the US are still able to access the song and download it on Band Aid 20's official website. In 1985, a group of high-profile American stars known as USA For Africa came together to record their own fund-raising single, We Are The World. The song was written by Lionel Richie and Michael Jackson, with Quincy Jones as producer.
It topped the US charts for three weeks and went on win Grammy awards for best record and song. Dionne Warwick, Diana Ross and Tina Turner were among the line-up of performers. Proceeds from the sales of the Band Aid 20 single will go towards aid relief in Africa, in countries such as Ethiopia and Sudan. The money raised will also be used to help combat HIV and Aids across the continent. The Band Aid Trust which was set up 20 years ago, when the original single was released, handed out $144m (£75m) to famine relief projects across Africa between January 1985 and November 2004.

iTunes now selling Band Aid song
Ipod owners can now download the Band Aid single from iTunes after Apple reached agreement with the charity.
Apple had been unwilling to raise the cost of the single in line with other download services, said Band Aid. But the single is now on sale for 79p - the usual cost of a song from iTunes - with Apple donating a further 70p to the charity for each song downloaded. A copy of the original 1984 song is also available for download at 79p - with all proceeds going to the charity.
More than 72,000 copies of the new Band Aid single were sold on its first day of release on Monday, according to sales figures. The track has become the fastest-selling single of the year so far, shifting more copies than the rest of the top 30 combined, HMV claimed. Dido, Robbie Williams and Chris Martin are among those featured on the new version of Do They Know It's Christmas?, which is raising money to fight hunger in Africa. If the track sold 500,000 copies, more than £1m would be raised for charity. The CD is being sold for £3.99, with HMV, Virgin and Woolworths all donating their profits.

Spark heads world Booker list
Dame Muriel Spark is among three British authors who have made the shortlist for the inaugural international Booker Prize.
Doris Lessing and Ian McEwan have also been nominated. McEwan and Margaret Atwood are the only nominees to have previously won the main Booker Prize. The new £60,000 award is open to writers of all nationalities who write in English or are widely translated. The prize commends an author for their body of work instead of one book.
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Saul Bellow, Milan Kundera and John Updike also feature on the 18-strong list of world literary figures.
But other past winners of the regular Booker Prize, such as Salman Rushdie, JM Coetzee and Kazuo Ishiguro have failed to make the shortlist. The prize, which will be awarded in London in June, will be given once every two years. It will reward an author - who must be living - for "continued creativity, development and overall contribution to fiction on the world stage". An author can only win once. The international award was started in response to criticisms that the Booker Prize is only open to British and Commonwealth authors.
Margaret Atwood (Canada) Saul Bellow (Canada) Gabriel Garcia Marquez (Colombia) Gunter Grass (Germany) Ismail Kadare (Albania) Milan Kundera (Czech Republic) Stanislaw Lem (Poland) Doris Lessing (UK) Ian McEwan (UK) Naguib Mahfouz (Egypt) Tomas Eloy Martinez (Argentina) Kenzaburo Oe (Japan) Cynthia Ozick (US) Philip Roth (US) Muriel Spark (UK) Antonio Tabucchi (Italy) John Updike (US) Abraham B Yehoshua (Israel)

Court halts Mark Morrison album
Premiership footballer and record company boss Kevin Campbell has gained a court injunction stopping R&B singer Mark Morrison from releasing an album.
The Everton striker signed Morrison to his fledging 2 Wikid Records label and claims he spent thousands of pounds producing his album Innocent Man. Now he is attempting to prevent Morrison releasing the album on Monday through another label. But Morrison vowed to ignore the order, saying "no judge is gonna stop me".
Morrison, who is now as well known for his brushes with the law than his music career, rose to fame with the 1996 single Return of the Mack.
But the Leicester singer has struggled to repeat its success following two spells in jail. One was for hiring a stand-in to complete his community service for possession of a stun gun and three-months following a nightclub fracas. He signed to Mr Campbell's label a year ago and has released one single, with the label saying the album was due for release on 24 January. But Mr Campbell said he learned that Morrison planned to release the album through Jet Star, which is advertising it on its website. Mr Campbell said: "I'm glad we were granted the injunction but I'm completely gutted that we have had to go that far. "Mark Morrison was given everything he asked for by 2 Wikid but it seems that he couldn't help but return to his old ways.
"I've worked hard to realise my ambition in football but had hoped that my future career would be in the music business. "I have always dreamt of starting a record label but now Mark Morrison has spoilt that dream for me. There is no loyalty in this business - just greed."
But Morrison is determined the album will be released on Monday. He said: "The injunction is ludicrous. "I signed a new deal with a new record company because I was not getting the support I needed from 2 Wikid. "I was with that label for a year and in that time released just one record, which was not properly promoted. He added: "The whole world is waiting for this album and it will come out on December 27. No injunction or judge will stop it. The Mack will return." The case is set to be heard in the High Court on 20 December.

Prince crowned 'top music earner'
Prince earned more than any other pop star in 2004, beating artists such Madonna and Elton John in US magazine Rolling Stone's annual list.
The singer banked $56.5m (£30.4m) from concerts, album and publishing sales with his Musicology tour and album. He kept Madonna in second place, as she earned $54.9m (£29.5m) while embarking on her global Re-Invention Tour. Veterans Simon and Garfunkel were in 10th place, their comeback tour helping them earn $24.9m (£13.4m) last year.
"Prince returned to centre stage after a decade in the commercial wilderness," the magazine reported. The singer's 2004 tour took $90.3m (£48.5m) in ticket sales and he sold 1.9 million copies of his latest album Musicology.
Although she grossed more than Prince last year, Madonna remained in second place because of the "monumental" production costs of her tour. Heavy metal band Metallica's Madly in Anger with the World tour helped push their 2004 earnings up to $43.1m (£23.1m). They were ahead of Sir Elton John, who took fourth place and almost $42.7m (£23m) from performances including a debut on the Las Vegas Strip. Other seasoned performers in the list included Rod Stewart, whose sold-out shows and third volume of The Great American Songbook covers album helped net him £35m (£19m). The highest-ranking rap act in the list was 50 Cent, who at number 19 took $24m (£13m) to the bank.

Early Elvis recordings go on sale
Some of Elvis Presley's earliest recordings - including takes of All Shook Up - are going under the hammer on Sunday at a Los Angeles auction.
The six unedited reel-to-reel tapes - which were owned by the engineer who recorded them - are valued at up to $50,000 (£29,000). Highlights of the two hour-long collection will get their public debut at Bonhams auction house on Saturday. The RCA tapes date from September 1956 to September 1957. The "pre-masters" include a take of Jailhouse Rock, religious songs, material for his first Christmas album, and banter between Presley, members of his band and engineer Thorne Nogar.
"We've had them for a lot of years, and I think the people should enjoy them," Nogar's son Stephen, 57, said. "And frankly, we could use the money." Nogar, who died in 1994 aged 72, always used to make two tapes of sessions as a back-up in case RCA producers wanted to make late changes to songs. "He called them his ass-saver tapes," his son said. The quality is said to be noticeably crisper than that of a new vinyl record. Because the family does not own the copyright to the music, the tapes can only be sold for "personal enjoyment" and they cannot be copied for commercial gain.

A saxophone belonging to legendary jazz musician Charlie Parker is expected to fetch up to $1m (£535,000) at an auction of jazz memorabilia next month.
The sale, at Guernsey's Auction House in New York, will feature instruments from other musicians including John Coltrane and Benny Goodman. Other items will include an evening gown belonging to Ella Fitzgerald. Organisers said the auction was the first in the US to be devoted to items belonging to jazz musicians.
Other items that will be auctioned include unreleased tape recordings of music by Parker as well as handwritten sheet music by jazz composers John Coltrane and Theolonius Monk. Among the instruments in the sale will be a trumpet which belonged to Dizzy Gillespie, which is expected to fetch around $500,000 (£267,000), as well as JJ Johnson's trombone and a vibraphone which beloned to Lionel Hampton. Works of art by musicians including Miles Davis and Bruni Sablan will also be featured. The proceeds from the auction, which will take place on 20 February, will go towards several organisations including the John Coltrane Foundation, a foundation set up in memory of Benny Goodman, and the Red Cross.

Comic Morris returns with sitcom
Comedian Chris Morris, who created controversial TV show Brass Eye, is to return to screens with a new sitcom about a spoof London media worker.
Morris will direct and co-write Nathan Barley - a character from cult website TV Go Home - for Channel 4. It is a send-up of the stereotypical "cool" metropolitan media scene, with Nicholas Burns in the title role. A Brass Eye satire of the media handling of paedophilia sparked 2,500 complaints in 2001.
Nathan Barley will be "a character-driven comedy", according to Charlie Brooker, who created TV Go Home in 1999 and has co-written the series. Barley is described as a "webmaster, guerrilla film-maker, screenwriter, DJ and in his own words, a 'self-facilitating media node". The story will also feature Dan Ashcroft, a style magazine columnist, and his sister Claire, a film-maker who hates the "cool" scene. As well as Brass Eye, Morris was behind another news show satire, The Day Today, and dark sketch comedy Jam. The new show is expected to begin in February.

TV station refuses adoption show
A TV station in the US has refused to show a controversial new series where adopted children try and pick their birth father - and win a cash prize.
The WRAZ-TV Fox affiliate in North Carolina was the only one of 182 stations to refuse Monday's show. Who's Your Daddy promises $100,000 (£52,000) to the contestant if she correctly identifies her father. It was met with protests by the National Council for Adoption, which said it "exploits" sensitive emotions. "It exploits the sensitive emotions of adoption," said Thomas Atwood, president of the National Council for Adoption. "It trivialises them. Adoption is a very personal, meaningful experience and it should not be commercialised like this." On the pre-taped programme, the contestant is presented with eight men who may or may not be her natural father.
If she picks the correct man from the line-up, the contestant wins the jackpot prize of US$100,000 (£52,590). However, if she picks the wrong man, then the impostor takes the money. Fox producers defended the show, saying it was a "positive experience". They have made six specials, though only one episode has so far been broadcast.
"The special was thoroughly vetted by our standards and practices department to ensure that it was appropriate for broadcast," said a Fox spokesman. "However, any network affiliate that feels the programming may be inappropriate for their individual market has the right to pre-empt the schedule." WRAZ-TV instead chose to air an independently-produced film, I Have Roots and Branches... Personal Reflections on Adoption, a documentary about families with adopted children. "We just don't think adoption is a game show," said Tommy Schenck, WRAZ-TV's general manager, though he said his decision had not been influenced by public protests.

A-listers flock to Gervais sitcom
Hollywood actors Samuel L Jackson and Ben Stiller have signed up for Ricky Gervais' new sitcom, the comedian has told BBC News.
He said they had both seen the scripts and had agreed to appear in an episode each of the sitcom Extras. They join British stars Jude Law and Kate Winslet who have been booked for guest roles. The comic and actor said he had drawn up an A-list of stars he wanted and all had agreed to be in it. "We wanted actors who had iconic status but that we could also deconstruct," Gervais told BBC News.
"It's not about the zeitgeist. We wanted people who would still be around in 20 years, not just the winner of Big Brother to take part." Gervais admitted he was cautious about revealing who would be taking part until they had all signed on the dotted line. But he has met with Stiller and Jackson and they enjoyed the scripts enough to commit to it.
"I didn't want to start revealing names until it was all sorted because people just mention people who haven't even been asked. "I have been linked with ridiculous stories recently such as I'm going to be in a remake of 10 taking Dudley Moore's part. I haven't been approached and I wouldn't take it anyway."
He said Stiller and Jackson would be playing "twisted" versions of themselves in Extras and that the jokes about them "would sail pretty close to the bone". Gervais and his writing partner Stephen Merchant are currently refining the scripts for the six-part series, in which Gervais plays a struggling actor who bitches about the stars. Meanwhile, Gervais is gearing up to promote his cartoon book Flanimals which is released in the US in March, around the same time as NBC begin showing the US version of The Office. The film rights to Flanimals have already been snapped up but Gervais is keen for the project to be taken slowly. "A film will happen over the next three years but I don't want it to be a $50m movie straight away because it is not well enough known and it wouldn't be another Spider-Man or Batman. I would like to do something small on TV with it first."

MTV has been criticised for "incessant sleaze" by television indecency campaigners in the US.
The Parents Television Council (PTC), which monitors violence and sex on TV, said the cable music channel offered the "cheapest form" of programming. The group is at the forefront of a vociferous campaign to clean up American television. But a spokeswoman for MTV said it was "unfair and inaccurate" to single out MTV for criticism.
The PTC monitored MTV's output for 171 hours from 20 March to 27 March 2004, during the channel's Spring Break coverage. In its report - MTV Smut Peddlers: Targeting Kids with Sex, Drugs and Alcohol - the PTC said it witnessed 3,056 flashes of nudity or sexual situations and 2,881 verbal references to sex. Brent Bozell, PTC president and conservative activist said: "MTV is blatantly selling raunchy sex to kids. "Compared to broadcast television programmes aimed at adults, MTV's programming contains substantially more sex, foul language and violence - and MTV's shows are aimed at children as young as 12. "There's no question that TV influences the attitudes and perceptions of young viewers, and MTV is deliberately marketing its raunch to millions of innocent children."
The watchdog decided to look at MTV's programmes after Janet Jackson's infamous "wardrobe malfunction" at last year's Super Bowl. The breast-baring incident generated 500,000 complaints and CBS - which is owned by the same parent company as MTV - was quick to apologise. MTV spokeswoman Jeannie Kedas said the network follows the same standards as broadcasters and reflects the culture and what its viewers are interested in. "It's unfair and inaccurate to paint MTV with that brush of irresponsibility," she said. "We think it's underestimating young people's intellect and level of sophistication." Ms Kedas also highlighted the fact MTV won an award in 2004 for the Fight for Your Rights series that focused on issues such as sexual health and tolerance.

US actor 'found with gun residue'
Actor Robert Blake had gunshot residue on his hands and clothes the night his wife was shot dead, a court has heard.
But it may not have come from the shot that killed Bonny Lee Bakley in 2001, Mr Blake's murder trial was told by criminalist Steven Dowell. Mr Dowell told a Los Angeles court the residue may have come from Mr Blake's revolver, his gun collection, his presence at the crime scene or police. The 71-year-old former star of US TV drama Baretta has denied murder. Mr Blake said he found Ms Bakley, 44, dead in a car after they left a restaurant.
He said he briefly returned to the restaurant to collect a gun he had left behind and discovered her body when he returned. The gun he collected was not the murder weapon. It could also have been picked up if he touched or leant on the car when he found the body, or from a police box in which his clothes were later stored. The box had come from an area where officers went after being on the firing range. But Mr Dowell also said the residue would have been present if Mr Blake fired a gun that night. Witnesses have already told the trial Mr Blake "stood out as being quite nervous and agitated" at the restaurant before the murder. The actor, who won an Emmy for playing a maverick detective in the 1970s TV cop drama Baretta, could face life in prison if convicted.

EastEnders 'is set for US remake'
Plans to create a US soap based on the BBC's EastEnders have reportedly been drawn up by the Fox TV network.
EastEnders' head writer Tony Jordan and music mogul Simon Fuller are involved in the project, according to reports in the Hollywood Reporter trade newspaper. It said scripts have been commissioned for a series about a community of working class people in of Chicago. The original EastEnders was pulled from BBC America last year after it proved a failure in the ratings. US versions of other British hits have proved less successful across the Atlantic.
BBC comedy Coupling was remade with a US cast, but lost its primetime slot on the NBC network due to disappointing ratings. At home, EastEnders has been facing its own ratings battle, recently losing out to rival ITV soap Emmer dale. Primetime soaps on US television have made a recent comeback, following the success of ABC serial Desperate Housewives. The series takes a "darkly comedic" look at the goings-on of a group of characters living in the suburbs.

Versace art portfolio up for sale
The art collection of murdered fashion designer Gianni Versace could fetch up to £9m ($17m) when it is auctioned in New York and London later this year.
Among the pictures for sale are works by Roy Lichtenstein, Andy Warhol and Henri Matisse. The collection was housed at Versace's six-storey New York townhouse. The 51-year-old designer was shot outside his Florida home in 1997 by suspected serial killer Andrew Cunanan, who later killed himself. The auction, at Sotheby's, will feature 45 contemporary, impressionist and 19th Century paintings. One of the highlights of the sale is Roy Lichtenstein's Blue Nude which has been given an estimate of £1.8m ($3.4m).
Tobias Meyer, Sotheby's worldwide head of contemporary art, said: "This collection reflects Mr Versace's wide-ranging taste and impeccable eye, and many of the works were commissioned directly from the artists. "Outstanding later examples from champions of the Pop movement, such as Roy Lichtenstein, are juxtaposed with masterpieces from the most visible artists of the 1980's, including Jean-Michel Basquiat and the collaborative genius of Basquiat and Warhol, as well as Francesco Clemente." Much of the collection will be offered for sale at three auctions in New York in June, with smaller contemporary paintings going under the hammer in London on 22 and 23 June. A sale of Versace's furniture and artworks sold in 2001fetched £5.5m ($10.3m).

US 'to raise TV indecency fines'
US politicians are proposing a tough new law aimed at cracking down on indecency and bad language on US TV.
Fines of up to $500,000 (£266,582) could be imposed each time broadcasters transmit nudity or profanities. The proposal, unveiled in the House of Representatives, also seeks to revoke a broadcaster's licence after three violations have been committed. The exposure of Janet Jackson's breast at last year's Superbowl landed CBS with a $550,000 (£293,264) fine. Entertainers could also be liable for fines under the proposed legisation from both US politcians and officials from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). A Republican senator from Kansas, Sam Brownbeck, is set to call for a maximum $3 million (£1.6 million) fine for repeated violations.
The current maximum fine stands at $32,500 (£17,320) - 20 of the stations in the CBS network were each penalised these lesser amounts for the Jackson incident. Republican politician Fred Upton, who chairs the committee responsible for broadcasting, said current fines are "more of a cost of doing business rather than a deterrent". Last year's Janet Jackson 'wardrobe malfunction' encouraged the FCC to impose tougher rules, but the US Congress adjourned last year without agreeing on a new level of fines. New figures have to be decided before new legislation can be put before President Bush. Certain broadcasters, like Fox, claim the material they carry does not violate indecency laws and is protected under the right to free speech.

Eurovision 'greats' to do battle
Stars of the Eurovision Song Contest from the show's 50-year history are to compete against each other to celebrate the contest's anniversary.
Viewers will choose 14 past songs to be performed by the original artists or others in the spirit of the originals. Past Eurovision performers include Abba, Celine Dion, Bucks Fizz, Nana Mouskouri, Lulu and Julio Iglesias. Fans will then vote as usual to pick the all-time best Eurovision song during the show in Denmark in October. The first contest was organised by the European Broadcasting Union, or EBU, in 1956, and has become an annual event pitting pop giants against musical minnows - with often surprising results.
While some regard it as an essential celebration of continental talent, others see it as an equally unmissable parade of the reasons some countries do not normally produce international stars. The 50th annual contest will be held in Kiev, Ukraine, in May, after Ukrainian singer Ruslana won last year. The 50th anniversary special will be held in Denmark later this year because the Danish Broadcasting Corporation came up with the idea for the all-time contest. A plan to hold it in London was scrapped because of problems finding a suitable venue. Ireland has been the most successful country in the show's history with seven victories, followed by the UK, France and Luxembourg with five each.

UK TV channel rapped for CSI ad
TV channel Five has been criticised for sending "offensive" and "threatening" advertising material to viewers for a new show about murder scene scientists.
Five mailed thousands of fake dossiers including photos of murder victims and an e-mail suggesting the recipient was being stalked by a serial killer. Following complaints, the Advertising Standards Authority contacted Five to cease promotion of crime show CSI:NY. Five admitted it had sent out 55,000 promotion packs but had now stopped. The promotion material was sent in brown envelope of the type used by investigators in the series, a spin-off from the highly successful CSI: Crime Scene Investigation series, which also runs on Five. The pack also features pictures of forensic evidence from a crime scene and a wanted poster, which did have a CSI:NY logo printed in large at the bottom.
Five said it had received 100 complaints but that it had been surprised at the reaction because it was "obvious this material is promoting a drama". A Five spokesman said: "In light of the efforts we have made to make the nature of the contents so transparent we are surprised a very small minority of recipients have mistaken it as anything else. "Everyone who was sent this promotion has expressed an interest in receiving details about this particular genre of programming on various websites. "We have also received emails and calls from recipients praising the originality and imagination of the campaign."

X Factor show gets second series
TV talent show The X Factor is to return for a second series after being recommissioned by ITV.
Judges Simon Cowell, Louis Walsh and Sharon Osbourne are in discussions to sign up for the new series. The final of the first series will take place on 11 December. Last Saturday's show was beaten in the ratings by the BBC's Strictly Come Dancing. "Working on the X Factor has been a blast... I predict series two will be even better," said Cowell. "I think the production team have done an amazing job," he added.
The Pop Idol-style show votes off a group or contestant every week - the two that receive the lowest public vote have to perform a second time before the judges make a final decision. Rowetta Satchell, Steve Brookstein, Tabby Callaghan and group G4 are the remaining finalists. ITV's controller of entertainment, Claudia Rosencrantz, said she had no hesitation in recommissioning the show. "There's much more to come this series as we build towards the final next month and it's great to have secured this terrific format for our viewers for another series," she said.

Alicia Keys to open US Super Bowl
R&B star Alicia Keys is to open February's Super Bowl singing a song only previously performed there by Ray Charles and Vicki Carr.
Keys, who will sing America the Beautiful, will be accompanied by 150 students from the Florida School for the Deaf and the Blind. Charles, who died last year, attended the school as a child in 1937. Keys said she was "very excited", describing Charles as "an artist I admire, miss and respect". "I know that this is going to be a very touching and memorable moment," she said.
It will be her first performance at the Super Bowl, which will be watched by millions in the US on 6 February. Sir Paul McCartney will provide the half-time entertainment in the slot filled by Janet Jackson last year. Organisers have promised there will be no repeat of her nipple-baring incident that sparked thousands of complaints on US TV's most-watched broadcast. A National Football League spokesman said they were "comfortable" this show would be acceptable to a mass audience. The game and show were watched by 144 million people in the US in 2003.
Twenty CBS-owned TV stations were fined $550,000 (£300,000) by the country's TV regulatory agency after more than 542,000 complaints were made about Janet Jackson's "wardrobe malfunction". Sir Paul said: "There's nothing bigger than being asked to perform at the Super Bowl. "We're looking forward to rocking the millions at home and in the stadium."

'Comeback' show for Friends star
Friends actress Lisa Kudrow is to play the lead role in a new series about a one-time sitcom star, according to the Hollywood reporter.
Thirteen episodes of Comeback have been commissioned by cable channel HBO, home of hits such as Sex And The City. Kudrow, who played Phoebe in Friends, co-wrote the pilot episode and will also act as executive producer. HBO has been looking for its next big comedy hit since Sex And The City drew to a close in the US in February. Comeback is the first 30-minute comedy series that the channel has picked up since the Sex And The City drew to the end of its six-year-run. Friends ended its 10-year run on the NBC network in May, and attentions have turned to which projects its six individual stars would pursue.
Matt LeBlanc is starring in a Friends spin-off sitcom, charting Joey's fortunes in Los Angeles as he pursues his acting career. Jennifer Aniston, who was Rachel in the long-running show, has enjoyed a series of successful film appearances, with further projects in the pipeline. Courteney Cox Arquette (Monica) has been working on a drama project along with husband David Arquette for HBO, called The Rise And Fall Of Taylor Kennedy. Matthew Perry, who played Chandler, has appeared on the West End stage, and has a film, The Beginning Of Wisdom, currently in production. And David Schwimmer (Ross) directed during his time on Friends, and has also worked on Joey.

Country and Western musician Jerry Scoggins has died in Los Angeles at the age of 93, his family has said.
Scoggins was best remembered for singing the theme tune to popular US TV show The Beverly Hillbillies. The Texan-born singer approached the producers of the programme with theme tune The Ballad of Jed Clampett for the pilot which was screened in 1962. The show, which told the story of a poor man striking oil and moving to Beverly Hills, ran until 1971.
Scoggins' daugher Jane Kelly Misel said that her father never tired of the song and would sing it at least once a day. "He'd sing it at birthdays and anniversaries and variety shows. He never stopped performing it," she said. When a film version of The Beverly Hillbillies was made in 1993, Scoggins came out of retirement to perform the theme tune. Scoggins sang the lyrics while bluegrass stars Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs played guitar and banjo.

Branson show flops on US screens
Entrepreneur Sir Richard Branson's US TV show, The Rebel Billionaire, is proving a flop in the ratings.
The programme suffered poor viewing figures on its debut on the Fox network three weeks ago, and has lost one in five of its viewers since then. The show is seen as Fox's answer to The Apprentice featuring tycoon Donald Trump, a ratings hit for rivals NBC. Sir Richard's show sees a group of young entrepreneurs compete to become the president of his business empire. The Rebel Billionaire has averaged five million viewers and is 91st in the rankings of all prime-time shows. The Apprentice, which has already completed its first season, is still managing to pull in 16 million viewers, while its prime-time ranking is number four.
But Fox has said it plans to stick with Branson's show throughout its 12-episode run. "It's going to remain on the air," said the network's spokesman Scott Grogin. "Creatively we're extremely pleased with the show and hope the audience will find it," he added. Contestants on Sir Richard's show are confronted with business tasks to solve, similar to The Apprentice. They are also subjected to stunts like walking a plank suspended in mid-air. The Rebel Billionaire has marketed itself as a less materialistic version of The Apprentice, with Sir Richard shown jumping out of a taxi, while Trump is seen in a limousine.

Housewives lift Channel 4 ratings
The debut of US television hit Desperate Housewives has helped lift Channel 4's January audience share by 12% compared to last year.
Other successes such as Celebrity Big Brother and The Simpsons have enabled the broadcaster to surpass BBC Two for the first month since last July. BBC Two's share of the audience fell from 11.2% to 9.6% last month in comparison with January 2004. Celebrity Big Brother attracted fewer viewers than its 2002 series.
Comedy drama Desperate Housewives managed to pull in five million viewers at one point during its run to date, attracting a quarter of the television audience. The two main television channels, BBC1 and ITV1, have both seen their monthly audience share decline in a year on year comparison for January, while Five's proportion remained the same at a slender 6.3%. Digital multi-channel TV is continuing to be the strongest area of growth, with the BBC reporting Freeview box ownership of five million, including one million sales in the last portion of 2004. Its share of the audience soared by 20% in January 2005 compared with last year, and currently stands at an average of 28.6%.

McCririck out of Big Brother show
Racing pundit John McCririck has become the latest contestant to be evicted from Celebrity Big Brother.
He was nominated to leave the Channel 4 show by fellow housemates, alongside Happy Mondays dancer Bez. At one time Bez was among the most popular contestants but he has since become withdrawn and argumentative. McCririck was ordered to leave the house on Monday, following Jackie Stallone, the actor Sylvester's mother, who was first to be evicted. Bez reacted badly to the news that he had been nominated by five of his fellow housemates, whilst John received four votes against him. Sylvester Stallone's ex-wife Brigitte Nielsen nominated both John and Bez. She said: "Bez is a difficult human being. There's something wrong with him. Even though he's making an effort, he's not very happy in here." Former Holby City actor Jeremy Edwards said he had nominated Bez after he became agitated on Friday night and talked about escaping over the wall to go clubbing. He said Bez was being "loopy" and "stressed". According to bookmaker Ladbrokes, John McCririck was 1/3 favourite to be evicted on Monday while Bez was at 9/4 . McCririck faced the public vote on Friday and received 67% of the vote to keep him in the house, whilst Jackie Stallone was evicted.

Slater to star in Broadway play
Actor Christian Slater is stepping into the role of Tom in the Broadway revival of The Glass Menagerie.
Slater, 35, is replacing actor Dallas Roberts in the Tennessee Williams drama, which opens next month. No reason was given for Roberts' departure. The role will be played by understudy Joey Collins until Slater joins the show. Slater won rave reviews for his recent performance in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest in London's West End.
He has also starred in a number of films, including Heathers, Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves and more recently Churchill: The Hollywood Years. Preview performances of The Glass Menagerie will begin at New York's Ethel Barrymore Theatre on Thursday. Philip Rinaldi, a spokesman for the show, said the play's 15 March opening date remains unchanged. The revival, directed by David Leveaux, will also star Jessica Lange as the domineering mother, Amanda Wingfield.

Chris Evans back on the market
Broadcaster Chris Evans has begun selling thousands of his possessions from a stall in Camden Market, London.
Evans perched on a stool as shoppers wandered around the open-fronted shop packed with his furniture. Among the items from his homes in Los Angeles and London were countless sofas, chairs, pictures, beds and memorabilia from his past TV shows. Asked the reason for the sale, Evans said: "I just want to get rid of it all, it's just a headache." He added: "It feels good to be selling this stuff, it's a weight off my mind. "Look at it all, there's so much clutter. I've enjoyed every bit of furniture and every poster but it's not important anymore." The normally gregarious Evans cut a peculiarly unshowbusiness-like figure as he sipped coffee and smoked cigarettes, wrapped in a big coat and scarf in front of his Aladdin's cave.
However, the ostentation of some of the items on sale painted a picture of the eccentricity that endeared him to the British public in shows such as Channel 4's gameshow Don't Forget Your Toothbrush. The most striking thing about many of the pieces was their sheer size. Sofas looked like they could seat a small party and a bed seemed big enough for four. The elaborate nature of the pieces, many custom-made, had to be admired, particularly a huge red and gold upholstered "throne" and a stripy deckchair from the Queen Mary liner.
To help people in their browsing, Evans had given the pieces labels with not only the price but a helpful, often comic, aside. "Isn't it great" was the comment on the £1,950 throne and "Bob Dylan's old sofa - honest" was written on a dark wood couch priced £4,250.
The prices were steep by a lot of people's standards but Evans said it was not deterring shoppers. "I've sold quite a lot already. Everything here is on sale for less than I bought it for but it's not really about the money. It's about getting rid of it all. We've all been bartering, that's what it's all about." He added that he was not going to reveal what he was going to do with the money he was making. Vintage TV and film posters also lined the walls, including a rare portrait of Raquel Welch and an original advertising print from the Benny Hill Show. And, almost hidden at the back of the lock-up, were the two giant toothbrushes from his former Channel 4 show, although these were not for sale.
Despite the sheer curiosity value of the sale, there was a healthy trickle of interest from the public rather than the perhaps expected crowds. Some wandered in just to browse, as they would any of the other stalls, not knowing that it belonged to Evans.
Paul Burgess said: "I didn't realise. I thought it was just a load of junk. I should go back and have a better look." But local resident Francesca Detakats came specially to the stall and left happy with her purchase of an original 1960s photograph of The Who by David Wedgburg. Ms Detakats said she was a collector and did not mind paying £350 for the print. "If you like something, you don't really count it like that," she said.
Martin Hellewell, who had also made a point of visiting Evans' shop, said he thought it was a great idea. "Why not, if you've got stuff to get rid of it's a good place to do it," said Mr Hellewell. Evans has taken out the stall with business partner Pete Winterbottom. They plan to open every day if possible, although Evans did not know how often he would be there. "We'll stay definitely until Christmas and then maybe a week after that," said Evans.

Top stars join US tsunami TV show
Brad Pitt, Robert De Niro and Hugh Grant have been added to the line-up for a two-hour US TV special to raise money for victims of the Asian tsunami.
Andy Garcia, Lucy Liu, Natalie Portman and Jay Leno are also among the new names for Saturday's Tsunami Aid. They will join A-list singers Madonna, Sir Elton John, Nelly and Usher plus actors Kevin Spacey, Halle Berry and George Clooney on the NBC broadcast. Viewers will be urged to phone in to make donations throughout the night. Norah Jones, Diana Ross, Stevie Wonder, Maroon 5, Mary J Blige and Eric Clapton will give musical performances on the show described as "A Concert of Hope".
Catherine Zeta Jones, Michael Douglas, Bruce Willis, Uma Thurman, Matt Damon, Drew Barrymore and Tim Robbins are among the other movie superstars due to put in an appearance. George Clooney recently reacted angrily to a TV host's suggestion that not all funds raised would go towards tsunami relief. Fox TV's Bill O'Reilly said he would be "watching to see if the money gets to the tsunami victims" and warned the celebrities taking part "had better be involved all the way down the line". But Clooney accused O'Reilly of creating a fuss for his own personal gain, saying viewers may now be "afraid that their money will do no good".
He urged O'Reilly to co-present the TV special, adding in a letter: "We're not playing games here, we're trying to save lives. It's as simple as this - you're either with this joint effort or against it." Organisers say all funds will go to the American Red Cross. The commercial-free benefit show will also be aired by a string of cable broadcasters and Clear Channel's radio stations across the US. In addition, performances will be available to buy on the internet as downloads from Sony's Connect music store. A similar TV benefit carried by all four primary US TV networks after the 11 September terror attacks raised more than $150m (£80m).
- The Bangkok International Film Festival got under way on Thursday in the Thai capital in the shadow of the country's 5,300 deaths from the tsunami. The red carpet gala opening night was ditched in favour of a more subdued first night. Six different films were shown at six cinemas, with all money from ticket sales going to charity.

Star Trek fans fight to save show
Star Trek fans have taken out a full-page ad in the Los Angeles Times in an attempt to persuade TV executives not to scrap Star Trek: Enterprise.
Made by the UPN TV network, the latest spin-off from the hit sci-fi show is due to end in May after four series. But fans around the world have pitched in to pay for the advert, which had the headline "Save Star Trek". They are also asking the Sci-Fi Channel to pick it up from UPN and will stage a rally in Los Angeles on 25 February.
The advert described the Star Trek franchise as a "cultural icon". Enterprise stars former Quantum Leap actor Scott Bakula as Captain Archer and is set before the original 1960s Star Trek series. "Captain Archer and the crew of the NX-01 need your help to continue their journeys!" the advert said. It also included a cut-out coupon for fans to send to UPN's parent companies Paramount and Viacom plus the Sci-Fi Channel. It also urged supporters to join the rally outside the Paramount studios.
Fan website Trek United is hoping to raise $32m (£17m) from donations by the end of March to pay for a fifth series. More than $23,000 (£12,000) has been pledged so far, according to the site. The 98th and final episode of Star Trek: Enterprise will air in the US on 13 May. The fourth series has averaged 2.9 million viewers per episode - half the amount it got in its first series. Star Trek: Enterprise began in 2001 following other Star Trek spin-off series The Next Generation, Deep Space Nine and Voyager.

Top of the Pops leaves BBC One
The BBC's flagship pop music programme Top of the Pops is to move from BBC One on Fridays to Sundays on BBC Two.
The new programme will combine with archive show TOTP2, mixing new music with footage of classic bands. The corporation said the new show "aims to appeal to a diverse audience of music lovers". The move is the biggest shake-up in the history of the show, which was first broadcast in 1964 and has always been on BBC One. Top of the Pops was relaunched in a blaze of publicity in December last year in an attempt to reverse a long-term decline in audience figures.
The All New Top of the Pops was fronted by newcomer Tim Kash and was put together by producer Andi Peters, who was brought back to the BBC from Channel 4 to revitalise the series.
About three million people a week were watching the show on Fridays - less than half the total it was attracting in the mid-1990s - as the programme went up against popular ITV soap Coronation Street. But despite the relaunch audience figures failed to rise and still remain around the three million mark. Tim Kash has since been replaced as host by Fearne Cotton. The new show will launch in Spring next year in an extended format. BBC Two controller Roly Keating: "It's an exciting new era for Top of the Pops. We want to make it bigger and better so that it becomes the ultimate pop music show for music lovers of every generation." Mr Keating described BBC Two as the "natural home" of Top of the Pops. He added: "The addition of Top of the Pops will also extend BBC Two's offering to younger audiences."
A BBC spokeswoman said Andi Peters would continue as executive producer on the show. She said that issues over the exact format of the programme and a time slot were still to be decided. The programme will have a close relationship with the BBC Radio 1 chart show, which suggests the relaunched show may be transmitted at about 1900 on Sundays. "Hopefully the audience for Top of the Pops will find it on BBC Two. "We think that the new slot will create a buzz around the programme as for the first time viewers will discover the news of who is number one as it happens."

Oscar host Rock to keep it clean
Oscar host Chris Rock said he will steer clear of bad language when he fronts the awards on 27 February.
The comedian, who recently got into trouble for poking fun at the ceremony, is renowned for his heavy use of expletives during his stand-up routine. The live ceremony will be broadcast with a transmission delay on US network ABC to ensure swear words are removed. "I've been on TV and been funny not cursing," he said during an interview for CBS network's 60 Minutes show. "As far as content is concerned, I will talk about the movies. I'm not really worried about it. I'm sure ABC might be more worried about it than me," he added.
The 40-year-old comedian caused a furore when he said in an interview with US magazine Entertainment Weekly recently that he hardly ever watched the Oscars and labelled awards ceremonies "idiotic". The show's producers defended Rock and confirmed that he would still be presenting the Oscar ceremony, saying his comments were "humorous digs". Meanwhile, the Academy has announced that Oscar-nominated actress Natalie Portman will present an award at the ceremony. Portman, who has been nominated for a best supporting actress gong for her role in Mike Nichols' Closer, joins a growing list of stars set to bestow an award at the ceremony including Dustin Hoffman, Drew Barrymore, Renee Zellweger and British-born actress Kate Winslet.

Johnny and Denise lose Passport
Johnny Vaughan and Denise Van Outen's Saturday night entertainment show Passport to Paradise will not return to screens, the BBC has said.
The ex-Big Breakfast presenters were recruited to host the BBC One family variety show last July. "There are currently no plans for another series," a spokeswoman said. She added the pair "brought a real warmth to Saturday night, but in the end we felt we had done enough with the format of the show".
Passport to Paradise involved a combination of games and outside broadcasts with a high level of audience participation. The first instalment attracted more than 4.1 million viewers - but that had dropped to fewer than 2.7 million by the time it ended. The BBC spokeswoman said Graham Norton's Strictly Dance Fever would be a priority for 2005. "That's very much on the cards for next year, and we're concentrating at the moment on Strictly Come Dancing, which is doing phenomenally well," she said.

Double eviction from Big Brother
Model Caprice and Holby City actor Jeremy Edwards have both left the Celebrity Big Brother house in a surprise double eviction on Friday.
Caprice, who left in the scheduled fourth eviction having gained just 5% of the public vote, afterwards said: "I am so happy, I am so glad I'm out." Edwards then left in a surprise eviction, with 12% of the vote. Nineteen-year-old Blazin' Squad singer Kenzie is currently favourite to win the £50,000 charity prize. Caprice had been the pre-show favourite to be voted out of the house, with bookmakers Ladbrokes offering odds of 1/5 on her departure. Ladbrokes spokesman Warren Lush had said she was "the hottest eviction favourite so far this series".
Odds on Kenzie's victory have been slashed from 4/6 to 1/2, although bookmakers have said they are not ruling out a late rally from former Happy Mondays star Bez. The other remaining housemate is actress Brigitte Nielsen. DJ Lisa I'Anson became the third housemate to be voted out on Wednesday when she became the victim of a surprise eviction during a game of hide-and-seek on the Channel 4 show. I'Anson said she was "glad to be out" and predicted that Kenzie would emerge as the winner. The winner is due to be announced on Sunday night.

Celebrities get their skates on
Former England footballer Paul Gascoigne will join EastEnders' actress Scarlett Johnson on BBC One's Strictly Ice Dancing.
The one-off Christmas special will also star television presenter Carol Smillie and Jessica Taylor from Liberty-X. Each celebrity will be paired with a professional skater to impress a panel of judges and win the audience vote. The BBC is yet to confirm the final two stars who will battle it out to become Ice King or Queen.
Veteran presenter Bruce Forsyth and Tess Daly will host the programme, which follows hot on the heels of the current Saturday night series Strictly Come Dancing. The celebrities will have to practise a stipulated ice dance and perform it at an ice rink with their partner. The judges will have 50% of the vote to decide who wins the contest, with the ice rink audience making up the rest of the vote. The show forms part of the BBC's festive schedule. Ice skating duo Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean are to front a similar celebrity ice dance show for ITV, titled Stars on Thin Ice. The contestants on Stars on Thin Ice will each be paired up with a professional skater and will learn a new routine every week. At the end of the series, one celebrity will be crowned the winner.

Holmes wins '2004 top TV moment'
Sprinter Kelly Holmes' Olympic victory has been named the top television moment of 2004 in a BBC poll.
Holmes' 800m gold medal victory beat favourite moments from drama, comedy and factual programmes, as voted by television viewers. Natasha Kaplinsky's Strictly Come Dancing win was top entertainment moment and a Little Britain breast feeding sketch won the comedy prize. The 2004 TV Moments will be shown on BBC One at 2000 GMT on Wednesday. Double gold medal winner Holmes topped the best sports moment category, beating Maria Sharapova's Wimbledon triumph and Matthew Pinsent's rowing victory at the Olympics.
She then went on to take the overall prize of Golden TV Moment. The sight of former royal correspondent Jennie Bond with dozens of rats crawling over her in ITV's I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here was named best factual entertainment moment. Michael Buerk's return to Ethiopia, 20 years after originally reporting its famine, topped the factual category for BBC programme This World. Long-running soap EastEnders won the best popular drama moment title when character Dot confided in Den Watts that she was unwell.

Veteran comic Cyril Fletcher dies
Veteran comedian and broadcaster Cyril Fletcher has died aged 91 at his home in Guernsey.
Fletcher will be remembered for his "odd odes" and amusing misprints on TV show That's Life in the 1970s and 80s, as well as a long variety career. He was also a regular on Does the Team Think?, a comic version of radio information show The Brains Trust. That's Life host Esther Rantzen said he was "so lovely" and a "delight" to work with. "The thing about Cyril was that he was, to use a slightly old-fashioned phrase, an English gentleman," she said. "He was courteous, and understated, and he adored gardens, particularly creating them for his beautiful wife.
"He was funny and witty to work with. He was a real friend and I shall miss him." One of the last comedians of old-time variety era, Fletcher made his first TV appearance in 1937. A year after BBC Television began, he was seen reciting humorous poems, appearing in a revue, Tele-Ho, and playing the Emperor of Morocco in the first televised pantomime, Dick Whittington. He went on to become a regular voice on radio, have a string of TV shows in the 1950s and appear in several films, including 1947's Nicholas Nickleby. He married actress Betty Astell in 1941 and in the 1950s and 60s, they produced pantos and summer shows, discovering new stars including Harry Secombe. In the mid-1990s, Fletcher said he had made a "fabulous living" since the age of 22 and had never had a day out of work.
He was most recently seen presenting a gardening programme for Channel TV. Fletcher was described as a "consummate professional" by his friend and fellow broadcaster Michael Pointon. "It really was a pleasure to work with him - he had met everyone and done everything," Mr Pointon said. "He was a whimsical, droll fellow, but also a very artistic man. As a friend, he was very kind, and generous." Fletcher's daughter Jill said her father would be sorely missed. "He was greatly loved by the public," she said.

Public show for Reynolds portrait
Sir Joshua Reynolds' Portrait of Omai will get a public airing following fears it would stay hidden because of an export wrangle.
The Tate Gallery unsuccessfully tried to buy the picture from its anonymous owner after a ban was issued preventing the painting from leaving the UK. The 18th Century painting has remained in storage but the owner has agreed to allow it to be part of an exhibition. The exhibition of Reynolds' work will be shown at Tate Britain from May. Joshua Reynolds: The Creation of Celebrity will feature prints, caricatures, and sculpture by the 18th Century artist, who painted some of the most famous personalities of his day. Portrait of Omai fetched the second highest amount for a British painting when it was sold at auction for £10.3m in 2001. It was bought by a London dealer who sold it on to a collector. The unnamed collector wanted to take it out of the country, but was barred from doing so by the government because of its historical significance.
In March 2004, the Tate managed to raise £12.5m funding to buy the portrait but the owner refused to sell and it has been held in storage since. The portrait is of a young man who was dubbed "the noble savage" when he arrived in London from Polynesia. He became a darling of London society and was invited to all the best parties by people who were fascinated by such an exotic character. Sir Joshua painted him after his arrival in 1774, and it became the artist's most famous work after it was first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1776.

Little Britain vies for TV trophy
BBC hits Little Britain and Strictly Come Dancing are among numerous British shows nominated for the prestigious Golden Rose television awards.
Homegrown reality programmes dominated that category, including Channel 4's Supernanny and ITV1's Hell's Kitchen. EastEnders and Coronation Street were overlooked in the soap category, but Doctors and Family Affairs gained nods. The festival, which honours the best TV from around the globe, will take place in Lucerne, Switzerland from 3-8 May.
Little Britain, which is now in its second series, faces competition from BBC Two's The Catherine Tate Show and Sacha Baron Cohen's creations Borat and Bruno. In the separate sitcom category, dark comedy Nighty Night - which began life on BBC Three - will do battle with mainstream BBC One show My Family.
BBC One's Strictly Come Dancing, which saw celebrities compete against each other to become champions of the dancefloor, is among five British nominations in the varirty category. Lenny Henry, who won a Golden Rose for his In Pieces series in 2001, picks up another nomination for his recent BBC show. British television music shows have picked up six nominations, with BBC Three's Flashmob - The Opera up against the UK Music Hall of Fame series, which was screened on Channel 4. British television has performed very well in the arts and specials category, gaining a total of 11 nominations. The BBC leads the way with its programmes on The Sound of Music, Agatha Christie and Rolf On Art - The Big Event - which saw Harris lead an effort to produce a life-size painting in London's Trafalgar Square.
British shows - which picked up a total of 48 nominations - will have to overcome competition from a host of other countries, including the US, Canada, Japan and across Europe. UK nominee TV Diaries, which is shown around the world, is owned by a British company but has yet to be screened in this country. Previous UK winners have included Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway, Pop Idol, Channel 4 show Faking It and comedy duo French and Saunders, who became the first winners to receive and honorary Golden Rose. Individual performers will also be rewarded, with prizes for best comics, best sitcom actor and actress and best gameshow host. Last year actor Shane Richie won an award for his portrayal of Alfie Moon in EastEnders.

Talk show host Jerry Springer, whose programme inspired the controversial opera shown by the BBC, has said he would not have written it himself.
The BBC received 47,000 complaints before the musical was broadcast, and protesters demonstrated outside BBC buildings across the UK. Springer helped launch the West End show and attended the opening night. "I wouldn't have written it. I don't believe in making fun of other religions," he said.
The TV host said he understood how people could have thought the musical had gone too far. "You know, on our TV show if people use inappropriate language we bleep it out, if there's nudity we cover it up, so that viewers at home don't get to see any of this," he said.
Asked whether he thought the BBC should have screened the controversial musical he said: "I don't know if they should have had it on television but, good Lord, if you don't like what's on television, that's why God gave us remote controls. "My show is about dysfunctional people and I defy anyone to watch the show and suggest to me the people on it aren't to some degree dysfunctional."
"If I did a show about the war in Iraq, it wouldn't make me a warmonger, I would just be doing my job to report on the war. "In the case of my show, it's my job to report on the dysfunctions that take place in society." The British-born presenter is in London to speak at a fundraising dinner for the United Jewish Israel Appeal. The dinner, on Tuesday, is expected to be attended by more than 800 guests.

CSI shows give 'unrealistic view'
People have unrealistic expectations of forensic science thanks to the success of the CSI TV shows, real experts say.
Evidence submitted to forensic labs has shot up as a result of the programmes, at a time when many have large backlogs, science investigators claim. Lawyers also fear the effect because jurors have a distorted view of how forensic evidence is used. The issue was discussed at a major science conference in Washington DC. Crime Scene Investigation (CSI) and its spin-offs, CSI: Miami and CSI: New York, have proven exceptionally popular with audiences on both sides of the Atlantic.
Each episode, a team of forensic investigators goes about solving a crime through the ingenious appliance of science - and the extensive resources at their disposal. "The CSI effect is basically the perception of the near-infallibility of forensic science in response to the TV show," said Max Houck, who runs a forensic science graduate course at West Virginia University, US. "This TV show comes on and everyone starts watching it - including the cops and prosecutors - and submissions to forensic laboratories go through the roof," he told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). The American forensics expert said there were roughly 200,000-300,000 backlogged DNA samples in US labs. Yet these constituted just 10% of the total test backlog, said Dr Houck. Forensic pathologist Dr Patricia McFeeley said she had started to see the show's influence in dealing with the families of victims. "What I find is that families now are more dissatisfied with the investigation than was previously the case," she explained. "For example, on television, the toxicology results are available almost instantaneously. But when people find out that it can take several months, they can find that very difficult."
Dr McFeeley added that the accuracy with which forensic investigators can determine time of death was far lower than most people's perceptions. The show's influence can follow forensic investigators all the way into the courtroom, making lawyers jittery. "Prosecutors fear the CSI effect with juries because, for example, they wonder: 'why wasn't everything tested?' Well, in fact, not everything needs to be tested," Dr Houck explained. "Defence attorneys also worry about the CSI effect because they think that jurors come in and have this view of science as a juggernaut; this objective method that's always accurate." However, he admitted the show had had positive as well as negative effects on the field. "My university course started with four graduates in 1999; we're now the largest major on campus - with 400 students," he said. Dr Houck added that there was an urgent need for better funding of forensic science at the university level: "There's more money spent in this country on holistic medicine than there is on forensic science research."

Minority ethnic led (Mel) production companies face barriers in succeeding in the film and television industries, research has suggested.
The study, commissioned by Pact and the UK Film Council, included interviews with industry experts and individuals. They indicated that career progression and a lack of role models are among the main problems within such companies. The research indicated that about 10% of independent production companies in the UK are minority ethnic led.
A minority ethnic led company is defined as one in which the majority of decision-making power rests with an individual or individuals from a minority ethnic group. The report also explored the problems faced by such companies when attempting to compete within the film and TV industries. It said they are often smaller than other companies and lack the resources, so are often squeezed out of the market by bigger firms. The research recommended that minority ethnic led companies could benefit from such positive actions as career training and business advice, plus improved communication within the film and TV sectors. "The UK has a rich and diverse culture and it is essential that it is reflected on film and television," said Arts minister Estelle Morris of the findings. "I welcome this report which I hope will lead to more doors being opened and all businesses in our film and television industries being given the same opportunities."

US TV special for tsunami relief
A US television network will screen a celebrity TV special to benefit the tsunami relief effort in South Asia.
NBC will encourage viewer donations during an hour-long show featuring musical performances on 15 January. Actress Sandra Bullock has donated $1m (£525,000) to The American Red Cross and actor Leonardo DiCaprio pledged a "sizable" aid contribution to Unicef. Meanwhile 70 Hong Kong music and movie stars re-recorded We Are the World in Mandarin and Cantonese to raise funds.
The song will not be released as a single, but will be played regularly during a Chinese telethon on Friday in aid of victims of the Boxing Day disaster. Around 140,000 people were killed and five million left homeless or without food and water after an earthquake below the Indian Ocean sent waves crashing into coastal communities in 11 countries.
The United Nations warned that the number killed in the disaster could rise sharply, with aid yet to reach some remote areas. Performers have yet to be confirmed for NBC's aid relief benefit later this month. It follows a two-hour telethon carried by all four major US television networks 10 days after the 11 September terror attacks in 2001. America: A Tribute to Heroes raised more than $150m (£79m) to help victims of the suicide attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon.

The Office's Ricky Gervais is writing an episode of hit US cartoon The Simpsons, following an invitation from its creator Matt Groening.
Gervais has already begun writing the script but is keeping its subject matter a closely guarded secret. He will also write a part for himself in the episode. "I've got the rough idea but this is the most intimidating project of my career. The Simpsons is the greatest TV show of all time," he said. Groening recently heaped praise on The Office, saying: "Everybody on The Simpsons is a fan of The Office - it's one of the best shows on TV in the last decade." Gervais has already said he would not guest star in the show as his Office character David, having left him behind for good in the Christmas specials. The Office became a surprise US success when it was screened on cable channel BBC America. The first series won two Golden Globes in 2004 for best comedy and best TV actor for Gervais.
In winning it beat the likes of Sex and the City and Will and Grace. An American version was produced, but so far only a pilot has been broadcast - to much criticism that it failed to live up to the original. At the British Comedy Awards on Wednesday, Gervais was handed a special achievement award for writing. But The Office missed out in the best comedy show category to Little Britain. Matt Groening was also at the awards to collect the award for best international comedy for The Simpsons.

John Peel replacement show begins
The permanent replacement for late DJ John Peel's BBC Radio 1 show goes on air on Tuesday, with three hosts chosen to fill the legendary presenter's slot.
Rock DJ Huw Stephens will go on air in the 2300 slot every Tuesday, with black music champion Ras Kwame on Wednesdays and dance DJ Rob Da Bank on Thursdays. Rob Da Bank filled in after Peel had a heart attack aged 65 in October. All three will play "diverse, unpredictable and non-commercial" songs under the banner of the OneMusic show.
Radio 1 said the station was not trying to replace Peel, but would rise to the "challenge" of "keeping his legacy alive" with unpredictable music. The three DJs were chosen for their "in-depth musical knowledge across a variety of musical genres", the station said.
Rob Da Bank is one of the hosts of The Blue Room, an early morning weekend show which plays electronic and dance music. Huw Stephens has been one half of the Thursday night show Bethan and Huw in Wales, which explores new music, especially up-and-coming acts in Wales. And Ras Kwame is host of 100% Homegrown on Radio 1's digital station 1Xtra, dedicated to showcasing the best hip-hop and garage. Another change to the station line-up will see Sara Cox return after maternity leave. She will host the lunchtime show on Saturdays from this week.
Good luck to all three of them, not one DJ could fill Peels boots so it's probably a good idea to get them all contributing. This time next year I hope we are saying how well these DJs have done, but I fear this time next year we will really realise how much John Peel will be forever missed.
Very good idea to continue the legacy without attempting to replace John Peel. Also, there will surely be a wider spectrum for international music as three top radio DJs unite under the One World name. Congratulations!
The whole glory of John Peel was the fact he was not commited to one genre. He played what he liked across the range of music.... this is not going to be the same, and all they seem to be doing is what they already have. Bring back Steve Lamacq.
The obvious heir to John Peel is the marvellous, wonderful and talented Claire Kember from totallyradio.com. This lady is young and fresh and is one of the most knowledgeable and likeable people in British broadcasting today. Everyone who listens to her show understands and compares her to the ledgendary John Peel. BBC Radio should seek out the real talent from internet radio stations, people who are making a real impact on the world of music and the world in general.

Actress Anna Keaveney, who appeared in Brookside, My Family and A Touch of Frost, has died of lung cancer aged 55.
Keaveney, who played Brookside's Marie Jackson when the Channel 4 soap began in 1982, died on Saturday. Born in Runcorn, Cheshire, she also starred in numerous films including 1989's Shirley Valentine. She played Nellie in Mike Leigh's latest film Vera Drake, which won the Golden Lion prize for best film at this year's Venice Film Festival.
And most recently she appeared alongside Richard Wilson in ITV's King of Fridges and with Martin Clunes in Doc Martin. Other TV appearances included the part of Matron in ITV drama Footballers' Wives and a cameo role as Tom Farrell's mother Sheila in BBC comedy Gimme Gimme Gimme. Keaveney's career also included stage performances in Neaptide for the National Theatre, Private Lives and The Rise and Fall of Little Voice. The actress died in hospital. Her agent Barry Brown said: "Anna was due to have had another operation on Friday but unfortunately she was too weak."

&#163;1.8m indecency fine for Viacom
Media giant Viacom has paid out $3.5m (£1.8m) to end investigations into indecency in its US radio and TV shows.
The settlement to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) ends a long-running saga dating back to 2001. The FCC was looking into 50 shows, including those by "shock jock" Howard Stern and two New York DJs. Stern recently announced he was leaving Viacom while the two DJs were sacked after their show featured a couple purporting to have sex in a church. After the church incident two years ago Viacom agreed to install audio delay equipment at its radio stations that broadcast live programming.
It also agreed to train its broadcasters and employees about indecency laws. The agreement cancels investigations into about 50 radio and television shows, said Richard Diamond, FCC deputy secretary of communications. The shows were broadcast by Viacom-owned stations across the United States. Viacom has five days to pay the $3.5m fine, according to the agreement. The payment is not related to the FCC's $550,000 (£293,000) fine levied against Viacom after the exposure of singer Janet Jackson's breast during the CBS Super Bowl halftime show in January. Viacom is contesting that fine. It is not the first time that Viacom has paid out over indecency charges. Infinity Broadcasting, which is owned by Viacom, paid cumulative fines totalling $1.7m (£907,000) in 1995 to settle FCC violations by Stern.

Celebrities get to stay in jungle
All four contestants still remain in I'm A Celebrity ... Get Me Out Of Here as no evictions were made on the television show on Saturday.
Contestants Paul Burrell, Joe Pasquale, Janet Street-Porter and Fran Cosgrave were told by hosts Ant and Dec. Natalie Appleton's decision to quit the show last Monday had given them all a stay of execution, the group were told. Model Sophie Anderton was the last person to be voted off the ITV1 show, set in the Australian jungle. The four remaining stars will do a joint Bushtucker Trial on Sunday.
Former All Saints singer Natalie Appleton,31, walked out of the show after learning she would face a fifth so-called Bushtucker Trial. The celebrities are chosen by the viewers to pass trials in order to win food for the rest of the camp. Appleton had endured a torrid time during the programme, including a well-publicised row with Sophie Anderton. And on 26 November singer Brian Harvey quit as a contestant after he had a blazing row with Janet Street-Porter.

Musical treatment for Capra film
The classic film It's A Wonderful Life is to be turned into a musical by the producer of the controversial hit show Jerry Springer - The Opera.
Frank Capra's 1946 movie starring James Stewart, is being turned into a £7m musical by producer Jon Thoday. He is working with Steve Brown, who wrote the award-winning musical Spend Spend Spend. A spokeswoman said the plans were in the "very early stages", with no cast, opening date or theatre announced.
A series of workshops have been held in London, and on Wednesday a cast of singers unveiled the musical to a select group of potential investors. Mr Thoday said the idea of turning the film into a musical had been an ambition of his for almost 20 years. It's a Wonderful Life was based on a short story, The Greatest Gift, by Philip van Doren Stern. Mr Thoday managed to buy the rights to the story from Van Doren Stern's family in 1999, following Mr Brown's success with Spend Spend Spend. He later secured the film rights from Paramount, enabling them to use the title It's A Wonderful Life.

Dame Alicia Markova, who has died in Bath aged 94, was the UK's first prima ballerina of the modern age, and, in her heyday, the greatest in the western world.
She was born Lilian Alicia Marks in London in 1910. Her parents were comfortably off - her father, a mining engineer, drove a Rolls Royce. When she was eight, her mother took a decision which changed her life. Fearing that she had flat feet and weak legs, she arranged for her to have ballet lessons. Very quickly it became apparent that she was something special. She was spotted by the Russian artistic impresario, Sergei Diaghilev, who wanted her to dance for his company, Ballets Russes. She became ill with diphtheria but kept in touch, and, eventually, with a governess in tow, joined Diaghilev in Monte Carlo when she was 14.
From here, she toured Europe, playing in all the top venues. It was Diaghilev who changed her name without even consulting her. Her life was one of great excitement. People such as Matisse and Stravinsky became like uncles to her, the latter put in charge of her musical education. Soon after Diaghilev's death in 1929, Alicia Markova returned to England and became Britain's first international ballerina. She helped launch the Ballet Club at the Mercury Theatre (later the Ballet Rambert), the Vic Wells Ballet, and then, with Anton Dolin, the Markova-Dolin Ballet of 1935-37. She also began working with young choreographers such as Anthony Tudor and Frederick Ashton who became huge influences on the direction of ballet in the west.
Her version of Giselle, all lightness and grace, is still considered to be among the finest ever. She was also outstanding in The Dying Swan. She was one of the first British ballerinas to take a major part in Les Sylphides. She, above all, helped popularise ballet both in Britain and in America.
Alicia Markova spent World War II in the United States where, in a re-formed Ballets Russes, she played to huge audiences. She even appeared in Hollywood movies. In 1950, back in England, she and Anton Dolin jointly established the Festival Ballet. She retired in 1963, an "instant decision" she said, "largely because of a leg injury". Created a Dame, she made a new career for herself as a teacher. She also travelled the world directing ballet companies and putting on shows. She became director of ballet for the Metropolitan Opera Ballet in New York, and for some years was full-time Professor of Ballet and Performing Arts in the University of Cincinnati. A critic once said of Dame Alicia Markova's dancing: "She gave the illusion of moving as if she had no weight to get off the ground."

Triple triumph for Little Britain
Top TV cult hit Little Britain has triumphed over The Office at the 15th annual British Comedy Awards.
The BBC show beat The Office Christmas Special in the best TV comedy category and took the people's choice award. Matt Lucas and David Walliams also jointly won best TV comedy actor over The Office creator Ricky Gervais, who won a special award for writing. It was also a good night for Ant and Dec who clinched two awards, including best comedy entertainment personality. The Geordie duo also secured best comedy entertainment programme for Saturday Night Takeaway, beating I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here!, which they also host, and the BBC's Have I Got News For You.
The ceremony was presented by Jonathan Ross from ITV's London Studios headquarters on the capital's South Bank. Little Britain began life as a radio series on Radio 4, with Walliams and Lucas playing a range of misfit characters from an alternative Britain. It was later commissioned for BBC Three, where it proved a huge success, with the second series also shown on BBC One. After receiving his award for best TV comedy actor with Walliams, Lucas said: "It's a great honour to be nominated alongside Ricky Gervais and Martin Clunes."
The show also won the people's choice award, which is the only gong on the night voted for by viewers. Speaking after receiving the award for best comedy, Walliams said: "It was a real shock but I don't think we deserved to beat The Office which is a great show and more than just a comedy. It's a beautiful piece of work." Gervais and The Office co-writer Stephen Merchant received a special award for writing, presented by Noel Gallagher and Tom Stoppard. Gervais said: "The show has won an awful lot of awards in the last couple of years, too much. It's got embarrassing to be honest." Other winners at the awards included Caroline Quentin, who took home best TV comedy actress for Life Begins and Von Trapped.
Catherine Tate, from The Catherine Tate Show, was also nominated for the same award, but she did walk away with best comedy newcomer, over James McAvoy from Shameless (Channel 4) and Julian Barratt and Noel Fielding from The Mighty Boosh (BBC Three). Nighty Night was named Britain's best new TV comedy over ITV1 shows Doc Martin and Life Begins. But Doc Martin won best TV comedy drama, over Jonathan Creek (BBC One) and Shameless. Winner in the best international comedy category was The Simpsons, beating Sex and the City and Curb Your Enthusiasm. The prize was accepted by Matt Groening, creator of The Simpsons, who also received an outstanding contribution award from scientist Stephen Hawking, who has been featured in the series. School of Rock was voted best comedy film beating Shaun of the Dead and Shrek 2.
Matt Lucas & David Walliams (Little Britain, BBC Three)
Caroline Quentin (Life Begins/ Von Trapped, ITV1)
Ant & Dec (Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway/ I'm A Celebrity, Get Me Out Of Here!, ITV1)
Catherine Tate (The Catherine Tate Show, BBC Two)
Nighty Night (Baby Cow Productions, BBC Three)
Doc Martin (Buffalo Productions, ITV1)
Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway (Granada, ITV1)
The Simpsons (Twentieth Century Fox, BBC Two/Sky One/Channel 4)

BBC 'should allow more scrutiny'
MPs have urged the BBC to give watchdogs more freedom to scrutinise how £2bn in licence fee money is spent.
The Public Accounts Committee called for the National Audit Office to be given a "free hand" to investigate how the BBC offers value for money. Although six areas are to be opened up to scrutiny the audit office should have more power to choose what it investigated, the MPs said. The call was made in a report into the BBC's Freeview digital service. "Our aim is not to rewrite the storyline of EastEnders but simply to ensure that the BBC is as accountable to parliament as any other organisation spending public money," said the committee chairman, MP Edward Leigh. "The BBC's spending is not subject to the full independent scrutiny, and accountability to parliament. "Parliament requires television owners to pay a licence fee and expects the comptroller and auditor general, on behalf of parliament, to be able to scrutinise how that money, over £2 billion a year, is used."
A BBC spokeswoman said: "We share the committee's interest in ensuring the public money we receive is spent well. Though in its infancy, we think the arrangements with the NAO are working well and should be given time to mature." The report said the Freeview digital service has had an "impressive" take up since its launch but the BBC must still dispel confusion about the service. The committee found the BBC had succeeded in ensuring subscription-free access to digital channels following the collapse of ITV Digital in 2002. But the fact that one in four homes could not access Freeview remained a problem.
The report said that while gaps in the coverage were largely due to landscape issues, there was need for detailed explanations on the Freeview website and on promotional literature as to why it was not available in specific areas. The government has proposed switch off of the analogue television signal, with 2012 the most recently proposed date. The BBC launched Freeview in 2002 as an alternative to satellite subscription services such as Sky, to allow its digital channels such as BBC Three and News 24 to be seen. There have been an estimated five million Freeview set-top boxes sold since the launch and prices have fallen considerably. The corporation plans to spend up to £138m on Freeview before 2014 to ensure people can receive the service throughout the UK, and are aware of it.

Greer attacks 'bully' Big Brother
Germaine Greer has criticised Celebrity Big Brother's "bullying" of housemates after quitting the reality TV show.
She said "superior" bullying tactics, like making housemates cold and hungry, could encourage playground bullying. She also condemned the "complete irresponsibility" of adding Brigitte Nielsen's former mother-in-law Jackie Stallone to the house on Monday. Nielsen had panicked that if she reacted badly it could harm her access to her children, Greer said. The feminist writer and broadcaster said Big Brother had behaved "like a child rather than a parent" by taunting contestant John McCririck after denying him a cola drink. "I thought it was actually demonstrating the role of taunting in the playground and there are so many children whose lives have actually been destroyed by taunting in the playground," Greer said. She also said that her fellow housemates had publicity-seeking "agendas".
"I had no idea who would be in here and it's wrong for me to present myself in the same context as they are." Media observers had been surprised by Greer's initial decision to join the third celebrity version of the Channel 4 reality TV show, given that she has written critical articles about the format in the past. As she packed her suitcase to leave the house she told fellow housemates: "I'm leaving over specific issues, but best for everyone if I don't discuss them. "I have a problem with decisions, I make them fast and when I make them, I stick to them." Greer had earlier failed to persuade other contestants to stage a naked protest against Big Brother.
Other celebrities to walk out of a reality show TV include Sex Pistol John Lydon, former EastEnders actress Danniella Westbrook and ex-E17 singer Brian Harvey who all left I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here. Previous Big Brother housemates to leave before their time were Sunita Sharma and Sandy Cumming from the third series of the non-celebrity version of the show.
VOTE   Was Germaine Greer right to leave Celebrity Big Brother?   Yes  No   Results are indicative and may not reflect public opinion
Happy Mondays dancer Bez is now 2-1 favourite to win the show, followed by Blazin' Squad singer Kenzie at 5-2 and actor Jeremy Edwards at 4-1. Ladbrokes spokesman Warren Lush said that the series was still "wide open", adding that the last 24 hours had also seen a rush of bets on McCririck slashing his odds to 8-1. DJ Lisa I'Anson is the outsider with odds of 40-1, while Jackie Stallone, who joined the house on Monday, is also one of the less popular housemates at 20-1. The first eviction of the series has now been postponed after Greer's exit unexpectedly reduced the number of competitors. The eight remaining contestants are competing for a £50,000 prize, to be donated to the charity of their choice, if they survive a series of public votes. For every 50p vote cast by viewers by telephone or text during the programme's run, 9p will go to a tsunami charity appeal.

No charges against TV's Cosby
US comedian Bill Cosby will not face charges stemming from an allegation of sexual misconduct.
Authorities in Philadelphia said they found insufficient evidence to support the woman's allegations regarding an alleged incident in January 2004. The woman reported the allegations to Canadian authorities last month. Cosby's lawyer, Walter M Phillips Jr, said the comedian was pleased with the decision. "He looks forward to moving on with his life," he said. District Attorney Bruce L Castor Jr, who was in charge of the case, said that detectives could find no instance "where anyone complained to law enforcement of conduct which would constitute a criminal offence.
He also said that the fact the woman waited a year before coming forward, and she had had further contact with Cosby during that time, were also factors in his decision. The unidentified woman's lawyer, Dolores M Troiani, said her client was likely to sue the comedian. "I think that's the only avenue open to her. She felt, as we did, that it's a very strong case and she was telling the truth." She also said that the woman supplied further evidence to prosecutors that she believed strengthened her allegations. Cosby emerged as one of the first black comics to have mainstream success in the US. He was a successful stand-up before hosting the children's show Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids, and starring in The Cosby Show, one of the biggest sitcoms of the 1980s.

Wife Swap makers sue US 'copycat'
The British producers of US Wife Swap are taking legal action against a show they claim is "a blatant and wholescale copycat" of their programme.
RDF Media, which makes the show for US network ABC, has filed a damages claim for $18 million (£9.25 million) against Fox's Trading Spouses. ABC bought the rights to the British show, which was first aired in 2003 and became a hit on Channel 4. The US network is not part of the claim, but has supported RDF's action. "We respect our producing partners' right to protect their intellectual property in whatever manner they deem most appropriate," said ABC in a statement. A spokesman for Fox said it had not seen the details of the legal action and could not comment.
Their show was first screened in June, and was criticised in the press for its similarities to Wife Swap. ABC originally planned to call their programme Trading Moms, but changed it to avoid confusion with the Fox version. Earlier this year, the NBC network claimed that Fox's boxing show The Next Great Champ had been hurriedly produced to ensure its programme was the first to be screened. NBC alleged that boxing regulations had been violated, but failed in their attempt to have the show pulled. The Fox show proved a ratings flop, while NBC's The Contender is due to begin in February.

Show over for MTV's The Osbournes
Rock star Ozzy Osbourne has said his family will not make any more episodes of reality TV show The Osbournes.
"At the end of it I didn't like having cameras around the house all the time," the Black Sabbath singer told reporters at the MTV Europe Awards in Rome. His wife Sharon, who also appears in the popular MTV show based on the Osbournes' family life, agreed. "Now everybody's doing reality shows. He's done it, he's been there, he's got to do something else," she said.
Ozzy Osbourne said he had had enough of the work involved in making the series. "When you watch a 25-minute episode, I've been filming all day," he said. Sharon Osbourne is currently appearing as a judge and mentor in ITV1 talent show The X-Factor alongside Simon Cowell and Louis Walsh.
Earlier this year she topped a poll of the most important people in rock, for her part in guiding the career of husband Ozzy and her family. She was the driving force behind The Osbournes, which ran for three series, earning the family a reported $85m (£46m). The renewed popularity for Ozzy has seen sales of his merchandise hit the $50m (£27.2m) mark, a record for a heavy metal artist. Sales of T-shirts, accessories and action figures have rocketed since The Osbournes hit screens. At its peak, The Osbournes had a regular audience of eight million, with America's TV Guide magazine describing the series as "a cross between The Simpsons and This Is Spinal Tap". Osbourne himself was at a loss to explain its popularity: "I suppose Americans get a kick out of watching a crazy Brit family like us make complete fools of ourselves every week."

Jungle TV show ratings drop by 4m
The finale of ITV1's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here drew an average of 10.9m viewers - about four million fewer than the previous series.
The fourth series of the show peaked on Monday at 11.9m and 49.2% of the audience, just before Joe Pasquale won. This compared with a peak of 15.3m at and a record 62.2% of the TV audience when Kerry McFadden won in February. Comic Pasquale beat former Royal butler Paul Burrell who came second, nightclub owner Fran Cosgrave, who was third. Pasquale follows Kerry McFadden, Phil Tufnell and Tony Blackburn as winners of the show.
Singer and TV presenter McFadden was the show's first female winner. When cricketer Phil Tufnell won in May 2003, 12.3 million people - 50% of the viewing public - tuned in to watch. And when Tony Blackburn won the first show in 2002, 10.9 million people saw the show. Pasquale had been the show's hottest ever favourite to win, and its hosts Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly, known as Ant and Dec, said Monday's deciding vote was the closest in the programme's history.
Pascuale has been flooded with offers of TV work, according to his management company, but one of his first jobs on his return is pantomime.
Before joining I'm a Celebrity, he had signed up to play Jack in Jack and the Beanstalk in Birmingham, and tickets for the show have become increasingly popular since he joined the TV show. His manager Robert Voice said: "We've had interest from different TV producers. Some are for comedy shows, some are new-type projects. "There are a number of things Joe wants to do. He is very ambitious. "He wants to play the West End and do different things other than straightforward comedy. We are talking to a couple of West End producers about a musical."

Duran Duran show set for US TV
Chart stars Duran Duran are to appear in a VH1 special in the US including interviews and concert footage.
The show airs on Tuesday and will feature a studio performance, behind the scenes footage and fan interviews. "They seemed like a perfect fit with our audience," said Rick Krim, VH1's vice president of music and talent. The band recently released a new album, Astronaut, the first from the original line-up since 1983. They will also tour Japan and the US next year.
"When we started playing together, we didn't try and make a really sort of mature album. We just really wanted to make a great Duran Duran album," said keyboard player Nick Rhodes. "It's pretty much in line with a lot of stuff out there." Duran Duran are currently promoting the album's second single, What Happens Tomorrow.
Simon Le Bon said earlier this year that the group were not trying to update their sound too much. "We wouldn't want to lose them [older fans] by trying too hard by trying to connect with a new audience," the singer said. Le Bon also said the five members were getting on very well. "We're like any people who get very close. Sometimes you argue with each other. But the fact is we inspire each other musically. "Nobody else does it for me," he said. "It's just very special."

US show sued for rat-eating stunt
A US TV network is being sued for $2.5m (£1.3m) by a viewer who says he was disgusted by watching contestants eat dead rats in a stunt show.
Austin Aitken is taking action against NBC over its programme Fear Factor. He said watching the show caused his blood pressure to rise so high that he became dizzy and light-headed. The legal assistant said NBC was "sending the wrong message to viewers that cash can make or have people do just about anything beyond reasoning". The hand-written, four-page lawsuit said: "To have the individuals on the show eat and drink dead rats was crazy and from a viewer's point of view made me throw-up as well as another in the house at the same time." Mr Aitken, who lives in Cleveland, said that after becoming light-headed, he ran towards the bedroom and knocked his head in a doorway. A spokesman for NBC said it had no comment on the lawsuit, but confirmed the stunt show did feature a rat-eating scene in New York's Times Square on 8 November. Past shows have featured viewers eating spiders and live worms. The programme has been screened in the UK on Sky One.

Muslim group attacks TV drama 24
A British Muslim group has criticised the new series of US drama 24, which is about to be aired on Sky One, claiming it portrays Islam unfairly.
The Muslim Council of Britain has complained to broadcasting watchdog Ofcom. It says the programme breaches editorial guidelines. The group's members met with Sky executives on Tuesday after viewing previews of the first five episodes. The drama, now in its fourth series, begins on Sunday evening. The new series portrays a Muslim family as a sleeper terrorist cell. The Muslim Council of Britain said in a statement: "We are greatly concerned by the unremittingly hostile and unbalanced portrayal of Muslims in this series of 24 based upon a preview of the first five episodes that we have seen." "There is not a single positive Muslim character in the storyline to date. At a time when negative stereotypes of Muslims are on the increase we feel that Sky - as a major UK broadcaster - has a responsibility to challenge these insidious views, not help to reinforce them." But Sky denied the programme breached broadcasting guidelines. A spokesperson said: "During a useful meeting yesterday, Sky listened to the concerns raised by representatives of the council. Sky does not believe that the episodes that it has reviewed to date breach Ofcom's programme code." Fox TV, which shows the series in the US, is broadcasting public service announcements showing Muslims in a positive light after complaints about the series.

Fears raised over ballet future
Fewer children in the UK are following in the dainty footsteps of dancers like Darcey Bussell, and carving out potential careers as ballet dancers.
New research from the Royal Academy of Dance (RAD) has found fewer children over the age of 10 are attending ballet classes and taking exams in the discipline. The organisation blames the growing popularity of computer games and other changes in lifestyle. And there are fears that if the trend is not reversed, there could be fewer British ballet stars in the future. The RAD found that the number of youngsters taking their ballet exams drops by almost 70% after the age of 10 or 11. Dance teacher Eve Trew, who has taught ballet for over 48 years, told BBC News she had seen a "vast" change over the years. She blamed modern lifestyles for the fall in ballet attendance. "I think the children of many years ago did not have as many hobbies," she said. "The trouble now is that they are wide open to computers, Gameboys and everything else children have got. "As a result, there is less time being spent on ballet lessons."
Hazel Gilbert, 23, an information manager from Newcastle, gave up ballet at the age of 10 and is typical of the problem. "It's not a very cool thing to do when you go to 'big' school and I think you have to be very focused on ballet to want to carry on doing it," she said. "I used to love it, but after a certain age it becomes much more disciplined and I didn't want that. "I started getting into other things, like swimming and kickboxing, and ballet just wasn't something I wanted to do any more." Ms Trew, who runs a dance school in Gateshead, admitted it would be "very difficult" to reverse the trend and said many young ballet dancers were no longer willing to make the sacrifices to succeed. "You have to be very dedicated and you have to be very disciplined. "It is a career that you have got to really want to do because it is such hard work. "Children these days have not got the time to spend perfecting it... that is very sad."
Currently, only two out of 16 principal dancers at the Royal Ballet - Darcey Bussell and Jonathan Cope - are British, compared to 16 of the 21 principals in 1985. But a spokesman for the English National Ballet told BBC News that although only two out of their 12 principal dancers were British, around a quarter of the company's dancers were from the UK. He said competition at open auditions in London was "fierce" between talented dancers from all over the world. The RAD have launched a new competition to try and reverse the decline in British ballet. Dame Antoinette Sibley, president of the RAD, launched the Fonteyn Nureyev Young Dancers competition earlier this week.
Aimed at children aged 10 to 13, it is hoped the contest will help keep British ballet evolving. A spokeswoman for the RAD said: "It is our responsibility to re-ignite the passion and nurture young dancers for the long-term future of ballet. "We need to provide them with a framework and a goal to work towards, with constant support and coaching in an environment where they can work with their peers and possibly leading artists and choreographers. "Perhaps more importantly provide them with the opportunity to experience 'performance' themselves. "What better way to reignite a passion for ballet than to let them experience the thrill of performance?"

Brookside creator's Channel 4 bid
The creator of defunct TV soap Brookside has written to the culture minister to offer to buy Channel 4.
Phil Redmond, now chairman of Mersey TV, told Tessa Jowell he would run it with its current remit intact for the next 10 years. But media watchdog Ofcom has said the the commercially funded public service broadcaster will not be privatised. A spokesman for the Department for Culture, Media and Sport said there were no plans to sell the channel.
He added that primary legislation would be required for the station to be sold off, which the government was not intending to introduce. Brookside was axed in 2003 after its ratings slumped from a peak of seven million to just 1.5 million. Redmond also brought teen soap Hollyoaks to Channel 4 and created Grange Hill, the school-based drama serial which was first broadcast on BBC One in 1978. He was awarded the CBE for services to drama earlier this year.

Little Britain two top comic list
Little Britain stars Matt Lucas and David Walliams have been named the most powerful people in TV comedy, in a poll by listings magazine Radio Times.
The duo kept Phoenix Nights creator Peter Kay at number two and The Office star Ricky Gervais in third place. A Radio Times panel compiled the list, taking the comedians' critical acclaim and financial success into account. Newcomers to the annual list included Nighty Night star Julia Davis at seven and Black Books' Tamsin Greig at 19.
Lucas and Walliams won numerous awards for Little Britain in 2004, including National Television, Royal Television Society and British Comedy awards. More than 1.8 million people watched the first episode of the latest series of Little Britain on BBC Three in October, giving the digital channel its highest rating ever.
They topped the Radio Times list after rising from 10th position last year. Other big risers over the past year included presenting duo Ant and Dec at five, up from 13 in 2004, Stephen Fry rising nine places to 15 and BBC Three controller Stuart Murphy, who moves to number 18 from 32 last year. Last year's winner, chat show host Graham Norton, fell to number 16 following relatively few television appearances in 2004. Production companies also featured in the top 50, including Steve Coogan's Baby Cow, which created Nighty Night among others, Hat Trick - behind The Kumars at Number 42 - and The Vicar of Dibley production company Tiger Aspect.

TV show unites Angolan families
Angolan families who are attempting to track each other down, after being separated by nearly 30 years of war, are succeeding thanks to a hugely popular TV show.
Meeting Point has become one of TV Angola's most watched programmes, and has reunited hundreds of families. It runs daily, not only on the television but also on the radio. Every Friday, hundreds of people gather in Luanda's Independence Square to record a message in front of the TV cameras, in the hope that a lost relative will see it. Many relatives have been reunited on air. "At the beginning there was an absolute explosion - huge, huge crowds," Sergio Gera, the programme's chief co-ordinator, told BBC World Service's Assignment programme. "Now things are a little calmer, there are slightly less people - but, after two and a half years of broadcasting, there are still a lot of people going."
The media in the southern African country, twice the size of France, has been gripped by the quest of so many people to find their relatives. Hundreds of thousands of people died in Angola's 30-year civil war, which finally ended in 2002, and tens of thousands of people are still missing. Many have not heard anything for 10 or more years - in all, 90% of Angolan families have lost someone.
The idea of recording in Independence Square was modelled on a square in the Argentine capital Buenos Aries, where mothers go to talk about the dead and the missing, and to exchange news. One woman, Victoria Lapete, found her sister - the only remaining member of her family - in Independence Square live on Meeting Point. She had not seen her sibling for 28 years. "When we saw each other, we threw ourselves into each other's arms," she told Assignment. "We started to cry. I felt very, very happy, because I'd spent so long without any family. Suddenly I had a sister again." However, Angola is one of the poorest countries in Africa, and the number of people with access to either a television or radio is comparatively few. This means that elsewhere in the country, the task of reuniting families lies primarily with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). In the city of Wambo, the ICRC runs the Gazetta - a 200-page, tabloid-size book which contains 13,000 names of missing or displaced.
Their task is made much harder by the huge number of landmines dotted around the country. "It's very difficult - there are many displaced," stated Joaquim Sahundi, head of tracing in Wambo.
"As they try to go back [home], others are trying to relocate their relatives. Many people are getting injured because of that - in the villages, in the bush, there has been no clearance of mines. "When people are crossing these areas, they step on mines." The ICRC also uses the media where it can, running four daily broadcasts of their lists of the missing on Radio Angola. Meanwhile, there remain massive challenges to Angolan families even once they are reunited. "The programme of family reunification is extremely important, but for these families to remain reunified, there has to be social integration, job access, education, healthcare," said Rafael Marques of the pro-democracy George Soros Foundation for Southern Africa. "Essentially the government is waiting for the international community to pay for the reconstruction - that's why it has been persistently calling for a donor's conference. That is just a way of detaching itself from its political responsibilities."

Volcano drama erupts on BBC One
Supervolcano, a docu-drama about a volcanic eruption in Yellowstone National Park in the US, is among the highlights on the BBC One this winter.
The £178m winter schedule also includes the return of Doctor Who and a drama about Angela Cannings, who was wrongly convicted of killing two of her babies. Sarah Lancashire and Timothy Spall will star in the real-life drama, Cherished. ITV also unveiled their festive season on Tuesday, which includes Stephen Fry in a remake of Tom Brown's Schooldays. Supervolcano, follows in the footsteps of last year's Pompei, which drew 10 million viewers to BBC One in October 2003.
The programme merges science, drama and computer imagery to reveal what could happen if Yellowstone - home to the only currently active supervolcano in the world - were to erupt again. BBC Two will run a two-part documentary, The Science Behind Supervolcano, in conjunction with the transmission. Other educational highlights include a documentary about infamous Mongolian warrior Genghis Khan and Grandchild of The Holocaust. Grandchild of The Holocaust, part of the BBC commitment to Holocaust Memorial Day, follows Adrian, 13, on a journey to uncover the truth about what happened to his grandmother in Auschwitz and Belsen.
New drama includes Archangel, an adaptation of the Robert Harris best-seller, which stars Daniel Craig on the trail of Stalin's diaries in Communist Russia. And Sarah Waters' gets her second adaptation on BBC One with Imelda Staunton and Charles Dance lined up to star in Fingersmith. The adaptation, about a conman in Victorian England, will make an interesting contrast to Julie Burchill's Sugar Rush - a lesbian teenage drama part of Channel Four's winter season. On a lighter note, Jessica Stevenson will star in new BBC One sitcom, The World According to Bex, penned by My Family creator Fred Barron and the Two Ronnies return for a celebration of their classic comedy series.
Fry's portrayal of headmaster Dr Arnold dominates a muted Christmas schedule on ITV1, which sees the channel retreat from broadcasting blockbuster movies in favour of extended soap episodes and popular quiz shows.
Sir Paul McCartney, wife Heather Mills and Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson will join a celebrity edition of Who Wants to be a Millionaire? on Christmas Day. Also on Christmas Day, John Nettles will return in a one-off edition of Midsomer Murders, while two episodes of the new Miss Marple drama will air over the festive period. Films on ITV1 include Gus Van Sant's Finding Forrester, starring Sean Connery, and classics such a Mary Poppins, Star Wars and The Good, the Bad and the Ugly. In contrast, BBC's Christmas season includes terrestrial debuts of the first Harry Potter film, Shrek and Steven Spielberg's AI, as well as new epipsodes of the Vicar of Dibley and the final Auf Wiedersehen, Pet.

South Bank Awards honour hit soap
Coronation Street has become the first soap to triumph at the South Bank Show Awards, which traditionally reward highbrow and groundbreaking culture.
The soap beat fellow ITV1 show Filthy Love and Channel 4's Shameless to win the best TV drama prize on Thursday. Little Britain was named best comedy while Franz Ferdinand beat Morrissey and The Libertines to the music award. Shane Meadows' Dead Man's Shoes picked up the best film award, beating Shaun of the Dead and My Summer of Love. The two award ceremonies reflect the achievements the industry believes have been made in the last year.
In 2004, Coronation Street pulled away from its BBC One rival EastEnders in the ratings and dominated other TV awards. Last year, the South Bank Award for best TV drama went to Steven Poliakoff's period piece The Lost Prince, while Bloody Sunday, about the 1972 killings in Northern Ireland, won in 2003. In other South Bank categories, Little Britain's second series beat Nighty Night and The Green Wing to the comedy trophy while Alan Bennett's The History Boys won in the theatre category. Author David Mitchell made up for losing out in the Booker Prize to Alan Hollinghurst by beating him to the literary award with his book Cloud Atlas. Shameless, State Of Play and Clocking Off creator Paul Abbott got a lifetime achievement award while former Grange Hill actress Amma Asante won the breakthrough award for writing and directing her first film, A Way Of Life.

Housewives lift Channel 4 ratings
The debut of US television hit Desperate Housewives has helped lift Channel 4's January audience share by 12% compared to last year.
Other successes such as Celebrity Big Brother and The Simpsons have enabled the broadcaster to surpass BBC2 for the first month since last July. However the channel's share of the audience fell from 11.2% to 9.6% last month in comparison with January 2004. Celebrity Big Brother attracted less viewers than its 2002 series.
Comedy drama Desperate Housewives managed to pull in five million viewers at one point during its run to date, attracting a quarter of the television audience. The two main television channels, BBC1 and ITV1, have both seen their monthly audience share decline in a year on year comparison for January, while Five's proportion remained the same at a slender 6.3%. Digital multi-channel TV is continuing to be the strongest area of growth, with the BBC reporting Freeview box ownership of five million, including one million sales in the last portion of 2004. Its share of the audience soared by 20% in January 2005 compared with last year, and currently stands at an average of 28.6%.

Baywatch dubbed 'worst TV import'
Surf show Baywatch has won the title of worst TV import of all time in a poll of UK television executives.
The programme, which starred David Hasselhoff and Pamela Anderson during its 12-year run, was shown in 140 countries at its height. Model Anna Nicole Smith's reality show and The Dukes of Hazzard were runners-up in the Broadcast magazine survey. The Simpsons and Dallas and 24 were among the magazine's list of the best all-time imports from the US. Soap operas Knots Landing, Falcon Crest plus The Bold And The Beautiful all made the top 10 of Transatlantic TV howlers. The Jerry Springer Show, which came in at sixth on the list, did not fare well.
Broadcast magazine said: "British TV never realised how low it could go before Jerry showed the way." Baywatch rose to the top of the list for having "mind-numbingly predictable scripts: beachgoer is saved from drowning," according to the magazine. Just inside the all-time worst top 10 came Extreme Makeover, which sees members of the public given thousands of pounds worth of plastic surgery. Other American shows which won praise were The X-Files, I Love Lucy, Twin Peaks and Star Trek.

Stern dropped from radio stations
Controversial DJ Howard Stern has been dropped from four US radio stations because he keeps promoting his move to a network broadcasting on satellite.
Cidatel Broadcasting said Stern had transformed his show into a "continuous infomercial promoting Sirius, his new satellite radio employer". Stern will join the Sirius subscription service, which is not governed by US regulators, next year. Citadel pulled Stern's show from stations in New York and Pennsylvania. Stern had been holiday for two weeks but his show did not return to the four stations as expected on 3 January. Citadel said it did not yet know whether it would return to its network.
Stern announced in October that he was leaving conventional radio, where his syndicated show goes out across the US, for the relatively restriction-free satellite service. The DJ's broadcasts are well known for landing in trouble with regulators for obscene and sexually explicit rantings. Stern was dropped by six stations owned by media giant Clear Channel in 2004 after it had to pay the Federal Communications Commission $1.75m (£950,000), over breaches indecency laws. Media giant Viacom has also reportedly agreed to the FCC's demands that if Stern is issued with another indecency violation then his show must be pulled from all of its stations. Viacom has also been hit with record fines of $3.5m (£1.8m) over Stern and two other New York DJs. But Stern continues to be one of the most popular talk show hosts, particularly in the 25-54 age category.

US TV host Clark suffers stroke
Veteran US television host Dick Clark is in hospital in Los Angeles after suffering a mild stroke.
The 75-year-old presented long-running show American Bandstand from 1956-87 and has since hosted game shows and produced award ceremonies. Clark is scheduled to welcome in the New Year on the ABC network, a job he has done for 33 years. The presenter said that he is "hopeful" of getting better in time to lead the festivities in New York's Times Square. Clark's publicist Paul Shefrin said the television host was "recovering" and there was no cause for alarm. Clark, who produces the Golden Globe and American Music Awards, disclosed last year that he was suffering from diabetes.
His popular music show American Bandstand was first broadcast in 1952, and attracted an audience of 20 million people after it was picked up by ABC in 1957. The long-running weekly series, which featured guests including Elvis Presley, Buddy Holly and Aretha Frankin, came to an end in 1989. Clark was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1993 for his contribution to the music industry. He has also been responsible for television series such as TV Bloopers, Celebrity Boxing and drama American Dreams. Clark is also expected to act as executive producer for the upcoming Golden Globe Awards ceremony, which is taking place on 16 January.

New media battle for Bafta awards
The BBC leads the nominations for the Bafta Interactive Awards, including one for the Radio Times website and one for Sport Interactive's Euro 2004 coverage.
The awards, which were started in 1997, recognise the best websites, digital TV shows and CD roms. Other nominees include The Guardian news website, the National Theatre, MTV, the Science Museum and the London Stock Exchange. The winners from 12 different categories are crowned on 2 March 2005. There were nearly 400 entries this year - a third more than last year. The BBC has 16 nominations while The Guardian has three nominations.
"This year's nominees are a testament to the creative and innovative work going on within the industry," said Grant Dean, chair of the interactive committee. Categories include interactive TV, film, digital TV, mobile phones and music. Shaun of the Dead, Oasis' Definitely Maybe, Really Bend It Like Beckham, The Chaplin Collection and The Day Today will battle it out in the DVD category.
ITV's Great British Spelling Test takes on the BBC's Olympics and Spooks Interactive for the interactive TV award. And the Guardian takes three of a possible five nominations in the news and sport category for its website coverage of Euro 2004, the Tour de France and the US elections. The BBC's iCan site is up for the technical and social innovation award alongside the likes of Nottingham University's Uncle Roy All Around You. In 2002, the British Academy of Film and Television decided to split the awards into separate games and interactive ceremonies, to fully cover the range of innovation outside the gaming industry.

Famed music director Viotti dies
Conductor Marcello Viotti, director of Venice's famous La Fenice Theatre, has died in Germany at 50.
Viotti, director of La Fenice since 2002, conducted at renowned opera houses worldwide including Milan's La Scala and the Vienna State Opera. His time at La Fenice coincided with its reopening in 2003 after it was destroyed by fire in 1996. He fell into a coma after suffering a stroke during rehearsals for Jules Massenet's Manon last week.
He conducted some of the best orchestras in the world including the Berlin Philharmonic and the English Chamber Orchestra. Viotti was born in Switzerland and studied the piano, cello and singing at the Lausanne Conservatory. His career breakthrough came in 1982 when he won first prize at the Gino Marinuzzi conducting competition in Italy. Viotti established himself as chief conductor of the Turin Opera and went on to become chief conductor of Munich's Radio Orchestra. At La Fenice Viotti was widely acclaimed for his production of the French composer Massenet's Thais and some of his other productions included Giuseppe Verdi's La Traviata and Richard Strauss's Ariadne auf Naxos.
The last opera he directed at La Fenice was Massenet's Le Roi de Lahore. Viotti's debut at the New York's Metropolitan Opera came in 2000 with Giacomo Puccini's Madame Butterfly, followed by La Boheme, La Traviata and Fromental Halevy's La Juive. Giampaolo Vianello, superintendent of the Fenice Theatre Foundation, said: "I am filled with extreme sadness because, other than a great artist, he is missed as a friend - a main character in the latest joyous times, during the rebirth of our theatre." Viotti's last public performance was on 5 February when he conducted Vincenzo Bellini's Norma at the Vienna State Opera.

Bets off after Big Brother 'leak'
A bookmaker has stopped taking bets on Celebrity Big Brother after claiming "sensitive information" about the Channel 4 show had been leaked.
William Hill made the move after four people tried to place bets on Friday's surprise double eviction. "This is highly unlikely to have been an inspired guess," William Hill spokesman Rupert Adams said. However, a Big Brother spokeswoman was "satisfied" that sensitive information about the show remained confidential.
The bookmaker said its suspicions had been aroused by betting for the last two contestant evictions, when people were still trying to place large sums despite odds as short as 1/14. But William Hill's "overwhelming evidence" came on Friday when four unknown callers asked to place bets on the show's surprise double eviction.
Shortly afterwards model Caprice and actor Jeremy Edwards left the show. Mr Adams believed someone had gained access to figures which revealed how viewers were voting, and was using them to predict which celebrity would be evicted next. "We think somebody somewhere has got them and has been trying very hard to take us to the cleaners," he said. The bets were not taken. Mr Adams did not believe anyone from Channel 4 or Big Brother producer Endemol had tried to place the queried bets. But he added: "They need to look at how many people are privy to the sensitive information."
Big Brother's spokeswoman said: "Only a handful of senior production executives are privy to any sensitive information regarding eviction voting and there are strict procedures in place to keep this information strictly confidential. "We do not feel the need to investigate this further as we are satisfied that these measures are effective." The show's independent adjudicator - the Electoral Reform Services - was also satisfied, she added. The current series of Celebrity Big Brother ends on Sunday, with Happy Mondays star Bez, actress Brigitte Nielsen and Blazin' Squad rapper Kenzie competing for a £50,000 charity prize.
Bookmaker Ladbrokes said it would continue to accept bets on the final, with Kenzie its favourite at 2/9. "We felt no need whatsoever to close the book," spokesman Warren Lush said. "We've seen absolutely no suspicious betting patterns." Mr Lush added that people sometimes vote on short odds "because they think it's like buying money". "You do have to risk quite a lot of money for a very small gain but if they think there's no chance of an upset they will still do it," he said.

School tribute for TV host Carson
More than 1,000 people turned out on Sunday to pay tribute to late US TV presenter Johnny Carson in the Nebraska town where he grew up.
Carson, who hosted the Tonight Show for 30 years, died on 23 January from respiratory disease emphysema. He lived in Norfolk, Nebraska from the age of eight until he joined the Navy, but returned regularly and donated $5m (£2.7m) to local causes. Old school friends were among the crowd at the school's Johnny Carson Theater.
Carson, who was one of the best-loved TV personalities in the US, asked not to have a public memorial in Los Angeles, where he lived in later life. He began his showbusiness career in Norfolk, performing magic under the name The Great Carsoni from the age of 14. His donations included $600,000 to Norfolk High School in the 1980s to build a new performing arts centre. When Carson died, President Bush led the public tributes, saying the presenter "had a profound influence on American life and entertainment".

Three Degrees star Sheila Ferguson is the favourite to be evicted from ITV's I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here on Monday.
Bookmakers Ladbrokes says the singer has even odds of being the first contestant to be voted off the show. "It's going to be close but Sheila is favourite as she has shown herself to be a bit of a troublemaker," said Ladbrokes' Warren Lush. Comic Joe Pasquale remains odds on favourite to win the reality show. Mr Lush added that Nancy Sorrell's chances of an early departure had increased since the surprise arrival of husband Vic Reeves in the jungle camp last Wednesday. Notwithstanding, comedian Reeves remains 3/1 favourite to win the show, after Pasquale.
Huggy Bear actor Antonio Fargas also remains a contender for eviction having "done nothing to live up to the pre-show hype". "There has been a big gamble on Natalie [Appleton] to go... but bookies fancy the millions at home will keep piling on the misery by putting her through more bushtucker trials," added Mr Lush. The former All Saint star has performed dismally in bushtucker trials which have seen her plunged into glass tanks containing putrid waste and challenged to eat fish eyes. On Friday, Ladbrokes suspended betting after singer Brian Harvey quit the show folllowing a blazing row with Janet Street-Porter. Harvey, who entered the camp a day later than other contestants after learning that his grandmother had died, reached the end of his tether following days of meagre rations and rows.

Farrell due to make US TV debut
Actor Colin Farrell is to make his debut on US television in medical sitcom Scrubs, according to Hollywood newspaper Daily Variety.
The film star, who recently played the title role in historical blockbuster Alexander, will make a cameo appearance as an unruly Irishman. The episode featuring the 28-year-old will be screened on 25 January. Farrell's appearance is said to be a result of his friendship with Zach Braff, who stars in the programme. It will be the actor's first appearance on the small screen since he appeared in BBC series Ballykissangel in 1999. The gentle Sunday night drama came to an end in 2001.
He has since become one of Hollywood's fastest-rising stars, with a string roles in major league films such as Minority Report, Phone Booth and Daredevil. Farrell is pencilled in to play the role of Crockett in a film version of 1980s police drama Miami Vice. Scrubs, which appears on the NBC network in the US and has been shown on Channel 4 on British television, is an off-beat comedy about a group of hospital doctors. Other film stars to have appeared in Scrubs include Heather Graham, while Friends actor Matthew Perry has guest-starred and directed an episode of the show. Its leading star, Zach Braff, has recently been seen on the big screen in Garden State, which he also directed.

Stallone evicted from Big Brother
Jackie Stallone, mother of actor Sylvester, has become the first star to be evicted from Celebrity Big Brother.
She and John McCririck faced the public vote on Friday - 67% of people voted to keep the racing pundit in the house. Stallone, 71, appeared not to have enjoyed her time in the house saying: "I'm a total wreck, I need a vacation, this was a nightmare". But she was pleased to have patched things up with actress Brigitte Nielsen, her former daughter-in-law. "That alone was worth $1m," she said. Stallone joined the Channel 4 show on Monday as a surprise for Nielsen. She was hot favourite to be evicted first, with odds of 1/4 to leave.
But McCririck has made some enemies with his outspoken views about women. Ladbrokes spokesman Warren Lush said: "We may have underestimated the power of the anti-McCririck brigade, but it's so hard to call with him, there are people out there who either love him or hate him, there is no middle ground." The bookmakers have made former Happy Mondays dancer Bez favourite to win the show at 7/4, while Blazin' Squad singer Kenzie is second at 2/1. "Bez has wooed the viewers and looks the one to beat, he's kept his nose clean and doesn't take anything too seriously," Mr Lush said. Earlier on Friday 15 protesters from the Fathers 4 Justice campaign group were arrested after entering the Big Brother compound at 0300 GMT and throwing fireworks. Feminist icon Germaine Greer quit the show earlier in the week over what she called "bullying" tactics used by the programme's producers. The show is currently attracting an average audience of about 4.2 million viewers a night.

Fox 'too reliant on reality TV'
The head of US TV network Fox has admitted the broadcaster had relied too heavily on reality TV shows such as the poor-rating Who's Your Daddy.
Chief executive Gail Berman said "in the case of this fall we drifted to too much on the unscripted side". The series Who's Your Daddy, where a young woman tries to pick her natural father for a cash prize caused outrage from adoption groups and rated badly. Last season, Fox's prime-time audience fell by 600,000 to 5.9 million. Ms Berman said: "I think the audience expects loud things from Fox. Sometimes they work, and sometimes they don't."
Who's Your Daddy, the first episode of which was shown on 3 January, pulled in a disappointing audience of 6.3 million, according to the Nielsen ratings system. Five other episodes of the show had also been filmed will be dropped from Fox's schedules, Ms Berman said. She was predicting a drop in ratings even for some of the network's established reality shows, such as American Idol, which is due to start its fourth series this week. Fox had unveiled a new strategy last year promising to launch new shows every season, including the traditionally quiet summer season. Though that had met with a poor reception, Ms Berman said "there's no question that the audience, in our mind, is ready, willing and able to accept new programming in the summer". Fox has changed this plan, launching new shows in May instead of June. One of the new shows will be the animated series American Dad, made by Seth MacFarlane, the creator of Family Guy. That series, after becoming a hit on DVD, is also set to return with new episodes.

George Michael to perform for BBC
George Michael is to perform live at London's Abbey Road studios as part of a BBC Radio 2 special next month.
The session, which will broadcast on 18 December, will also see him talk about how his biggest hits came about. Michael's appearance is part of the station's Sold on Song initiative, which explores the art of songwriting. The station also confirmed that Chris Tarrant will be hosting a one-off New Year's Eve programme. He left London's Capital FM this year after 17 years. The former breakfast show host - who attracted some of the highest ratings in Britain, despite only broadcasting to London - will offer his own individual take on the year in the two-hour show. "This should be great fun," Tarrant said. "I've had a fantastic year and I know that lots of other people have as well. I'm definitely looking forward to being on Radio 2." Other Christmas specials from Radio 2 include singer Jamelia hosting a Christmas Day concert from the London Community Gospel Choir, while actor Christopher Lee will read Fireside Tales from the likes of Edgar Allan Poe, E Nesbit and Ambrose Bierce. Comedian Harry Hill will host a spoof nostalgia show on Christmas Day, while singer Jamie Cullum will perform a live concert for the station.

Joy Division story to become film
The life of late Joy Division singer Ian Curtis is to be made into a film, it has been announced.
The Manchester-based production is called Touching From A Distance, after a book by Curtis's widow Deborah which forms the basis for the film. Music mogul Tony Wilson, who headed the record company Joy Division were signed to, will be co-executive producer. The musician committed suicide in 1980 aged 23, shortly before the band were due to go on tour in the US. Mr Wilson, who has remained friends with Curtis's widow and daughter Natalie, who he says asked for his involvement to make the film "official". "People have different ideas as to why Ian committed suicide, so maybe the film will reflect those different views," he told the BBC News website.
Plans for a separate Joy Division film had been announced at the Cannes Film Festival earlier this year, but the project did not get off the ground as it failed to get the backing of Curtis's family. Mr Wilson, who was also involved with Joy Division's sucessor band New Order, as well as the Happy Mondays, said he would "rather not" appear in the film. He made a cameo appearance in 24 Hour Party People, in which his leading role was played by Steve Coogan. "I'm not an actor and I did a lousy job playing my part in 24 Hour Party People," said the Factory Records founder, who has been associated with the Manchester music scene since the 1970s. "Film people have a tendency to mess up when they touch music, but I hope this one works.
"This is much more than the music - they want to do the real story of Ian," he said. The film is to be directed by Dutch-born Anton Corbijn, who has made music movies for Depeche Mode and U2. It will be produced by a US production company, while the widow of Ian Curtis will also be an executive producer.

New York rockers top talent poll
New York electro-rock group The Bravery have come top of the BBC News website's Sound of 2005 poll to find the music scene's most promising new act.
The Bravery, who have been compared to The Cure and New Order, were the most heavily-tipped act in the survey of 110 impartial critics and broadcasters. Rock band Keane won Sound of 2004 while US rapper 50 Cent topped Sound of 2003. Other new artists in this year's list include London indie group Bloc Party at second and UK rapper Kano third. The Bravery played their first gig in 2003 and have since supported bands including The Libertines, Interpol and Echo and the Bunnymen.
They were the subject of a record company bidding war in 2004 and their debut single, Unconditional, caused a huge buzz when it was released in the UK in November. Singer Sam Endicott said he felt "great" about coming top of the Sound of 2005 list. "Anyone that says they don't want a zillion screaming fans is a jackass, a liar," he said. One of the experts to tip The Bravery was The Times' music critic Paul Connolly, who said they were "spiky but in love with pop". Chris Hawkins, host of BBC 6 Music's chart show, said the band had "great guitars and a mastery of the electro-clash sound". "The Bravery are proof alone that New York City is still home to hot new talent," he said. Alison Howe, producer of TV show Later... With Jools Holland, booked the group to appear the day after seeing them at a west London pub.
"They played like they were headlining the main stage at Glastonbury," she said. "Great songs, a good look, a touch of attitude and a cracking live band."
Q magazine reviews editor Ted Kessler said they were "pretty-boy New York clothes horses" with "an unusually nimble ear for concise, yearning pop in the mould of Duran Duran or The Strokes". Other pundits to take part in the survey included BBC Radio 1 DJ Trevor Nelson, NME editor Conor McNicholas, Top of the Pops presenter Fearne Cotton, Glastonbury organiser Emily Eavis and BBC Radio 2 music editor Colin Martin. Elsewhere on the top 10, second-placed rock band Bloc Party began their rise after supporting Franz Ferdinand and UK garage MC Kano, in third, is signed to The Streets' record label. US rapper The Game is hip-hop great Dr Dre's latest protege while Leeds group Kaiser Chiefs came fifth with a promise to lead a Britpop revival. In last year's survey, Keane were followed by Franz Ferdinand, Razorlight and Joss Stone in the top five - all of whom were virtually unknown outside the music industry at that point.
Boy band McFly were sixth while Scissor Sisters, who had the UK's best-selling album of 2004, were seventh. In the survey, the pundits were asked for tips for three acts they thought were capable of reaching the top in their chosen genre, either in terms of sales or critical acclaim. The artists could be from any country and any musical genre, but must not have had a UK top 20 single, been a contestant on a TV talent show or already be famous for doing something else, such as a soap actor. Those tips were then counted and compiled to make the top 10.

Aaliyah claim dismissed by court
Late R&B star Aaliyah's record company has failed in an attempt to sue the video producer who booked the ill-fated flight on which she died in 2001.
A New York appeals court has told Blackground Records that only the singer's parents had the right to launch a claim for wrongful death. The 22-year-old singer's family came to an undisclosed settlement over a negligence claim in 2003. Aaliyah had completed a music video when the plane crashed in the Bahamas. She and eight others were killed on the plane, which crashed as if left for Florida. Blackground Records' lawyer Frank Penski said he had yet to examine the decision and did not know whether they would pursue the case.
An investigation into the crash revealed the twin-engined Cessna was overloaded by 700 pounds (320kg). A post-mortem carried out on the remains of the pilot showed there was cocaine and alcohol in his body. Aaliyah was a rising star in music and film before she was killed. She was honoured with a string of posthumous awards and her single More Than A Woman went to number one in the UK.

Paraguay novel wins US book prize
A novel set in 19th century Paraguay has won the $10,000 (£5,390) fiction prize at the US National Book Awards.
Lily Tuck's The News From Paraguay is a fictionalised tale about Paraguayan leader Francisco Solano Lopez and his Irish mistress. But the annual awards, which were presented in New York on Wednesday, were not without controversy. Children's author Judy Blume, who was given an honourary medal, used the ceremony to speak out over censorship.
Sales of Blume's books have exceeded 75 million, but her work - which features frank narratives about families, religion and sexuality - is closely watched by the censors. Blume said: "The urge to ban is contagious. It spreads like wildfire from community to community. Please speak out. Censors hate publicity." Her medal marks the second year in a row the honourary prize went to someone as notable for popular success as literary greatness. Last year's honorary winner, Stephen King, accused the industry during the 2003 ceremony of snobbery against popular writers. But his argument that the award should help sell books instead of honouring excellence is not shared by everyone.
This year's fiction panel overlooked high-profile works such as Philip Roth's The Plot Against America and instead chose five little-known books, all by New York-based women. One fiction judge, Stewart O'Nan, carried around a note written on a napkin that said: "I would hope that our caring more for the quality of a work than its sales figures make us a friend of books, not an enemy." The National Book Awards non-fiction prize was awarded to Kevin Boyle's for Arc of Justice, which focuses on a black family's fight to live in a white Detroit neighbourhood in the 1920s. The award had created a lot of interest this year after the surprise inclusion of the of the 9-11 Commission Report looking into the events of the 11 September terrorist attacks on the US. Pete Hautman won the young people's literature prize for his novel Godless. The winner in the poetry category was Jean Valentine for Door in the Mountain: New and Collected Poems, 1965-2003.

Three DJs replace Peel radio show
The late John Peel's BBC Radio 1 show is to be succeeded in February by three shows hosted by three DJs focusing on diverse, non-commercial music.
Huw Stephens, Ras Kwame and Rob Da Bank will each host the mid-week, late-night timeslot, showcasing UK talent. Radio 1 said the show would not try to replace Peel, but would rise to the "challenge" of "keeping his legacy alive" with unpredictable music. Peel died after suffering a heart attack in Peru in October. Radio 1 said the three DJs had been chosen for their "in-depth musical knowledge across a variety of musical genres". Rob Da Bank has been hosting The John Peel Show since the DJ's death. He is also one of the hosts of The Blue Room, an early morning weekend show that plays a mix of old and new electronic and dance music. Huw Stephens is currently one half of the Radio 1 Thursday night show Bethan and Huw in Wales, which explores new music, especially up and coming acts breaking through in Wales. And Ras Kwame is the host of 100% Homegrown on Radio 1's digital station 1Xtra. His show is dedicated to showcasing the best of UK black music and broadcasts live sessions, often giving new artists their first chance to perform on live national radio.
All of the three DJs will continue to host their current shows on Radio 1. "It is widely accepted that John Peel can never be replaced," said the radio station. It added that One Music would support both signed and unsigned talent, and said: "It will seek out those making music for music's sake rather than for commercial success. "Above all it will provide support to emerging genres of music and styles that have not yet and may never reach the mainstream."
One Music is not new to Radio 1 as it already exists as a website, offering advice on aspects of the music industry, such as recording a demo and signing a record contract. Radio 1's controller, Andy Parfitt, said: "We believe that by having a series of DJs hosting a selection of shows under the One Music title, we will ensure that his legacy lives on." Stephens said he grew up "listening to John" and that it was a "massive honour" to continue Peel's work championing new music. The show will be broadcast from 1 February on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2300 GMT - 0100 GMT.

Connick Jr to lead Broadway show
Singer and actor Harry Connick Jr is to star in a Broadway revival of 1950s hit musical The Pajama Game.
He will play the supervisor of a US pyjama factory who has a romance with a union activist during labour unrest. Jeffrey Richards, the show's co-producer, said Connick was "an actor of enormous charisma and skill, a wonderful singer and a bona fide star". He has recently starred in hit US comedy Will and Grace as the husband of Grace, played by Debra Messing. The musical will open in November, said Mr Richards, who added that no other casting had been announced yet.
The original book by George Abbott and Richard Bissell will be revised by playwright Peter Ackerman, who co-wrote the screenplay for the movie Ice Age. It has a score by Richard Adler and Jerry Ross, and Adler is writing two new songs for the score, which includes numbers including Hey There, Small Talk and Steam Heat. Connick appeared with his band on Broadway in 1990, and he wrote the score for a musical based on Emile Zola's novel Therese Raquin, called Thou Shalt Not. It had a three-month run on Broadway in 2001.

Elvis fans hold birthday bash
Elvis fans around the world have been marking the legendary singer's 70th birthday on Saturday.
A three-day Elvis convention took place in Blackpool, England, over the weekend with the aim of finding the best European Elvis impersonator. His Graceland, Tennessee, home was the focus for US celebrations with four days of events including a concert by the Memphis Symphony Orchestra. Elvis' single Jailhouse Rock became the UK's number one on Sunday. Fans in France celebrated with a tribute concert by Elvis cover bands and a special exhibition of memorabilia is on display in Bonn, Germany.
Jailhouse Rock is now the 999th number one single in UK pop history. Record company SonyBMG are releasing Elvis' 18 number one singles at the rate of one a week in Britain, complete with original artwork and a collector's box. Hit single One Night will follow next week - with the chance of becoming the 1,000th number one as interest surrounding Elvis' birthday grows. HMV spokesman Gennaro Castaldo said: "It would be a fantastic and truly fitting way to celebrate Elvis' landmark birthday."

Elvis regains top chart position
Elvis Presley has scored his 19th number one single in the UK charts with the re-release of Jailhouse Rock, 27 years after his death.
Elvis knocked X Factor winner Steve Brookstein down into second place after three weeks in the charts. In at number three was Iron Maiden for the Number Of The Beast and Erasure entered the chart at four with Breathe. Elvis's number one is the 999th in chart history and comes the day after what would have been his 70th birthday. Fans around the world held tribute events for the singer on Saturday, ranging from concerts to memorabilia exhibitions. Meanwhile, a poll carried out by royalty payments group the Performing Right Society found that The Wonder of You is the Elvis song most performed by live bands and tribute acts.
Record company SonyBMG are releasing Elvis's 18 number one singles at the rate of one a week in Britain, complete with original artwork and a collector's box. Hit single One Night will follow next week - with the chance of becoming the 1,000th number one as interest surrounding Elvis's birthday grows. Elsewhere in the singles charts, the Scissor Sisters went straight in at number five with Filthy/Gorgeous. Band Aid 20 slipped to six after seven weeks in the chart with Do They Know It's Christmas. The other two new entries are Dana Rayne with Object of My Desire at seven and Kasabian who are at number eight with Cut Off. Making up the top 10 are Boulevard of Broken Dreams by Green Day, down three places to number nine, and Out of Touch by Uniting Nations, also down three places to 10. In the album charts, the Scissor Sisters went to number one with their self-titled release, knocking Green Day's American Idiot to third place. The Killers' album Hot Fuss moved up three to number two.

Pop band Busted to 'take a break'
Chart-topping pop band Busted have confirmed that they plan to "take a break", following rumours that they were on the verge of splitting.
A statement from the band's record company Universal said frontman Charlie Simpson planned to spend some time working with his other band, Fightstar. However they said that Busted would "reconvene in due course". The band have had eight top three hits, including four number ones, since they first hit the charts in 2002. Their singles include What I Go To School For, Year 3000, Crashed The Wedding, You Said No, and Who's David?
The band, which also includes members Matt Jay and James Bourne, made the top ten with their self-titled debut album, as well as the follow-up, A Present For Everyone, in 2003. They won best pop act and best breakthrough act at the 2004 Brit Awards and were nominated for best British group. Most recently they topped the charts with the theme from the live-action film version of Thunderbirds, which was voted Record Of The Year on the ITV1 show. The band have capitalised on a craze for artists playing catchy pop music with rock overtones. The trio are seen as an alternative to more manufactured artists who are not considered credible musicians because they do not write their own songs or play their own instruments. However, recent rumours have suggested that Simpson has been wanting to quit the band to focus on Fightstar. He now plans to take Fightstar on tour.

Franz Ferdinand's art school lesson
Scottish rock band Franz Ferdinand, who shot to prominence in 2004, have won two Brit Awards.
With their self-titled debut, Franz Ferdinand have achieved what most rock bands crave - high credibility and critical acclaim while also selling stacks of CDs. They have risen to the head of the UK's art rock ranks with an album of songs that are catchy, creative and original enough to sound fresh. With a cool, spiky, fun sound previously associated with bands like Talking Heads, they hit upon a style that had been out of fashion for a while and so was ripe for another airing. Their first UK single hit number three last January, followed by two more top 20 hits, while the album has sold more than 600,000 copies in 11 months on release. In September it was named album of the year winning the prestigious Mercury Music Prize.
On the festivals circuit, they have been one of the main attractions for huge crowds at Glastonbury, T in the Park and Reading/Leeds. They have also found success in Japan, Europe and the US. By September the album had sold 500,000 in the States and total sales were pushing two million worldwide. They have been nominated for three Grammy awards in the US as well as the US music industry's Shortlist award, but lost the Shortlist prize to US band TV on the Radio. Nevertheless Franz Ferdinand were the only UK band to win an MTV Video Music Award this year, taking the breakthrough video crown for Take Me Out.
The four-piece met two years ago when drummer Paul Thomson was working at the Glasgow art school where bassist Bob Hardy was studying. Singer Alex Kapranos was studying English at university but had friends at art school, and the line-up was completed when guitarist Nick McCarthy moved from Munich, Germany, to the city. At the turn of the year, Kapranos told BBC News Online the band were fed up with serious bands in "that post-rock thing that seemed to be doing its damndest to avoid any bloody tune".
"We want people to go away from the gigs humming the tunes that we were singing. But at the same time bringing an edge to it." Franz Ferdinand had a question they asked themselves every time they wrote a song, Kapranos said. "Where's the fun in that?" they pondered at every stage, making enjoyment the top priority and ensuring they did not disappear up their own muso posteriors. The band started out with a DIY ethic that saw them take over a disused art-deco warehouse in Glasgow and rename it The Chateau. The venue soon became legendary - so well-known that the police spent a month trying to find it, eventually raiding it and arresting Kapranos. But the charges of running an illegal bar and contravening health and safety, fire hazard and noise abatement laws were dropped.
The band took over an abandoned Victorian courtroom and jail instead, and named that The Chateau. The buzz about the band soon spread around the music industry and 40 record labels turned up to one gig in Glasgow - which the band thought was "totally ridiculous". "I'm really glad it was almost comical because we weren't overwhelmed by the seriousness of it," Kapranos said. They signed with independent label Domino, home of Smog, Sebadoh and Four Tet, in June 2003.

Singer Knight backs anti-gun song
R&B star Beverley Knight said she sang on an anti-gun single after being "haunted" by the fatal 2003 shooting of two teenage girls in Birmingham.
Knight and drum 'n' bass star Roni Size have released No More in a bid to reduce gun use among young people. She said she was "horrified" by the deaths of Charlene Ellis, 18, and Letisha Shakespeare, 17. Size, whose New Forms album won the 1997 Mercury Music Prize, said gun use was "nothing to be glamorised".
There were more than 10,500 firearms offences and 70 gun crime deaths in England and Wales between June 2003 and 2004, according to Home Office figures. Knight said the scale of the problem became clear to her after the 2003 shootings in Aston, near Knight's Birmingham home.
"It haunted me to be honest, it haunted my sleep," she said. Size became involved after two friends, Donna Small and Asha Jama, were shot in his Bristol hometown in October. Jama, 25, lost her sight in one eye while 22-year-old Small suffered serious head injuries. Size said he collaborated on the single, which was released on Monday, because he has "a bird's eye view of what's going on". "Over the last 10 years, I have seen a lot of things happen and it is nothing to be glamorised, it really isn't," he said.

Portishead back after eight years
Cult British group Portishead have revealed they are writing their third album, their first in eight years.
Founding member Geoff Barrow told BBC 6 Music the record was well on the way to being completed. "We're actually into it as we speak. We took some time off for Christmas, but generally we're doing another record," Barrow told the digital radio station. News of their album plans comes after confirmation the Bristol band will play a tsunami charity show next month. Portishead will play alongside fellow Bristol band Massive Attack at Oxfam's Tsumani appeal, held at the Bristol Academy on 19 February. Barrow said he was surprised people thought the band, who won a Mercury Music Prize in 1995 for their debut album Dummy, had split up.
"We've just had our heads down really, we've never actually broken up, or parted, or whatever. "So for us it just seems, even though we haven't played for years, we still see each other and write - we just haven't released a record for a long time." Portishead will not play any new material at next month's concert, which will feature singer Beth Gibbons playing with an acoustic backing. Other acts appearing include Liverpool band The Coral and former Led Zeppelin singer Robert Plant. Portishead became an international success and a deeply influential band despite their scant recorded output. Dummy was a critics' favourite in 1994, hailed for its blend of menacing sounds and hip-hop beats married to old soul samples. The follow up, Portishead, was released three years later.

Fightstar take to the stage
Charlie Simpson took his new band Fightstar to the stage on Friday night, just hours after officially announcing his departure from pop band Busted.
He was greeted by a sell-out crowd at the University of Warwick. Confirmation of Busted's long-rumoured split had come earlier in the day, when Simpson held a press conference in London with bandmates Matt Willis and James Bourne. All three band members stressed that the break up was amicable, although Bourne admitted he was "devastated" to hear of Simpson's departure. "This has been a really difficult decision," 19-year-old Simpson revealed, "I hope the fans will understand."
While Simpson declared he would look back with pride on Busted's enormous success, his focus turned immediately to Fightstar, with Friday's press conference coinciding with the start of the band's 13-date tour of the UK. Fuelled by this news, all 1,400 tickets to see Charlie's first post-Busted live appearance - at the University of Warwick's Student Union - sold out rapidly. Mike Eccleshall, the venue's Promotions Coordinator, said: "Tickets had been selling strongly over the past few days, but sales went mad after the news broke. We had completely sold out by 4pm."
With queues outside the venue long and expectations high, the pressure was on Fightstar to impress. Although many dedicated fans travelled to the gig from around the country, they faced a tough crowd made up chiefly of students, the average age of the audience far exceeding that of any Busted concert. Gone were the screaming girls to which Simpson had become accustomed. Support act Brigade, fronted by Simpson's brother, played a short set first and were met with general approval. When Fightstar eventually took to the stage around 11pm, however, a riotous cheer easily drowned out any hecklers lurking in the crowd.
Unfortunately, the band were initially hindered by technical teething problems as Simpson's guitar amplifier failed to work. As sound technicians rushed to fix it, other band members did their best to improvise. When they eventually got under way, Fightstar's blend of emotionally charged rock was warmly received. Far heavier and less commercial than Busted's chart-topping pop-punk, the band will undoubtedly appeal to a more mature fan-base. Warwick student Helen Clutterbuck admitted: "I came to check out Fightstar because of all the controversy. "I've never heard them before, but I'm pretty impressed." Less impressed were fellow students Ryan Crabbe and Gordon Rennie, who observed, "With Fightstar, Charlie has clearly progressed from Busted's sound, but they're still not very inspiring." Fightstar played for around 45 minutes, showcasing material from their forthcoming EP called They Liked You Better When You Were Dead, due for release in February.

Elvis 'set for chart hat-trick'
The late US legend Elvis Presley is likely to score his third UK number one single in three weeks on Sunday, according to early sales figures.
The king of rock 'n' roll has already had consecutive chart-toppers with Jailhouse Rock and One Night. A Fool Such As I, the next in a series of 18 reissues, is on course to beat the Chemical Brothers to the top. But his next single, It's Now Or Never, will face a challenge from tsunami charity single Grief Never Grows Old. Sir Cliff Richard, Russell Watson, Boy George, Bill Wyman and members of the Bee Gees, the Beach Boys, America and the Eagles are expected to feature on the charity song.
Bookmakers have offered odds of 10/1 for all Presley's 18 hits to go back to number one. A Fool Such As I would become the 1,001st number one single in UK chart history after One Night took the 1,000th place on Sunday. The latest release is currently outselling the Chemical Brothers' comeback single Galvanize plus other new releases from Athlete, Ciara and Feeder. Presley's 18 original number ones are being reissued as limited release singles, with fans eager to buy the set to fill a collector's box that went on sale in the first week. Record company Sony BMG is now manufacturing 5,000 more copies of each single than originally planned to meet demand, taking the total number of copies of each song on sale to about 28,000.

New Harry Potter tops book chart
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince has topped Amazon's book chart less than 24 hours after its release date - 16 July - was announced.
Thousands of customers placed pre-orders on the amazon.co.uk website for the sixth book in the series. Rowling revealed she had completed the novel on Tuesday, ahead of the scheduled announcement on 25 December. It will be published simultaneously in the UK, the US, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. JK Rowling's fifth book in the wizard series, Harry Potter and Order of the Phoenix was Amazon's largest pre-ordered item ever, with 420,000 copies pre-ordered prior to its release in June 2003. Customers who pre-order Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince avoid standing in long queues at bookshops on the day of the book's release next July. "The fact that the book has already hit number one in our Hot 100 books chart shows how incredibly excited customers are about the sixth Harry Potter," said Amazon's Robin Terrell.
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince takes up the story of Harry Potter's sixth year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry as Lord Voldemort grows stronger. Rowling has already revealed that the Half-Blood Prince is neither Harry nor Voldemort. And she added that the opening chapter of the book had been brewing in her mind for 13 years. Rowling said she had plenty of time while pregnant "to tinker with the manuscript to my satisfaction and I am as happy as I have ever been with the end result". She also previously revealed that a character will be killed in the sixth book, but she has given no hints as to who it might be. Following publication of the sixth book, just one novel remains to complete the series.

Youssou N'Dour wins music prize
Senegalese musician Youssou N'Dour has been named a winner of a BBC Radio 3 World Music Award.
His album Egypt won the critics' award for album of the year, while the best newcomer accolade went to Argentine Chango Spasiuk. Winners were chosen from ten categories to reflect different continents. A special Poll Winners concert, hosted by Eliza Carthy and Benjamin Zephaniah will take place at The Sage in Gateshead on 5 March.
The concert will be broadcast on Radio 3's World Music Day the following evening and will feature performances by many of the award winners. It will also include the announcement of the Audience Award, chosen by Radio 3 and BBC World Service listeners, alongside BBC Four viewers.
Winner in the Africa category was Malian desert blues band Tinariwen, formed from the nomadic people of the southern Sahara. Cuban pianist Bebo Valdes and flamenco singer Diego El Cigala, responsible for critically acclaimed album Lagrimas Negrasmusic, won an award in the "boundary crossing" category. Each winner will receive a specially commissioned sculpture entitled Planet by Anita Sulimanovic who won a competition to design the award. Highlights of the Poll Winners Concert, to be held at The Sage, Gateshead, will be televised on BBC Four on 11 March.

TOTP turns to Elvis impersonator
Top of the Pops has turned to the star of Elvis Presley musical Jailhouse Rock after the late rock legend scooped the UK's 1,000th number one single.
Mario Kombou, who plays the Presley role on stage, will sing One Night on Friday's BBC One show as producers are unable to use Presley video footage. It is his second number one in a row. The show used Presley photos last week. Presley will feature in the charts for several more months as all 18 of his original UK chart-toppers are reissued.
A Top of the Pops spokesperson said: "It's a very special number one as it's the UK's 1,000th. "We wanted to pay tribute to Elvis in the best way we knew how, so we thought getting a professional would be the best way for Top of the Pops to do that." Kombou is likely to appear on the show again next week as the next Presley re-release, A Fool Such As I, is on course to give him his third number one in three weeks. Kombou plays Vince Everett in Jailhouse Rock - the same role Presley played in the 1957 film of the same name.

Blue beat U2 to top France honour
Irish band U2 have been honoured at France's biggest music awards, but were beaten to a prize by boy band Blue.
U2 received a special achievement prize at the NRJ Music Awards, but Blue beat them to the international group award. US band Maroon 5 was named best new international artist, and took the best international song title for This Love. More than five million radio listeners voted in the awards. The international male and female prizes went to Usher and Avril Lavigne respectively. Collecting his band's award from model Naomi Campbell at the Cannes ceremony, U2 frontman Bono said in French: "I'm not from this country but I'll make a little confession to you - it's at the Cote d'Azur I feel at home."
Hosted by radio group NRJ, the ceremony featured performances from Usher and Jennifer Lopez, who was accompanied by dancers clad in schoolgirl outfits. US pop act Black Eyed Peas picked up the best international album gong for Elephunk. Singer Jenifer also took home two awards, for best French female singer and best French album. French-Canadian pop star Roch Voisine was named best Francophone male artist.

Ten-year tragedy of missing Manic
Richey Edwards, guitarist and lyricist for The Manic Street Preachers, vanished 10 years ago, on 1 February 1995. His disappearance remains one of the most tragic mysteries in rock music.
For his devoted fans, Richey Edwards was an inspired and inspiring poet, a man who articulated their desperation and despair, who shouted the things most kept hidden. The Manic Street Preachers may only have become stadium-conquering rock giants since his disappearance - but Edwards was the figurehead for their first, dangerous and dazzling incarnation. Edwards did not feature in the original line-up of the band, though. Singer/guitarist James Dean Bradfield, bassist Nicky Wire and drummer Sean Moore were originally accompanied by a rhythm guitarist called Flicker. But Edwards replaced Flicker in time for the band's self-financed debut, Suicide Alley, after designing the record's artwork.
After becoming a full-time member, Edwards became a critical part of the band, writing lyrics and playing guitar - though in many concerts, he was not actually plugged in. But the fiercely intelligent Edwards - who name-checked writers such as Sylvia Plath, George Orwell and Philip Larkin - battled depression, alcohol problems, eating disorders, and self-harm. By the time the band released their third album, The Holy Bible, in October 1994, Edwards had been admitted to hospital with depression. But in his last interview a few months later, seemed to be making plans for the future.
Edwards walks out of the Embassy Hotel in London in the early morning, ahead of the band's US tour to promote The Holy Bible. In the following days, police issue a missing person alert and his parents, Graham and Sherry, plead for their son to let them know he is safe and well.
Police discover Edwards' car in a car park near the Severn Bridge near Bristol - a notorious suicide spot. The discovery leads many to believe he has killed himself. The rest of the band stop touring and recording.
The band play their first concerts since Edwards' disappearance as a trio, performing support slots for The Stone Roses on their UK stadium tour.
The Manic Street Preachers release their first music since Edwards' disappearance. A Design For Life reaches number two in the UK singles chart. The album Everything Must Go follows.
The Manics win best band and best album for Everything Must Go at the Brit Awards.
A fan says she saw Edwards in the hippy resort of Goa, India. Interpol are alerted but do not track him down.
Graham and Sherry Edwards fly to the Spanish island of Fuerteventura six weeks after reports a man fitting their son's description has been seen in a bar called Underground. The report comes to nothing.
Edwards' sister Rachel makes an emotional TV appeal five years after the disappearance. "I'd just like to say to him if he is able to listen that we do love him very much and we'd like him to come back - me, mum and dad," she said.
The band play a concert in the Cuban capital, Havana - the first contemporary western rock band to play there.
On the seventh anniversary of his disappearance, police offer Edwards' parents the opportunity to sign a death certificate. They refuse. The Big Issue magazine, which supports homelessness charities, prints the last known picture of Edwards in a fresh plea for information.
A pair of trainers containing human bones washed up on the banks of the River Severn have no link to Edwards, police say.
The last song written by Edwards - a song called Judge Y'Self, which was to have been used for the Judge Dredd film soundtrack - is released on the B-side compilation Lipstick Traces. A skeleton found by the River Severn is not Edwards, tests reveal.
The Manics' seventh studio album, Lifeblood, features a song dedicated to Edwards called Cardiff Afterlife.
The remaining Manic Street Preachers members continue to pay a quarter of the band's royalties into an account held in his name.

Mogul Wilson backing UK rap band
Tony Wilson, the music mogul who established the influential Factory Records in the 1980s, is to launch a new label - convinced he has discovered his "third major band".
Factory were the label of both Joy Division - who became New Order after singer Ian Curtis committed suicide - and the Happy Mondays. Now Wilson believes rap act Raw T - signed to his F4 label, the fourth incarnation of Factory - will "complete the hat-trick". "Suddenly, when Raw T came into my life, I realised they are my third major band," he told BBC World Service's The Music Biz programme. The group are set to release their first single on 21 February, and follow it up with an album, Realise And Witness, in March.
Wilson has twice tried to resurrect Factory - which lasted for 14 years before folding - but conceded these efforts had been "despondent and dismal experiences". But it has not put him off. "Of all the things I do in my life the most exciting thing I've ever done, and the thing I have most loved, is being part of a record company," he added.
"The idea of working with brilliant young musicians, and being close to the centre of popular culture, is just the biggest thrill in my life." Wilson explained how his son persuaded him to go and see Raw T, but he had initially been reluctant saying he "detested" young British people rapping. "It's always inauthentic, it's always crass, it never really works for me," he said. "I went to see this group, Raw T - which stands for Realise And Witness Talent - and like everyone else in the room that night, we were utterly blown away." Wilson believes Raw T could be "to F4 as Joy Division were to Factory records".
The story of Factory records - which also owned the legendary Hacienda club in Manchester - was told in the Michael Winterbottom film 24 Hour Party People, in which Wilson was played by Steve Coogan.
Wilson stressed that the independent music scene remained "as important" as it had been during the 1980s, when labels such as Factory and Rough Trade proliferated. He pointed out that Franz Ferdinand and The White Stripes - "perhaps the two most important bands since the millennium" - were signed to indies. "I think that is a reflection of how useful and how powerful the indie philosophy is, and how bands prefer it," he added. "They can make more money that way - it's a more generous relationship, and also it's a more understanding relationship. "I think independents are in a wonderful position at this moment in time."

Singer Sizzla jailed for swearing
Reggae star Sizzla, whose UK tour was cancelled after protests at his "anti-gay" lyrics, has been jailed in Jamaica for swearing on stage.
The singer must serve 15 days in prison after he consistently swore during a concert in St Thomas, Jamaica, in January despite warnings by police. He was charged under a law which prohibits indecent dress or expression. Sizzla's five-date UK tour was cancelled last November after protests by gay rights campaigners.
Sizzla, whose real name is Miguel Collins, has released 25 albums since 1995 and is credited with taking dancehall music back to its reggae origins. Many Jamaican entertainers have appeared before the courts for use of profanity in recent years but they usually receive a verbal warning, a suspended sentence or community service. Sizzla's UK tour was cancelled after Scotland Yard's Racial and Violent Crime taskforce announced it was examining lyrics by eight reggae artists. It would not confirm that Sizzla was among them. One of his most controversial songs, Pump Up, contains the Jamaican patois lyrics "fire fi di man dem weh go ride man behind", translated by gay rights group OutRage! as "burn the men who have sex with men".

Spears seeks aborted tour payment
Singer Britney Spears is suing eight insurance companies that have refused to reimburse her for cancelling her 2004 world tour.
The pop star cancelled her Onyx Hotel tour last June after suffering a knee injury during a video shoot. She is now seeking to be reimbursed for the tour's £5m ($9.3m) costs in a claim filed at New York State Supreme Court. Seven London-based companies and an eighth Paris firm have been given up to 30 days to respond to the complaint.
The 22-year-old star initially missed a number of shows on the 82-date tour after injuring her knee during a show in Illinois last March. But she was rushed to hospital and needed surgery after a later incident while filming a video for her song Outrageous, leading her to cancel the rest of the tour, including dates in China. "She obviously took a wrong step and blew out her knee," a Jive spokeswoman said at the time. "It was an old dance injury." The legal submission described Spears as "one of the most recognised performers in her industry". The Onyx Hotel tour was cited as "a highly crafted production which included the well-known music and dancing of Spears, supported by elaborate costumes, complex choreography as well as cutting-edge video production, lighting and other effects". In September Spears married Kevin Federline, who had been a dancer on the aborted tour.

Deal to ban 'homophobic' reggae
The reggae industry is to refuse to release or stage concerts featuring homophobic songs under a global deal struck with gay rights groups.
A damaging campaign against stars such as Beenie Man and Sizzla has been waged over lyrics that allegedly call for gay people to be killed or assaulted. The campaign, which led to gigs being scrapped and a UK police investigation, will now be dropped under the truce. Brett Lock of gay group OutRage! said they were "wiping the slate clean". The protests had been led by the Stop Murder Music coalition, an umbrella group including OutRage!, the Black Gay Men's Advisory Group and Jamaican movement J-Flag.
That coalition has reached a verbal agreement with major dancehall reggae record labels and concert promoters covering eight of the scene's biggest stars. But the artists themselves were not involved in the negotiations and have not directly signed up. Instead, the record companies have pledged not to release or re-release any offensive songs - many of which date back a number of years. And it is believed promoters will make stars agree not to perform such tunes on stage. "The reggae industry will work with the artists while still maintaining their freedom of speech and artistic freedom," according to media and PR strategist Glen Yearwood, who is representing the reggae industry.
The industry would halt any attempt by an artist to perform or release a song inciting violence against any group or gender, he said. "We'll advise them this is not the way forward in a civilised society." The Stop Murder Music campaign saw protesters picket gigs, resulted in Sizzla's UK tour being cancelled in November, forced Mobo award organisers to drop artists from nominations and saw Beenie Man dropped from an MTV show in August. Police have also been investigating whether lyrics incite the assault and murder of gay people. The campaign was a blow to the reggae industry, Mr Yearwood admitted. "If you can't have major stars touring, then you don't sell many albums," he said.
But the artists - Beenie Man, Sizzla, Elephant Man, Buju Banton, Bounty Killer, TOK, Capleton and Vybz Kartel - will not have to apologise for past songs or comments. OutRage!'s Mr Lock said: "The main players in the dancehall reggae industry will attempt to regulate the industry themselves to ensure that there aren't any violently homophobic or gay-bashing lyrics in the future. "As a gesture of good faith, the Stop Murder Music coalition has agreed to suspend our aggressive campaigning against murder music. "So we shall not be picketing concerts or calling for prosecutions to give the industry the space to regulate and reform itself." Record companies VP and Greensleeves, distributor Jet Star and concert promoters including Jammins and Apollo Entertainment are all on board.

Soul sensation ready for awards
South West teenage singing sensation, Joss Stone, has been nominated in three categories in Wednesday's Brit awards.
The 17-year-old from a small east Devon village near Cullumpton, received nominations for Best Solo Female, Best Urban Act and Best Breakthrough Artist. Her second album Mind, Body & Soul reached number one in the UK charts last October and went straight into the US charts at number 11. Ms Stone is due to perform at the 25th award ceremony at London's Earls Court. The teenager also has Grammy nominations in the US, normally dominated by home-grown acts. Born Jocelyn Stoker, the Devon diva started her career in a BBC talent programme, and was then discovered at a New York audition by a US record executive, Steve Greenberg. The 17-year-old singer is hoping to tour in Japan, Australia and the US in 2005.

Prince crowned 'top music earner'
Prince earned more than any other pop star in 2004, beating artists such Madonna and Elton John in US magazine Rolling Stone's annual list.
The singer banked $56.5m (£30.4m) from concerts, album and publishing sales with his Musicology tour and album. He kept Madonna in second place, as she earned $54.9m (£29.5m) while embarking on her global Re-Invention Tour. Veterans Simon and Garfunkel were in 10th place, their comeback tour helping them earn $24.9m (£13.4m) last year.
"Prince returned to centre stage after a decade in the commercial wilderness," the magazine reported. The singer's 2004 tour took $90.3m (£48.5m) in ticket sales and he sold 1.9 million copies of his latest album Musicology.
Although she grossed more than Prince last year, Madonna remained in second place because of the "monumental" production costs of her tour. Heavy metal band Metallica's Madly in Anger with the World tour helped push their 2004 earnings up to $43.1m (£23.1m). They were ahead of Sir Elton John, who took fourth place and almost $42.7m (£23m) from performances including a debut on the Las Vegas Strip. Other seasoned performers in the list included Rod Stewart, whose sold-out shows and third volume of The Great American Songbook covers album helped net him £35m (£19m). The highest-ranking rap act in the list was 50 Cent, who at number 19 took $24m (£13m) to the bank.

UK's National Gallery in the pink
The National Gallery, home to some of the UK's greatest artworks, has seen a big jump in visitor numbers.
Five million visitors made the London gallery - which houses treasures like Raphael's Madonna of the Pinks - the UK's most visited museum in 2004. It recorded a 13.8% rise in numbers and was the country's second most visited tourist attraction, behind Blackpool Pleasure Beach. Charles Saumarez Smith, the gallery's director, said he was "delighted". He said the number of visitors through the doors had boosted figures to pre-11 September 2001 levels. Mr Saumarez Smith added that the pedestrianisation of Trafalgar Square, where the gallery is located, and strong temporary collections throughout 2004 had led to the strong performance.
"Our 2004 exhibition programme of El Greco, Russian Landscape in the Age of Tolstoy and Raphael: From Urbino to Rome was particularly strong and exceeded all targets," he said. "The exceptional quality of the paintings in our permanent collection is also huge draw for the public. "The expectations of today's visitors are higher than ever and we have kept pace with their demands." Mr Saumarez Smith said he was confident the gallery could maintain the attendance. "With important exhibitions of the work of Caravaggio, Stubbs and Rubens in place for 2005, I am confident that the gallery is set for another highly successful year," he added. The figures were prepared by the Association of Leading Visitor Attractions (Alva).
It found that the figures had been boosted by an increase in Europeans travelling to the UK on budget airlines. Popular cultural tourist spots such as the Tate Modern and the Natural History Museum all recorded increases of more than 10% in visitor numbers compared with 2003. But for legal or confidentiality reasons some Alva members did not submit figures for 2004, including Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle, Madame Tussauds and Alton Towers. Alva director Robin Broke said: "Visits from Western Europe were up by 10% and from North America by some 9% compared to 2003, while numbers from the rest of the world rose 20%. "European figures were helped by the rapid growth of low-cost flights to Britain from Europe, especially from new EU countries."

Brit awards for Devon music acts
Devon singer Joss Stone and rock band Muse won coveted Brit awards during the event's 25th anniversary.
Seventeen-year-old Stone, from near Cullumpton, won two awards: best British female act, and best urban act out of three award nominations. Muse, whose members met in south Devon, beat Franz Ferdinand, Jamie Cullum, Kasabian and The Libertines for best British live act. The band has sold about two million records worldwide.
After beating Amy Winehouse, Jamelia, Natasha Bedingfield and PJ Harvey to the best British female prize, Joss Stone said: "I don't know what to say. I don't like doing this at all. I'd like to thank my family for being really supportive and everybody that made my record with me." "I don't even know what to do right now. Thank you all you guys for voting for me, I feel sick right now." Viewers of digital music TV channel MTV Base voted Stone the winner in the best urban act category. Ms Stone also performed her song Right To Be Wrong, backed by a gospel choir, at the 25th award ceremony at London's Earls Court. Her second album Mind, Body & Soul reached number one in the UK charts last October and went straight into the US charts at number 11.
The teenager also has Grammy nominations in the US, normally dominated by home-grown acts. Born Jocelyn Stoker, the Devon diva started her career in a BBC talent programme, and was then discovered at a New York audition by a US record executive, Steve Greenberg. Indie Rock group Muse consists of Matthew Bellamy, Chris Wolstenholme and Dominic Howard who met in their early teens in Teignmouth, south Devon. Dominic Howard said of winning: "We love playing live, it's very important for our band. So to win something like this really feels great." The trio met aged 13 and formed the band Gothic Plague, changing its name to Fixed Penalty, Rocket Baby Dolls and finally Muse. The band released its first self-titled EP in 1998. The third studio album, Absolution, was released in 2003, providing the hit singles Time Is Running Out, Hysteria, and Butterflies And Hurricanes.

Rock star sued by ex-girlfriend
Motley Crue guitarist Mick Mars is being sued by his ex-girlfriend for $10 million (£5.4 million), claiming he broke a promise to take care of her.
The woman, Robin Mantooth, said Mars promised her repeatedly that he would provide financial support in the event of the couple breaking up. When they split in December, Mantooth says Mars denied any such agreement. She is asking a Los Angeles court to award her half the musician's property, a monthly allowance and damages. Mantooth added that the pair became lovers in 1990, after which she abandoned her career as a documentary film-maker to move in with the guitarist at his Malibu home.
She is also claiming that Mars, 53, has failed to provide her with any material support since they ceased to be a couple. Motley Crue recently reunited after being apart for a period of five years. They originally formed in the early 1980s and scored six hits in the UK, including Girls Girls Girls in 1987. They are embarking on a world tour later this year which will take in 60 cities across the US, Europe, Asia and Australia. Mars - real name Bob Allen Deal - underwent hip replacement surgery in October. He suffers from a degenerative rheumatic disease which causes ligaments and tendons to attach to the bone.

Scissor Sisters triumph at Brits
US band Scissor Sisters led the winners at the UK music industry's Brit Awards, walking off with three prizes. The flamboyant act scored a hat-trick in the international categories, winning the best group, best album and best newcomer awards. Glasgow group Franz Ferdinand won two prizes, as did Keane and Joss Stone, who was voted best urban act by digital TV viewers. Robbie Williams' Angels was named the best song of the past 25 years. Scissor Sisters frontwoman Ana Matronic collected the best international album prize from singer Siouxsie Sioux. She told the audience: "If you told us a year ago we would be getting these awards today we would have called you crazy. You guys made our dream come true."
The band - whose self-titled LP was 2004's biggest-selling album - thanked "all the members of the sisterhood", adding: "We wouldn't be here without you." The US band, who opened the show with Take Your Mama, won the best international act and newcomer awards, as well as best international album.
Franz Ferdinand, who were shortlisted in five categories, won best rock act and best British group, an award they dedicated to late DJ John Peel. But they missed out on best British live act, which went to Muse. Keane won best British album and breakthrough act. Will Young won the best single prize for Your Game. McFly won the best pop act prize, and Gwen Stefani picked up the best international female artist award. Eminem won the male prize.
Best British male artist winner Mike Skinner - aka The Streets - does not usually attend award ceremonies, but the Birmingham hip-hop artist performed his hit Dry Your Eyes at the ceremony. However, he did not collect his prize. A bandmate informed the crowd Skinner was "in the toilet". After beating Amy Winehouse, Jamelia, Natasha Bedingfield and PJ Harvey to the best British female prize, Joss Stone said: "I don't know what to say. I don't like doing this at all. I'd like to thank my family for being really supportive and everybody that made my record with me." "I don't even know what to do right now. Thank you all you guys for voting for me, I feel sick right now." Viewers of digital music TV channel MTV Base voted Stone the winner in the best urban act category.
Little Britain comedy duo Matt Lucas and David Walliams presented the best song prize to Robbie Williams dressed as his former Take That colleagues Gary Barlow and Howard Donald, leading him to quip he was "always the talented man of the band".
Williams' track beat songs by Will Young, Queen, Kate Bush and Joy Division in a vote by BBC Radio 2 listeners to mark 25 years of the UK music industry ceremony. It is his 15th Brit award, having already received 10 solo awards and four with Take That. He told the audience: "I'm just amazed that my career keeps going." Keane frontman Tom Chaplin thanked fans for enduring "rubbish gigs" after they won the British breakthrough act prize. He added: "A lot of people don't think it's cool that we've had the guts to be ourselves but it's a vital part of who we are as a band and receiving this is recognition of that."
Natasha Bedingfield - in the running for best British female and best pop act - performed with her brother Daniel for the first time at Wednesday's event.
The chart-topping siblings duetted on the Chaka Khan hit Ain't Nobody. Meanwhile, Joss Stone performed Right To Be Wrong backed by a gospel choir, while Lemar and Jamelia performed the Robert Palmer track Addicted To Love. Bob Geldof won a prize for his outstanding contribution to music. Of the 15 Brit awards for achievements in 2004, 10 were won by artists tipped in the BBC News website's Sound of 2004 list of artists to watch, published at the start of last year. Scissor Sisters, Franz Ferdinand, Keane, Joss Stone and McFly were all in the Sound of 2004 top 10. The other five Brits winners were already established before Sound of 2004 was compiled. The ceremony will be televised on ITV1 on Thursday.
I'm speechless. Best song of the last 25 years? Yeah right.
I very much doubt that 'Angels' was even the best song of the week that it came out. Like every track Robbie has released as a single, it's a blatant but poor facsimile of something that someone else has done better before.
Best song in 25 years, you must be joking. Its good if you like that sort of thing, but really!
Listened to Angels on Radio 1 this morning when I was driving into work. Had not heard it for a while. I love Robs voice, the lyrics and tune. Perfection!
As usual, the public have short memories when it comes to voting for "the greatest". There must be more than a dozen songs in the last 25 years that deserve this award more. It's not exactly groundbreaking. Presumably, the age range that could be bothered to vote is is pretty low...
I'm actually embarrassed to be British if that is the best song we have produced in the last 25 years!!
What about The Specials - Ghost Town, The Buzzcocks - Ever Fallen in Love With Someone... Happy Mondays - Kinky Afro, McAlmont & Butler - Yes, Joy Division - Love Will Tear Us Apart... Angels is middle-of-the-road rubbish.
Angels is a awful piece of sentimental claptrap. It's musically and lyrically inept; and fantastically overrated, a bit like Mr Williams himself. This result isn't very surprising though, The Brits has a long history of celebrating rubbish music!
Best of the last 25 years? Maybe. Cunning to make the timescale not include Stairway to Heaven or Bohemian Rhapsody, but it does kind of make it a bit of a hollow award really. Not much competition in the last 25 years after all.
It's alright for a pop song - but the best song of the last 25 years???
There is no way on earth that song should have been voted the best of the last 25 years....it's a travesty.
Rubbish! Who voted it for it to be included in any list? I am a regular listener to Radio 2 but I don't recall the invitation to vote for this bland, slushy rubbish which might appeal to the masses who wouldn't know a good song if it jumped up and bit them on the nose but is certainly NOT the best song of the last 25 years. How depressing and just when we thought manufactured 'pop' was on the way out - where on earth did this dreadful list appear from?
While I am biassed in that I thought Love Will Tear Us Apart should have won, in all seriousness, I think that the best song of the last 25 years should not include songs less than 5 years old as that would exclude songs which are popular because of novelty. Then again, well done Robbie, good show.
You've got to be kidding.
Angels is a great song, but not the best song of the last 25 years. Only the best song to be up for nomination at the Brits.
I think Angels is a great song and deserved to be in the run up for this award but I don't think its the best song from the past 25 years! Right enough, it is better than some of the others in this catergory, for example, what was Will Young doing being nominated in the first place - he is alright but the song isn't that good! I'm happy for Robbie himself though!
Best song in the last 25 years? What a Joke! Think of all the great rock and pop songs released in the 80s and pretty much all of them are better than Angels. Phil Collins doesn't deserve awards for all the good songs he wrote? Angels is an overrated song, that got tiresome even before you had finished listening to it. Soppy rubbish at best. Hopefully manufactured rubbish will die down soon, and let the real artists who worked hard for there glory receive awards.
So boringly obvious and typical of the bland nature of mainstream music in Britain today, for me it's proof that music and democracy just don't mix. Still, at least it wasn't Will Young...
Oh it's all just a bit of fun. People take these awards too seriously! Robbie has millions of loyal fans, while even non-fans know the words to angels. Him winning obviously reflects who votes in these awards. Personally I wanted Will Young to win, but that was not really due to his musical talent!
I hate the song, all it brings back is memories of school discos and no-one to slow-dance with!
I agree about Angels. I never get fed up hearing it. Whenever the song comes on the radio I turn the radio up, smile and sing along (very badly, that is why the radio has to be turned up to drown my voice out). The song makes me calm and serene and happy. Well done Robbie.
I think that although Robbie Williams is a good performer, that Angels isn't really that good a song. It certainly isn't anywhere near as good as Love Will Tear Us Apart by Joy Division or Wuthering Heights by Kate Bush.
Angels is a fantastic song. All credit to Robbie Williams and Guy Chambers. It's a song that will be played forever and bridges all age groups.
Robbie did in no way deserve that mantle. Whenever we have these awards it is always 'artists' from the past five years that seem to win the best of the best...We forget about the late 80s and early 90s for example. They weren't cool at the time, but because they are cool again now shows that the songs have greater longevity than people think.
Yes Angels is the best song since the past 25 years, because it touches the soul as it carries a lot of meaning.
I've always disliked Angels intensely. I believe it to be symbolic of the general capacity of British pre-teens, teens and middle aged women to accept low quality/ low aspirational music as "classic" songwriting. It's 'orrible. It seems obvious to me that people who like Robbie are people who don't particularly like music all that much. Folks without collections; folks who have never engaged in that madness one experiences when falling under the spell of pop music. Angels adds nothing - it is merely an irritating distraction - a wasp that refuses to go away on a summer's afternoon picnic. What a dreadful result. If you voted for it - you should feel ashamed of yourself - you probably only know a dozen songs or so don't you - so where do get off applying this uninformed filter and casting this ridiculous vote. Booo hisss
Angels, best song? You are kidding, right? Last five years I might be willing to accept, but 25, no way. Did whoever voted for this actually have ANY music knowledge prior to, say, 1995? Really quite insulting to the British music industry of the past quarter of a century.
No surprise about Robbie Williams considering the list. Where on earth did the nominations list come from???? Compiled by an eleven year-old girl perhaps?? I mean, Will Young? Come on.
What a load of crap, best song in the last 25 years - I don't think so!! What about all the REAL artists out there over the last 25 years - the list is endless, but Robbie Williams doesn't even come close.
What a joke. That song has become such a bane to me that I have developed a Pavlovian response to the word 'Angels' where I thrash around, and scream "no no no no no" until someone tells me "the radio's off". Why a half-baked cheesy ditty like Angels, which has become the anthem for millions of romantic sops (think how many times it was sung on Pop Idol for example, and by whom), should be voted the best song of the past 25 years, is beyond me. If this is the song against which all others are judged, then musicians may as well give up.
Why do we reward mediocrity so highly in this country?? The initial list was very weak anyway, but Angels the best song of the last 25 years!!!! I think not, I didn't realize Radio 2 had so many listeners under the age of 10!!
People have such short memories! A great song yes, but the best of the last 25 years? Not a chance. I think the person as opposed to the song has been voted for here.
The Great British Public at work again. It's a mediocre, sentimental and safe song. Granted, it's not too bad, either. But can it stand up against ANYTHING by The Smiths (in particular "How Soon is Now?") or anything from the Stone Roses' first album? Nope.
No, Because I'm not female and I'm not 10!
Ok I like Robbie and Angels is a decent song. But it is no way the best song of the past 25 years! The shortlist wasn't great but him winning it is a joke!
The success of Angels at this years Brits reflects poorly on the state of British music over the last 25 years. The British public are brainwashed by the corporate pulp that is presneted to them as cutting edge music and true talent is being sadly missed. Whilst Angels is a popular song it is not even the best song in Robbie's repertoire never mind best song of the last 25 years.
I am a huge Robbie fan and love that song. But I think there are a lot more outstanding songs / music out there that influenced music today, unfortunately they were left out of the list.
Have Radio 2 listeners even heard of Joy Division? A band who, through two albums, have had a bigger impact on music, and continue to do so, over the last 25 years than Robbie Williams ever will.
No doubt about it. There's not a song done by anyone with more emotion and feeling. Some people will adopt their slightly snobby stances, but Angels has hit home with a far larger audience than any other song.
It should have been Joy Division.Those guys have played an influential part in shaping modern day music while Angels remains yet another pop song. I sincerely do not believe that in 25 years from now, the most influential artists will argue that Robbie Williams inspired their art in the way that the Byrds, the Beatles and Nick Drake have done for music today.
Yes!! I think its a brilliantly written song with different meanings to different people. There were other great songs in the category... but somebody had to win! Robbie was a deserved winner.
I am astounded that such a second-rate record has beaten such a line up of amazing songs! it's a terrible song, voted for by the masses who don't have the brains to appreciate innovative and exciting music.
The best song of the past 25 years? Really? Come on, this is surely a joke? No? I think I need a long lie down...
It just goes to show that the british public do not have a clue about good quality music when they pick Robbie Williams over the beautifully talented Kate Bush and Joy Division. I suppose it's confirmed one thing - the British public are consistently dull :- &lt;(
No offence Robbie, but pleeease! There must be a thousand better songs than a formulated cheesy pop song for kids. No one agrees with this and quite frankly it is an embarassment to the integrity of British music, and a further nail in the coffin!
I think Robbie deserves it, he has been the most iconic of any stars we have had in Britain since John Lennon and is an idol to millions worldwide. Anybody who says he doesn't deserve it is jealous of his success. The only real challenger was Queen but hey, Another One Bites the Dust!!
Obviously all the Karaoke singers in the UK voted for it.
If this is the best song of the last 25 years then the British Music industry is in trouble. Sure Robbie is talented and produces excellent material, but this is not the best record.
A sad day for music
It's not the type of music I normally like, but even as a diehard rock fan, I recognise that it is a good song and appelas to most people. That's why it has been voted best song of the last 25 years. It's a good all-rounder. Just like Robbie.
Best song in 25 years? Since 1980? I'm confused. "Angels" isn't a bad song. It's a nice, catchy, formulaic anthem that ticks all the boxes. But this is not great music. If anything it's regressive. Bland even. I suppose it's just more evidence of how redundant the Brit Awards have become.
Granted angels is a good song, however it really wasn't up against any other proper competition. The Queen's song was lackluster, and apart from Kate Bush, the other choices were pathetic! Also, why weren't the Stones there, David Bowie, etc, there are so many greater songs than Angels...I wonder if it was simply the fact that Robbie wasn't getting more awards so they had to make one up for him!
Best song of the last 25 years? What a ridiculuous concept, and an even more ridiculous winner. Sigh. On the upside, at least it wasn't Bohemian Rhapsody, for which we should all be thankful.
Angels is without doubt a great song but I really don't think it deserves the title of best song in 25 years.perhaps the vote had more to do with teenage opinion on Robbies' goodlooks than the actual song!!! Don't get me wrong, I'm not disputing his looks, but there are more deserved winners.
It would have been a travesty had Angels not won. Without Angels, Robbie Williams may well not be where he is now, and Britain would have been deprived of one of its most charismatic and talented performing artists. It has to be seen performed live, with 125,000 people singing along to be fully appreciated. Well done Rob.
I find it hard to believe that 'Angels' is the best we have to show for the past 25 years! I'm rapidly redifining 'best' in my own head now to mean 'most gratuitously played at weddings and funerals because people think it has deep meaning'. What about Britpop? Blur, Oasis, Suede, Pulp... not only making fantastic songs but also making changes, doing something different. Why must 'best' always come down to most commercially popular?
I've nothing against Robbie, I actually like his music, but how can this possibly be the best song from the last 25year? The Brits has proved to be nothing more than a bargaining tool between the pop moguls to boost band profiles and record sales. The same goes with the Scissor Sisters, I think this is a superb record and thoroughly deserves the newcomer award, but the album comes no where near U2's new record, neither are they in the same league. Once again there have been some baffling discisions made, they are not for artisic reasons, but for profit.
No surprise really, it's voted for by the general public. Since when did they have taste in music?
Personally I find Angels by Robbie Williams to be one of the most irritating songs I have ever heard!
It absolutely deserved to win. It is a song that has united the generations and will continue to be played for many years to come.
It's an absolute joke, however most of the original 25 were very poor choices as well. All in all a pretty pointless exercise !
The song is overplayed and oversentimental. Out of the rather poor five choices that were left, it should have gone to either Joy Division or Queen. I suppose we should be thankful that it didn't end up in the hands of Will Young though.
Although it has nostalgia value, there is no way it deserved to win. Everybody knows the words to Bohemian Rhapsody, Nothing Compares 2 U, etc. Much better songs and more timeless. Give it to someone with real talent.
Although Angels is a good song I think that anyone with the slightest musical taste will realise that this is not the best song of the last 25 years. This is just another example of record company manipulation to keep an artist in the public eye. Why not give him an award for the greatest pair of trousers if that's all it means!

Jamelia's return to the top
R&B star Jamelia had three Brit nominations to go with her triple triumph at last year's Mobo awards.
The Birmingham-born singer, full name Jamelia Davis, was signed to a record label at the age of 15 and released her first single So High at 18. She released four number ones from her 2000 album Drama, including the top five hit Money featuring the vocals of reggae artist Beenie Man. She racked up five Mobo nominations in 2000, winning one for best video. But in the same year she also fell pregnant and decided to take a break from music to bring up her daughter Teja, who was born in March 2001. While she originally planned to get back to work pretty swiftly after giving birth it was actually two years before she released another single. During her absence R&B music exploded and a whole host of female artists were on the scene, meaning Jamelia had to once again prove herself. Her comeback song Bout featuring Rah Digga only just scrapped into the top 40.
It was her next single, Superstar, that really put her back on the map as one of Britain's most popular female R&B singers, holding her own in a music scene dominated by US artists such as Beyonce and Ashanti.
Superstar was followed by Thank You, winner of best single at the 2004 Mobos, which reached number two in the UK charts. The autobiographical song, which deals with domestic abuse, hit number one in New Zealand and Australia. Next came the song See It In A Boy's Eyes, which was especially written for her by Coldplay's Chris Martin. His involvement with the song meant not only was it given massive publicity but it was also greeted favourably by a new audience who would not usually listen to R&B. She now combines singing with modelling and supporting charities including the NSPCC and Make Trade Fair. Despite her huge success in recent years, Jamelia remains down-to-earth about her fame and her chances of lasting in the fickle music business, partly due to motherhood. "When I first got into the industry, I'd be away from home for months at a time. But now I have other things in my life. I still want to make it, but it's not the end of the world if I don't," commented Jamelia.

Cult band Kasabian surge forward
Indie dance band Kasabian built up a cult following throughout 2004 to secure three Brit Award nominations.
The four-piece Leicester band blends dark electronics with rock, earning Kasabian places on the best British group, rock act and live act shortlists. They have also earned a reputation as outspoken and charismatic, in contrast to fellow Brit nominees such as Keane and Snow Patrol. "British music needs a kick up the arse and Britain needs a new band to breathe life into the British people again," declared Kasabian's singer Tom Meighan.
"No-one's doing it at the minute. Music feels like it's in the afterlife right now. We don't want people to give up on it. "The serpent's going to rise from the sea and scare all the pirates away!" Meighan grew up in Leicester with Kasabian songwriter/guitarist Sergio Pizzorno and bassist Chris Edwards, a trio which began making music from the age of 17.
They enlisted guitarist and keyboard player Christopher Karloff after spotting him in a pub. "We saw his long sideburns and thought 'hey, he looks the part, we'll ask him,'" said Meighan. Inspired by Britpop and a mutual love of hardcore, an early 1990s genre that fused house music with hip hop beats and a dark sensibility, they added an electronic element to the traditional guitar sound. "We got a computer and we cut rock'n'roll up, because there's no point in going back to how it was," said Meighan. "It's all about new ideas and creativity."
The band's original approach is reflected in its name, inspired by Linda Kasabian - the getaway driver of US serial killer Charles Manson. Coincidentally it is also the Armenian term for "butcher". Kasabian moved into a remote farmhouse in Rutland to record their debut album, benefiting from its isolation but also managing to sneak in a few parties while they were there. Signed to the RCA record label, Kasabian tested the water with two singles, Club Foot and LSF, which reached numbers 19 and 10 in the UK singles chart respectively.
They built up their following on the summer festival circuit, opening both Glastonbury and T in the Park, and at a series of "guerilla gigs" at unusual venues including Half Time Orange, a pub next to Leicester City football club's headquarters. Kasabian's self-titled album was released last September to widespread critical acclaim, its indie dance stance drawing comparisons to The Stone Roses, Primal Scream and The Happy Mondays.
Regarding it as "both a fiery assertion of rock 'n' roll ethics and proof that a siege mentality is alive and well in the badlands of Rutland Water", the NME's praise was typical of the album's reception. As 2004 progressed Kasabian would score a further two hits - Processed Beats and Cutt Off - and embark upon a well-received UK tour. "We take our music seriously, definitely, but we want to have fun with it," said Pizzorno. "This is not a job to us," added Meighan. "This is the best life we could ever have. This is what it's all about and without it we'd be lost souls. But music needs us as well."

Brits debate over 'urban' music
Joss Stone, a 17-year-old soul singer from Devon, beat Dizzee Rascal, Jamelia, Lemar and The Streets to win best British urban act at the Brit Awards. Her victory has reignited the debate about what urban music is.
I'm not really comfortable with the word urban. It's a word that's been manufactured in this country and America to describe black music. The word urban seems to cover such a broad range of black music that it's wrong. How far are the Brits removed from inner-city music and what people are doing? It's so far removed that I don't expect them to get it bang on. The music industry isn't championing music from our particular genre very well anyway. People don't feel like that's anything to do with us. I don't feel like urban music's just been celebrated by [Joss Stone] winning or her being nominated, or by the Brits acknowledging that there's an urban music scene because it's all a kick in the teeth at the end of the day. It's not really relevant. If Joss Stone is the closest thing that they feel comfortable championing because of what she looks like and how she sounds and who she's signed to, then so be it. It's got nothing to do with what's really going on.
Urban as a genre is very broad. If you look underneath urban, there are a number of core elements that include hip-hop, R&B, garage and into that obviously comes soul. Joss Stone is a soul artist. Her first album was called The Soul Sessions. So urban is a very broad brushstroke that is the umbrella over the top of sub-genres, and there are offshoots of all of those. Joss Stone has had amazing success [in the US] given that she's a UK artist. What has really captured everybody's imagination is that here you have a 17-year-old from Devon with a voice to die for and a bunch of really, really good tunes and she looks good - I think that's what's done it.
The award for best British urban act was voted for by viewers of MTV Base.
I don't think Joss was not a worthy winner. She makes soul music and that definitely comes under the category of what we describe as urban. The fact that she's from Devon is the interesting thing because most of the music we cover is made in large cities and she's literally rural. The great thing about urban music is that there's a big range. If there is some sort of root with black music or dance music in Britain, I think that's where you can call it urban - that's where this new sub-category, or uber-category, has come from. Joss Stone is certainly not old enough to have had some of the experiences of an older soul singer, but you couldn't argue that she was being inauthentic with her emotions - it is coming from somewhere genuine. It has to come across as real. That's the only cut-off point we have here and that's the only way by which we judge people.
What urban means to us as an organisation is the politically correct term to describe music which originated from a black background. Music should become inclusive and if we are fighting for a multi-cultural Britain, then we should be fighting for inclusion rather than exclusion. If Joss Stone can be accepted within the urban music community, I think acts from other ethnicities doing classical music and rock should be accepted too. Race doesn't make a difference if everyone is included. Out of all the awards dished out yesterday, I'm still trying to find out what people of other races received any sort of recognition or award.
A type of music (especially street music) that originates from a city, and typically reflects or is characteristic of urban life.
She might not be urban, but when did R&B become the hip hop tainted thing it is now? R&B stands for Rhythm And Blues, remember!
That Joss Stone is rubbish is certain. If anyone deserves to win an award for urban music (I think probably should include Hip-Hop, Soul & Funk at least but not rock or pop) this year its the Streets, although Dizzee Rascal stakes a good claim
She definitely deserved to win a prize, Joss Stone's albums are quite simply amazing, easily better than anything else that was released last year. This whole debate about what is urban, what isnt urban is completely pointless and probably fueled by urban artists who weren't nominated or didn't win. I cant see why people can't just congratulate her for the talent that she is.
She did deserve it, but I agree with the comments about urban music. Its a stupid phrase, and particularly British. In the states they tend to use hip hop and R&B, if I say hip hop here a lot of people have no idea what I'm talking about. Very strange.
What's in a name? A rose by any other name etc... If people want to call it urban, why not? If we really analysed it, the term 'dance music' is misleading because it doesn't describe everything you can dance to.
Whilst I agree that the term 'urban' is open to interpretation, it strikes me as simply weird that Joss Stone has won. 'Urban' to me is what I hear being played in parties in the inner cities - I live in Brixton and have never heard The Soul Sessions pumping out of of a bass heavy sound system in any parties I've been to. Good luck to Joss Stone, let's celebrate her victory - let's also question why, with artists so successful and talented as Jamelia, Lemar, Kanye West, Dizzee Rascal, Alicia Keys and Outkast - we didn't see a single black artist on stage collecting an award.
So, what you're saying is that any music that has black heritage is not allowed to be sung by anyone who isn't black. And, if it is, then they shouldn't be acknowledged for it even if they're pretty dam good at it? She's 17, has an amazing voice, and won. Good on her. Oh, but she's not "black" well, let's make her feel real bad about it then. How dare she! Though hang on, didn't the so-called 'public' vote on this one?
This idea of pigeonholing whatever is popular at the time is no different than what was happening in the 1940s and 50s in relation to what "Jazz" was. The media then called anything that had a swinging beat, syncopated melody or soulful feeling "Jazz", much to the chagrin of the artists. It would mean that "blues" would be put in the same mould as "bebop", "cool" and "ragtime", all very different styles at that time. Jazz was and remains such a massively misunderstood term. And so what of "Urban" music? In truth it's a lazy term to categorise music that you don't really understand. Soul and garage are worlds apart musically (Marvin Gaye v Tuff Jam?), but no doubt have their connections. If we just let the music speak for itself and not judge the success of an artist by the number of awards won, then maybe we can enjoy the music for what it is, rather than what it represents.
I demand a prize for rural music! Sucks to the cities- it's way better out here. We have hay, for one thing.
Excluding her from what has become known as urban music would be as bad as excluding Lenny Kravitz or Hendrix from rock music for being black surely? I dont understand the point that Ty is making. If Lemar, who makes music which is less soulful than Joss' work won, he might have said nothing. (btw i'm black too)
How can she be "urban" if she spent most of her life in the Devon countryside? Nonsense.
I love Joss to bits and don't care what her branding is - it's amazing music, full stop. Stop puting it all in brackets and let's just call it music, and let's especially drop the black / urban tag - nearly all music came from black origin, this just sets an example that it is ok to pigeonhole people and their music by their colour.
Surely the point of having an urban music category is simply to acknowledge artists that are making what is (historically) considered urban music, irrelevent of the colour of their skin, or where they originate from. Joss Stone is simply singing a certain type of music that can be considered urban in style, just as someone from an inner city, and indeed not from the USA could sing country music. If that person was good at it and authentic in sound, would we criticise it being referred to as country music or the artist for representing that style?
The term urban in reference to a music genre in UK has developed, in part, from the controversy surrounding the branding of the MOBO Awards. The very term 'Music of Black Origin' has confused and offended many people. This is particularly strange given the existence of the Asian Music Awards. It appears that the use of 'black' or 'white' in relation to music makes people feel uncomfortable. The term 'urban' therefore, has been invoked to sidestep the debate of which type of music came first 'black' or 'white' thereby rendering the issue colourblind. The result is now a redundant new debate as to what 'urban' also means. Perhaps we should have created a new term altogether to describe the various strains of soul/RnB and Hip-Hop, one which does not also mean something else - as we have done with 'Crunk'.
Urban is just a word that's come about recently to describe "black" music that's become popular now. The word wasn't even in use, or common use five of six years ago. It's just a way of the industry clumping it all together without having to call it black music, because some people are oversensitive and might call them racist for it.
I'm in a band that has been called "urban", and I despise the label. I'd hate to think I belonged to any neat marketing niche, because that's all it is. Ever since the music channels and record comapnies tried to fracture what they consider 'music of black origin', these labels have been used to undermine the status of good music into a commodity. Look at all the TV broadcasters, unable to reach young people without condesending, they simply play some 'urban' music on the soundtrack as if its some dreadful cheap lift music. Ignore the labels, it is what it is, just music.
As a black man, I think I agree with some of the statements at least the statements made by the key executives. Black people should lead the music they invented . We should stop calling a genre meaningless, northing is meaningless. The real question is would Joss Stone would have been that successful doing the music she was doing if she were black? Same thing, with Streets, Amy Winehouse, etc. Who's ever heard of Terri Walker or Rhian Benson.. They are both 10 times better than Joss Stone and both of them have won Urban Music Awards and i think Mobos , but why not Brits????
So what if Joss Stone won the Urban awards. Her music is great soul and surely that is under the 'Urban' banner? What if The Streets had won? Would people be whining because Mike Skinner is white... It seems that a lot of the fuss is about race where the real issue should be music and nothing else.
Urban is PC version for saying black music. I'm not doubting Ms Stone's talent, but why didn't Jamelia or Lemar get a Brit? This reminds me of what happened to Craig David and Soul II Soul in the past, getting nominations are easy to get, but picking up a Brit seems to be the hardest thing.
Refreshing to see people making reasonable, intelligent comments on any topic these days. More power to you, people! You have said it: there is music you like and music you don't like - who cares what label you put on it?
That entire category was a mess. How can you have people like Dizzee Rascal up against Joss Stone? Its like putting Eminem against Bob Geldof. She should have been nominated for Best British R & B act. Joss Stone deserved to win an award for her talents, but I don't think it was very 'urban' of her to sing angels with Robbie Williams.
Urban is a nonsense term - music of black origin? Well doesn't that include rock? Music made in the inner cities? Well almost all bands end up making music in London/Manchester etc. And doesn't that make some weird implication that all black people live in cities? It doesn't make any sense.
Why does music have to be put into a genre? It's music, you like it or you don't. Simple as that.
I play in a heavy metal band. We are urban music as far as I'm concerned. We live in cities and spend our working life in an urban environment; It therefore directly shapes what we write musically.
"Urban" seems to be the new name for all styles of black music. Why it needed a rebrand I don't know as the name is misleading. Oasis originate from a city and characterise the urban life they know, therefore more than fit the term "urban" yet as they're a white rock band they won't be described as such.
Joss Stone has a fantastic voice and great timing and delivery - what other reason do they need to award her the Brit? All this "urban" and other such categorisation is just the red-tape of the music business and is best ignored.
Yeah, she deserved it. She is talented. Urban is a crap, meaningless, politically correct and probably actually racist marketing term though. There's only two kinds of music: good and bad.

Row threatens Hendrix museum plan
Proposals to open a museum dedicated to Jimi Hendrix are flailing because of a row over the home of his late father.
The run-down house in Seattle has already been moved wholesale once and local authorities are now demanding it be moved to another site. Hendrix supporters hoped to turn the home into a museum for the guitarist. "The mayor is going to go down as the mayor who destroyed Jimi Hendrix's house," said Ray Rae Marshall of the James Marshall Hendrix Foundation. The foundation moved the building, in which Al Hendrix lived between 1953 and 1956, when the land it was built on was to be developed for housing in 2002. Now the City of Seattle wants its new plot to be used for development, giving a deadline of 22 February for the home to be moved. Mr Goldman said the authority had promised the house could remain on its new site and be turned into a memorial and community centre. Seattle officials said no such deal had been offered.
"We never said, 'You can own this property,'" said John Franklin, chief of its operations department. "From our perspective, it was a temporary situation. We have not threatened to demolish the house. We've simply asked that they have to move it." Now Mr Goldman is calling for the authority to pay to move the building to Seattle's central district, where Hendrix grew up. Janie Hendrix, the guitarist's stepsister, said the family were still hoping the guitarist would be honoured by having a road named after him. "That's something my father really wanted to see," she said. "It would be nice if we didn't have to fight for everything to get it." Hendrix was widely considered one of the most important guitarists of his time. He died of drug overdose in 1970 at the age of 27.

No jail for singer Courtney Love
Singer Courtney Love has been spared jail for assault and drug offences, but must serve three years probation.
She had back-to-back court appearances in two separate cases in Los Angeles, first pleading no contest to attacking a woman with a whisky bottle. In the second, Ms Love, 40, pleaded guilty to possessing a forged prescription and painkiller oxycodone. She must also do 100 hours community service, have drug treatment, attend Narcotics Anonymous and pay a fine. The ex-Hole singer's lawyer Howard Weitzman said Ms Love had "turned her life around" and she was "clean and sober".
The assault charge stemmed from April 2004, when Ms Love found musician Kristin King in her boyfriend's home. Ms King said the singer "threw the bottle at the left side of my face" in an "angry, vicious and erratic" attack. Ms Love was originally charged with the more serious offence of assault with a deadly weapon, but that was reduced to assault. Judge Rand Rubin said she must:
- Spend three years on probation
- Have one year's anger management counselling
- Have one year's drug rehabilitation
- Do 100 hours community service
- Pay $1,000 (£535) fine
- Have random drug tests
- Go to three Narcotics Anonymous meetings per week
In the drugs case, she was sentenced to 18 months probation, to run concurrently with the probation for the assault. That offence stemmed from October 2003, when she suffered an overdose after breaking a window at her boyfriend's home. In a separate case relating to the same incident, Ms Love was sentenced to 18 months in drug rehabilitation for being under the influence of cocaine and opiates. In another case last October, she pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct for hitting a man on the head with a microphone stand at a New York City nightclub. Last month her lawyers said she had won back custody of Frances Bean, her 12-year-old daughter with former Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain. The girl was removed from her care following her double arrest in October 2003. Cobain committed suicide in 1994.

Rapper Kanye West's shrewd soul
US hip-hop star Kanye West - who leads the race for this year's Grammys with 10 nominations - rose to prominence by producing songs for artists such as Jay-Z and Alicia Keys.
He then emerged from his behind-the-scenes role to become an artist as well as a producer. But his solo career almost ended before it began after a near-fatal car crash left West with his jaw wired shut in 2002. The resulting song, Through the Wire, became West's first UK hit in April 2004 and subsequent album The College Dropout became a transatlantic success, both critically and commercially. West, 26, began rapping as a teenager at his Chicago school, inspired by the beats and rhymes of 1980s pioneers Run DMC.
Hip-hop producer No ID encouraged West to sample old soul and R&B hits then revive them with an updated sound, an approach that would become his trademark. "I feel like a lot of the soul that's in those old records that I sample is in me," he said. "So when I hear them and I put them with the drums and I bring them to the new millennium, it's just like God's doing that. I'm one with them records right there. It's a blessing."
Leaving his Chicago art school after only one year - a move which would later inspire the title of his album - West began his music career co-producing songs for artists Mase and the Madd Rapper. This drew the attention of superstar rapper Jay-Z, who signed West up to his Roc-A-Fella record label to produce numerous artists on his roster. West's work gained mainstream recognition when he produced the singles Takeover and Izzo (HOVA) on Jay-Z's own 2001 album Blueprint. Incorporating samples of Five to One by The Doors and the Jackson Five's I Want You Back respectively, the hits were credited with injecting soul back into hip-hop.
As their success attracted further production work for Jay-Z ('03 Bonnie & Clyde) and artists such as Ludacris (Stand Up) and Alicia Keys (You Don't Know My Name), West announced plans for a solo album. Driving home from a late-night Los Angeles recording session in October 2002, he was involved in the car crash that left his jaw fractured in three places. "Anytime I hear about any accident my heart sinks in and I just thank God that I'm still here," he later said. "That steering wheel could have been two inches further out, and that would have been it."
West's account of the accident sampled Chaka Khan's hit Through the Fire to become the heart of his completed solo album The College Dropout. Released last year, it was by turns smooth, humorous and sharp and largely avoided the clich&#233;d hip-hop preoccupation with guns, girls and jewellery.
Through the Wire was quickly joined in the UK and US charts by Slow Jamz, on which West collaborated with rapper Twista and Ray actor Jamie Foxx. The College Dropout spawned two further UK hits and a string of award nominations. West was shortlisted for 10 Grammys - including nominations for artist and album of the year - and took the best hip-hop artist, producer and album titles at last year's Music of Black Origin (Mobo) Awards. Now a respected rapper and producer in the influential field of hip-hop, Kanye West is unlikely to regret his decision to leave college early.

Singer Christina Aguilera to wed
Pop star Christina Aguilera is to marry music executive Jordan Bratman, the singer's agent has confirmed.
Bratman, 26, proposed to Grammy-winning singer Aguilera, 23, on holiday at an undisclosed location. The pair have been together for more than two years. "No wedding plans have been set yet," said Aguilera's agent Meghan Prophet. Aguilera burst onto the pop scene in 1999, winning a best new artist Grammy in 2000. Her hits include What a Girl Wants, Dirrty and Beautiful. Bratman presented his fiancee with a diamond ring designed by jeweller Stephen Webster on Friday, said Ms Prophet. New York-born Aguilera reached number one in the UK with her debut hit Genie in a Bottle in October 1999. Her early success was cemented by two further Grammys in subsequent years. In 2002, Aguilera won best pop collaboration for the hit track Lady Marmalade with Lil' Kim, Maya and Pink, and last year she picked up the award for best female pop vocal performance for Beautiful. Her most recent single, Car Wash, featuring Missy Elliott, reached number four in the UK charts last November.

Lit Idol begins search for author
The second Pop Idol-style search for literary talent has begun with the help of the brother of Simon Cowell.
Writer Tony Cowell is among the judges who will hear aspiring writers read their work aloud. The winner gets a deal with literary agency Curtis Brown. "I'm not going to be the Mr Nasty of books," said Cowell, 54, in reference to his brother's caustic remarks on TV shows Pop Idol and The X-Factor. The 2004 winner, Paul Cavanagh, went on to sign a deal with Harper Collins.
This year, the competition is specifically looking for a crime writer. Writers must submit up to 10,000 words from the opening chapters of their novels and a synopsis. Professional readers will choose a shortlist of five following the competition closing date on 14 January.
The final five will then have to read their work in front of judging panel. A public vote will also take place, which will account for 25% of the final decision. The winner will be announced at the London Book Fair on 14 March next year and could be screened on TV. "It's very, very hard to find an agent and extremely difficult, without an agent, to get a publisher to look at your work," said Cowell. "People do fall by the wayside and the more avenues we can provide for aspiring authors, the better," he added. Paul Cavanagh, a former university professor and health care consultant from Ontario in Canada, was one of 1,466 aspiring novelists to enter the first contest. He lifted the inaugural Lit Idol prize after reading aloud an excerpt of his work Northwest Passage. Three film studios are said to be interested in buying film rights for the book, even though it is not finished yet.

Brits return Keane to number one
Brits success has helped return Keane's award-winning album Hopes and Fears back to the top of the UK album chart.
The debut album, which took the best British album title at the Brits on Tuesday, moved up seven places from number eight to number one. Also capitalising on Brits success were the Scissor Sisters whose eponymous album moved three places to number two. U2's latest single Sometimes You Can't Make It On Your Own took the top spot in the singles chart, ahead of Elvis. The track, from their current album How To Dismantle An Atomic Bomb, pushed Eminem's Like Toy Soldiers from number one to number three.
Elvis' Wooden Heart, which entered the chart at number two, is the sixth in a series of 18 reissues to mark the 70th anniversary of Presley's birth. There are currently six re-released Elvis' tracks occupying spots in the top 40 singles chart including Are You Lonesome Tonight at number 20, It's Now or Never at number 27 and Jailhouse Rock at number 37. Soldier, by Destiny's Child, Ti and Lil Wayne, debuted at number four, while Almost Here, the duet from former Westlife star Brian McFadden and Delta Goodrem, fell from number three to number five. There was more follow up to Brits success for Franz Ferdinand won best rock act and best British group last week. Their self-titled album moved from 13 to number four. Last week's number one album Tourist, by Athlete, fell to number three.

U2's desire to be number one
U2, who have won three prestigious Grammy Awards for their hit Vertigo, are stubbornly clinging to their status as one of the biggest bands in the world.
The most popular groups in the history of rock all have several things in common. The music must be inspired and appeal across generations and be distinctive, if not always groundbreaking. But such success is down to more than music. They have to be compelling performers, charismatic and intelligent enough to make good decisions and keep their feet on the ground. They also have to want it. They have to want to be the biggest band ever and not stop wanting it. The Beatles had it, the Rolling Stones still have it, REM hold onto it and Queen were it in a catsuit. And U2 have it in spades, and keep churning it out. Their new album, How To Dismantle An Atomic Bomb, comes 28 years after the schoolfriends got together in Dublin and 17 years after The Joshua Tree cemented their place on the all-time rock A-list.
They may have lost some of the edginess and raw, youthful force that propelled them to the top, but they have lost none of the desire or ability to craft songs and albums.
Vertigo, the first single from the new album, went straight into the UK singles chart at number one, knocking Eminem off the top spot and giving them their 26th top 10 hit. "The challenge is to be bigger and bolder and better - to make records the whole world will listen to," Bono recently said. Drummer Larry Mullen Jr echoed those sentiments: "We're very competitive - we want to be on the radio, have big singles. We don't want to be thought of as a veteran band." The band have done "everything in their considerable powers" to ensure they remain the biggest band in the world, according to Q magazine editor Paul Rees.
"This makes them hugely determined and formidable." He added: "They are equally determined to push themselves to make music that continues to stand up. "As such, they've constantly re-invented and challenged themselves. They are, perhaps, alone as the only rock band that has got better with age." The other key ingredient was the fact they were highly organised, Mr Rees said. "They do everything in the right way." The group were born when Mullen put an appeal for bandmates on a high school notice board, attracting fellow pupils Paul Hewson (Bono, vocals), Adam Clayton (bass), David Evans (The Edge, guitar) and his brother Dick.
Dick Evans soon dropped out and the four-piece were known as The Feedback and The Hype before settling on U2.
By 1978, they had won a talent contest and got noticed by a manager, Paul McGuinness. "They were brilliant, but very coarse," McGuinness recently said. "In a way, they were doing exactly what they do now. Only badly." They struggled to attract record company attention, later being described as "pretty damn average" and "strange and eerie" by scouts who saw them live. They released two Ireland-only singles, which topped the national charts in 1979 and 1980, leading to a deal with Island and their debut album Boy. The stadium-filling, anthemic sound was U2's aim from the start, and their third album, War, saw them make the breakthrough on both sides of the Atlantic, going to number one in the UK and 12 in the US. Songs like Sunday Bloody Sunday and New Year's Day brought success and an image as a political and spiritual band - which Bono rejected as a cliche.
His stage performances - which included flag-waving, speaker-climbing and drum-throwing - earned him a reputation as an electric performer, and their appearance at 1985's Live Aid is widely seen as sealing their global stardom.
In 1987, The Joshua Tree broke sales records and saw the band reach the height of their powers with hits including Where the Streets Have No Name, I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For and With Or Without You. Those songs took the band's epic, atmospheric sound to a simple, powerful and popular pinnacle. The end of the decade marked a crucial point for the band - they had reached the top but still yearned for new challenges and achievements. These came in the form of explorations of different branches of rock and forays into electronic dance music, plus wildly extravagant stage shows, while still trying to retain their mass appeal. The Achtung Baby album in 1991 was followed by Zooropa, Pop and their corresponding stadium tours, which featured giant olives, flying cars, live phone calls to the White House and Bono's transformation into alter-egos The Fly and MacPhisto. He was also building a parallel reputation - not always to the pleasure of his bandmates - as a campaigner on issues from global debt to Aids. Before the release of How To Dismantle An Atomic Bomb, they had sold 125 million albums around the world. But they still want more.

Lasting influence of legend Charles
Ray Charles, who has won a string of posthumous Grammy Awards, belonged to a pioneering generation of artists that had a huge influence on the course of rock and pop music.
His sound encompassed so many styles - blues, gospel, jazz, rock 'n' roll, even country - and had a real impact on the nascent UK beat and R&B scenes.
Compared in stature to Elvis Presley by some commentators, Charles' songs cast their spell on such 1960s stalwarts as Joe Cocker, Steve Winwood, Eric Burdon and Van Morrison. His influence has extended to contemporary artists such as Norah Jones, with whom he recently recorded a duet. If James Brown was the godfather of soul, then Ray Charles was indisputably one of its founding fathers. Along with Sam Cooke, he was instrumental in bringing together the gospel fervour of the deep south Baptist church with the "devil's" music of R&B to pave the way for a new generation of soul artists.
Without Charles, it is hard to imagine the tear-stained Atlantic R&B sound of Aretha Franklin, Otis Redding or Wilson Pickett. He was also a talented jazz composer, arranger and band leader, playing at the Newport Jazz Festival and Carnegie Hall and recording with noted jazz musicians such as Milt Jackson and David "Fathead" Newman. Unfortunately, he also shared another trait common among many jazz artists of the era - that of heroin addiction, which led to him being arrested in 1965. His string of 1950s Atlantic R&B successes included songs that would be covered by the first-generation rock 'n' roll greats, including I've Got A Woman (Roy Orbison, Elvis Presley) and Hallelujah, I Love Her So (Eddie Cochran). After the exuberance of his 1959 signature song What'd I Say, Charles turned towards a more pop-oriented style, recording Hoagy Carmichael's sentimental string ballad Georgia On My Mind, and the upbeat Hit The Road Jack.
He also won acclaim in the country arena with his interpretations of Hank Williams standards such as Your Cheating Heart and You Win Again. More than 40 years after its release, his 1962 ABC album Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music is still regarded as a classic. His version of Don Gibson's I Can't Stop Loving You topped the pop and R&B charts in the US. In 1972, he made a rare foray into protest songs with his album A Message from the People.
On it, he took a stand on poverty and civil rights - echoing similar recordings of the era from progeny such as Stevie Wonder, James Brown, Curtis Mayfield and Marvin Gaye. More than 20 years later, he would embrace contemporary production with his 1993 album My World, which featured hip-hop beats - although Charles claimed at the time not to know what hip-hop was. Among the tributes that poured in from all sections of the music world when Charles died aged 73 in June 2004 was one from his friend, the producer Quincy Jones, who described him as a "brother in every sense of the word". "There will never be another musician who did as much to break down the perceived walls of musical genres as much as Ray Charles did," he said. Former Manfred Mann singer Paul Jones, who sang on 1960s hits such as Come Tomorrow and Sha La La, said Charles was one of his heroes. "I'm quite sure my own writing was influenced by him," he told BBC News Online. "I would put money on the proposition that Ray Charles will have an influence on music forever."

Grammys honour soul star Charles
The memory of soul legend Ray Charles dominated the music world's leading music ceremony on Sunday as he was given eight posthumous Grammy Awards.
Charles, who died in 2004, got honours including record and album of the year, while Alicia Keys and actor Jamie Foxx performed a musical tribute to him. R&B star Keys won four awards herself at the Grammy ceremony in Los Angeles. U2, Usher, Norah Jones and Kanye West got three each. West led the race going into the ceremony with 10 nominations.
Charles' last album, Genius Loves Company, a collection of duets that has sold more than two million copies, was named album of the year and best pop vocal album. His song Here We Go Again with Norah Jones won record of the year and best pop vocal collaboration, while Heaven Help Us All with Gladys Knight picked up best gospel performance. Jones said: "I'm glad he's getting recognised, because of who he is and how much I love him." Actor Jamie Foxx - who is nominated for an Oscar for playing Charles in the hit movie Ray - dedicated a rendition of Georgia on My Mind to "old friends". Keys, looking to replicate her Grammys success of 2002, when she won five, picked up best R&B song for You Don't Know My Name and best R&B album for The Diary of Alicia Keys. She also shared the award for best R&B vocal performance by a duo or group with Usher for My Boo.
Usher's other victories were for best contemporary R&B album for Confessions and best rap/sung collaboration for Yeah!, featuring Lil Jon and Ludacris. Kanye West dominated the rap categories, winning best rap song for Jesus Walks and best rap album for The College Dropout. But in one of the night's biggest shocks, he lost out in the battle to be named best new artist to pop rock act Maroon 5. Vertigo by rock giants U2 won three trophies - best rock song, best short video and best rock vocal performance by a duo or group. One of the other main awards, song of the year, went to US singer-songwriter John Mayer for Daughters. Mayer also won best male pop vocal performance. Britney Spears picked up her first ever Grammy for her song Toxic, which was named best dance recording.
Rod Stewart also won the first Grammy of his career, getting the best traditional pop album award for Stardust... The Great American Songbook: Volume III. In 2003, Stewart said he was "astounded" he had never won a Grammy - but "they tend not to give it to the British unless you're Sting". There were few other high-profile British victors this year. Annie Lennox, metal group Motorhead and dance act Basement Jaxx all took home trophies. But Elvis Costello, who had four nominations, and Joss Stone and Franz Ferdinand, who were both up for three awards, got nothing.
Beach Boys veteran Brian Wilson was another first-time winner - for best rock instrumental performance. "It represents triumph and achievement in music that I feel that I deserved, and I'm really glad I won," he said. A live recording of composer John Adams' 11 September tribute, On the Transmigration of Souls, performed by the New York Philharmonic, won three classical prizes. And former US President Bill Clinton picked up the second Grammy of his career, winning the spoken word award for the audio version of his autobiography My Life.

Abba reunite for musical premiere
The original stars of Swedish pop quartet Abba have reunited for the home premiere of hit musical Mamma Mia! which is based on the band's songs.
It is the first time in almost 20 years that the four, Bjorn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson, Agnetha Faltskog and Anni-Frid Lyngstad, have met publicly. Faltskog has been a virtual recluse since the band split up in 1982. The musical, which has become a global phenomenon, will be performed in Swedish for the first time. Fans camped outside Stockholm's Cirkus theatre in the snow for a glimpse of the stars. The premiere marks Abba's first public reunion since the legendary band's acrimonious break-up in the early 1980s. It was thought that Faltskog would appear in London for the musical's fifth anniversary celebrations in April 2004 but she stayed away due to her fear of flying.
Original Abba member Bjorn Ulvaeus set about translating the musical into the band's mother tongue for the celebrated homecoming, alongside Swedish artist Niklas Stromstedt. Almost all of Abba's original songs, which have sold more than 350 million records worldwide, were written and recorded in English. The musical, set on a small Greek island, tells of the story of a young woman and her fiercely independent single mother. The show will include such classics as Super Trouper, SOS and Dancing Queen. There are currently 14 productions being staged worldwide, including New York and London, with road shows in Toronto, South Korea and Madrid. More than 20 million people around the world have seen the show.

Help for indies in download sales
A campaign has been launched to help independent labels get their music online and benefit from the growing trend for downloading music.
The British Phonographic Industry has identified a lack of independent music available for download. "We want to ensure that independent repertoire is as successful in the download world as it is in the physical world," said BPI chief Peter Jamieson. Downloaded singles have now overtaken physical singles in the UK. Mr Jamieson said his organisation was lobbying music service providers, which include iTunes and Napster, to urge them to promote independent releases. Download sales are due to be incorporated into the UK singles chart later this year. "With downloads shortly to be eligible for the singles chart, this is a key commercial issue on which the BPI committed to assisting its members," added Mr Jamieson. As part of the campaign the BPI is running a series of seminars entitled Getting Your Music Online, focusing on how independent labels can embrace digital music. The US has already begun incorporating download sales in the Billboard's Hot 100 chart.

T in the Park sells out in days
Tickets for Scotland's biggest music festival have sold out in record time, five months before the event is held.
The 12th annual T in the Park festival, which takes place at Balado near Kinross in July, sold out just four days after the line-up was announced. Green Day, the Foo Fighters and Keane are among the acts that had already been lined up to appear at the event. However, the organisers have revealed Scots favourites Travis as well as soulman James Brown will also appear.
Last year tickets sold out 10 weeks before the festival but organisers confirmed that all 130,000 for the two-day event had been sold. Geoff Ellis, CEO of festival organisers Big Day Out Ltd, said this year's event promises to be the best yet. "After last year's sell-out, we did think this year's event would sell slightly earlier, however this is way beyond our expectations," Mr Ellis said.
"We are extremely proud that fans are so excited about T in the Park that they have made absolutely sure that their place at Balado is booked for 2005, and we will deliver one of the greatest events yet for them in July." More than 120 acts will play on eight stages over the weekend of 9 and 10 July. Brit Award winners Keane and The Streets are among the main attractions, while The Killers and dance act The Prodigy are also on the bill. Both Green Day and The Foo Fighters last played at the festival in 2002, the same year Oasis and Basement Jaxx were among the headline acts.

Black Sabbath top rock album poll
Black Sabbath have topped a list of the best British rock albums of all time.
The band once fronted by Ozzy Osbourne led a poll of Kerrang! magazine readers with their 1970 self-titled debut. The band have three more efforts on the list, including fifth-placed Paranoid. Osbourne appears more than any other act, with two solo records featured. The top five includes Led Zeppelin, Iron Maiden and Sex Pistols. Queen, Muse, Manic Street Preachers and The Clash complete the top 10. A mix of heavy metal, punk, glam rock and even dance music makes up the list. Motorhead, Judas Priest and Prodigy are included along with newer acts like The Darkness and Lostprophets.
Kerrang! editor Ashley Bird said: "It's amazing to see so many incredible homegrown albums in one list, and without any of the abysmal fashion bands that currently clog up the music scene. "These are the real opinions of proper rock fans."
Formed by four teenage friends in the West Midlands in the late 1960s, Black Sabbath are one of Britain's most successful heavy rock bands. Their debut was a UK top 10 hit in 1970 and sold more than a million copies in the US. Osbourne said the band's success in the Kerrang! poll was a triumph for British rock. He said: "Back then you'd hear: 'If you go to San Francisco, be sure to wear a flower in your hair'. "We lived in Aston, Birmingham. The only flowers I ever saw were on a gravestone in our local cemetery." Despite being disliked by many critics, Black Sabbath's subsequent albums included multi-million sellers but internal rows led to Osbourne leaving in 1979. The band continued without Osbourne, who went on to solo success but also had to battle alcoholism and legal action over his music allegedly inciting teenagers to commit suicide. He was eventually cleared of the charges. Osbourne, who bit off the head of a live bat on stage in 1982, rejoined the band to play the Live Aid charity concert in 1985. After many changes in line-up, the original four members reunited to play live dates in 1997. Black Sabbath have reunited regularly in recent years while Osbourne has gone on to wider fame with his family through MTV documentary series The Osbournes.

Singer George Michael has said that a new film about his life is the start of a retirement from public view.
The pop star said it would be a much more "behind the scenes affair", and called his own genre of music "dead". "I thought I should explain myself before I disappear," said Michael, who was at the Berlin film festival to launch the documentary. The film, A Different Story, chronicles Michael's life and career from the 1980s and his personal struggles. The 41-year-old chart-topper told reporters in the German capital that he wanted to "move his career into a different form", but added that he does not know what it is going to be yet.
"I'm still going to be making music," he said, but added that he was "not going to be around". He hinted at discontent with the current state of music industry, and said: "I don't really think that there is anyone in the modern pop business who I feel I want to spar with." Michael said that the film, directed by Southan Morris, would put his two decades of fame into context. "It's almost as much for me as for my fans, in terms of trying to make sense of the last 22 years and bring it to a close in a proper way," he said. The documentary chronicles the highs and lows of his life in the public gaze, from his meteoric rise as one half of pop duo Wham! to his arrest for lewd conduct in a Los Angeles toilet in 1998. The film also deals with the loss of Michael's partner Anselmo Feleppa from an Aids-related condition in 1993. A Different Story, which is being shown at the Berlin Film Festival, has been screened by BBC One.

A much-loved guitar belonging to Jimi Hendrix has been sold for £100,000 at an auction in London.
The 1965 Fender Stratocaster was one of a number of guitars included in the sale dedicated to the rock legend. The vast archive of instruments, signed records and posters were collected by a dedicated fan who had become friendly with the star. The auction was billed as the biggest collection of Hendrix memorabilia to go under the hammer. The majority of the items were collected by fan Bob Terry who began collecting at the age of 17. He later sold it on to another collector.
Hendrix, widely considered one of the best guitarists of his era, died of a drug overdose in 1970 at the age of 27. The 1965 Fender Stratocaster was used by the musician on tour and in his studio. A poem written by Hendrix two weeks after his infamous appearance at the Monterey Festival where he set light to his guitar went for £10,000. The Jimi Hendrix Experience's first single Hey Joe, signed by all the band, was sold for £2,000. The sale, hosted by auctioneers Cooper Owen, was held at the Hard Rock Cafe in London.

Potter director signs Warner deal
Harry Potter director Alfonso Cuaron has signed a three-year deal with Hollywood studio Warner Brothers, according to Variety trade magazine.
The Mexican film-maker, who directed Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, will produce mainstream movies and smaller Spanish-language films. "We had a wonderful experience with Alfonso on Harry Potter," Warner producer Jeff Robinov told Variety. Cuaron's other films include Mexican movie Y Tu Mama Tambien.
The 2001 rites-of-passage drama about two teenage boys who embark on a relationship with an older woman, brought Cuaron international attention - and box office glory.
It also won him and his brother Carlos, with whom he co-wrote the screenplay, an Oscar nomination for best original screenplay. Warner will distribute Cuaron's films in several languages outside the US. "This deal will give us the opportunity to collaborate with Alfonso on movies that make the most of his artistry and vision, and continue to offer him the mainstream worldwide audiences that our studio provides so successfully," said Mr Robinov.
His first film for Warner Brothers was 1995's family fantasy movie A Little Princess. Based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett, A Little Princess tells the story of a young girl who is sent to live in a New York boarding school when her widowed father enlists for war. After the erotic nature of Y Tu Mama Tambien, Cuaron was a surprise choice to direct the third Harry Potter film but his dark interpretation was received well by the public and critics alike.

German music in a 'zombie' state
The German music business - the third largest in the world - is "in the state of a zombie" because it has failed to respond to the challenge posed by downloading and piracy, a leading industry figure has said.
Tim Renner, the head of Universal Music Germany until last year, told BBC World Service's The Music Biz programme that the country's music industry was now struggling to survive. Renner warned that unless the industry accepted "new realties" - such as downloading - its decline could become irreversible. "The problem the music industry has got is that they aren't willing to accept that the classic way of doing business is over and out," he stated. "So the music industry in its current form over here is pretty much in the state of a zombie."
The music market in Germany peaked in 1997, with sales of 2.6bn euros (£1.8bn). Since 2000, sales have plummeted to just 1.6bn euros (£1.1bn) in 2003. In the space of one year - between 2002 and 2003 - CD album sales fell by 13.8%. But a study by the Society for Consumer Research found that at the same time, more than twice as many recordable CDs had music recorded on them than CD albums were sold. Mr Renner pointed out that, because profit comes mainly from the longevity of a good-selling record, this was particularly damaging.
"You need time," he added. However, Peter Zombic, the managing director of the International Federation of Phonographic Industry in Germany, said he did not feel the situation was as "dramatic" as Mr Renner believed. "It's quite true that we have severe problems in Germany - but that's true in other parts of the world and in most developed markets too," he argued. "We have a severe problem with piracy, especially internet piracy, and we also have a severe problem of private copying. "I don't agree that the music industry lost control over the music market - in fact, especially in regard to Germany talent, the market is quite successful." He did, however, admit that copyright owners have "partly lost control of their copyright", due to piracy and copying.
But he refuted suggestions that the industry had been too slow to respond to digital downloading. "We were the first to implement a download service - back in 1997," he argued. "At that time it was not successful, because of the advent of piracy - it was the Napster time, when P2P services became popular. "It still is quite difficult for the music industry to compete with a price that is zero as far as the illegal product is concerned." Mr Zombic also called for a change to the perception in Germany that private copying of music is not a problem. German law does allow people to make copies of CDs for their family and close friends, without fear of breaking copyright. Mr Zombic said that this legal framework was a "huge problem". "There is a widespread attitude that private copying is a hobby, it's nice, it's fun," he added. "We try to make clear it's not nice and it's not fun - it's endangering the creativity in our country."

Musical treatment for Capra film
The classic film It's A Wonderful Life is to be turned into a musical by the producer of the controversial hit show Jerry Springer - The Opera.
Frank Capra's 1946 movie starring James Stewart, is being turned into a £7m musical by producer Jon Thoday. He is working with Steve Brown, who wrote the award-winning musical Spend Spend Spend. A spokeswoman said the plans were in the "very early stages", with no cast, opening date or theatre announced.
A series of workshops have been held in London, and on Wednesday a cast of singers unveiled the musical to a select group of potential investors. Mr Thoday said the idea of turning the film into a musical had been an ambition of his for almost 20 years. It's a Wonderful Life was based on a short story, The Greatest Gift, by Philip van Doren Stern. Mr Thoday managed to buy the rights to the story from Van Doren Stern's family in 1999, following Mr Brown's success with Spend Spend Spend. He later secured the film rights from Paramount, enabling them to use the title It's A Wonderful Life.

Famed music director Viotti dies
Conductor Marcello Viotti, director of Venice's famous La Fenice Theatre, has died in Germany at 50.
Viotti, director of La Fenice since 2002, conducted at renowned opera houses worldwide including Milan's La Scala and the Vienna State Opera. His time at La Fenice coincided with its reopening in 2003 after it was destroyed by fire in 1996. He fell into a coma after suffering a stroke during rehearsals for Jules Massenet's Manon last week.
He conducted some of the best orchestras in the world including the Berlin Philharmonic and the English Chamber Orchestra. Viotti was born in Switzerland and studied the piano, cello and singing at the Lausanne Conservatory. His career breakthrough came in 1982 when he won first prize at the Gino Marinuzzi conducting competition in Italy. Viotti established himself as chief conductor of the Turin Opera and went on to become chief conductor of Munich's Radio Orchestra. At La Fenice Viotti was widely acclaimed for his production of the French composer Massenet's Thais and some of his other productions included Giuseppe Verdi's La Traviata and Richard Strauss's Ariadne auf Naxos.
The last opera he directed at La Fenice was Massenet's Le Roi de Lahore. Viotti's debut at the New York's Metropolitan Opera came in 2000 with Giacomo Puccini's Madame Butterfly, followed by La Boheme, La Traviata and Fromental Halevy's La Juive. Giampaolo Vianello, superintendent of the Fenice Theatre Foundation, said: "I am filled with extreme sadness because, other than a great artist, he is missed as a friend - a main character in the latest joyous times, during the rebirth of our theatre." Viotti's last public performance was on 5 February when he conducted Vincenzo Bellini's Norma at the Vienna State Opera.

TV presenter Deeley drops CD:UK
Cat Deeley has resigned as host of ITV1's Saturday morning children's music show CD:UK after six years.
The 28-year-old host who also presents Stars In Their Eyes said she wanted to concentrate on new television projects. "I've had a great few years, met some really incredible people and been given some wonderful opportunities," the presenter said. Deeley will host her last show on 5 March and guest presenters will stand in until a replacement is found.
The long-running presenter said: "I would like to take this opportunity to thank the CD:UK team and all the viewers that have watched, supported the show and let me gate crash their Saturday morning. "Whilst obviously I am really sad to say goodbye, I'm immensely excited about the future." Deeley formerly co-hosted SM:tv, the children's show which airs before CD:UK on a Saturday morning, alongside hit presenters Ant and Dec. She won a Children's Bafta award for best presenter in December 2001 and also fronted BBC One's Fame Academy series.

The Producers scoops stage awards
The Producers has beaten Mary Poppins in the battle of the blockbuster West End musicals at the Olivier Awards.
The Producers won three prizes at the UK's most prestigious annual theatre awards, while Mary Poppins won two. Mel Brooks' hit show triumphed in the battle for best new musical, where it was up against Mary Poppins and Andrew Lloyd Webber's The Woman in White. Alan Bennett's The History Boys was the big winner in the straight theatre categories, picking up three trophies. But all eyes were on the musical prizes after The Producers, Mary Poppins and The Woman in White all had high-profile openings in the last six months.
The Producers' Nathan Lane, a last-minute replacement for Richard Dreyfuss, beat his former co-star Lee Evans to win best musical actor. Lane has already left the production. A smash hit on Broadway before moving to London, the show also won best musical performance in a supporting role for Conleth Hill, who plays director Roger DeBris. Mary Poppins' awards came for best choreography and best musical actress for its star Laura Michelle Kelly. It led the nominations going into Sunday's ceremony at London's Hilton hotel, up for nine awards. Both shows are stage adaptations of 1960s films. The History Boys, set in a grammar school in the early 1980s and partly based on Bennett's experiences as a teacher, was named best new play.
It also won best actor for Richard Griffiths, who beat his Harry Potter film co-star Michael Gambon, nominated for Endgame, as well as Jonathan Pryce and Ben Whishaw. The play also won National Theatre artistic director Nicholas Hytner best director and Bennett got a special award for outstanding contribution to British theatre. Dame Judi Dench, who starred in All's Well That Ends Well at the Gielgud, lost out in the best supporting role category to Amanda Harris, who played Emilia in Othello for the Royal Shakespeare Company. The Olivier Awards have been handed out by the Society of London since 1976.
- Best lighting design - His Dark Materials designed by Paule Constable at the Olivier
- Best sound design - The Woman in White designed by Mick Potter at the Palace
- Best new opera - Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk at the Royal Opera House
- Outstanding achievement in opera - Thomas Ades and the Royal Opera House for the world premiere of The Tempest
- Best costume design - All's Well That Ends Well designed by Deirdre Clancy at the Gielgud
- Best Revival - Hamlet by William Shakespeare at The Old Vic
- Best set design - His Dark Materials designed by Giles Cadle at the Olivier
- Outstanding musical production - Grand Hotel at the Donmar Warehouse
- Best supporting role in a musical - Conleth Hill for The Producers at Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
- Best theatre choreographer - Matthew Bourne and Stephen Mear for Mary Poppins at the Prince Edward
- Best actor - Richard Griffiths for The History Boys at the Lyttelton
- Outstanding achievement or performance in an affiliate theatre - Andrew Scott for A Girl in A Car With A Man at the Jerwood Theatre Upstairs at the Royal Court
- Best new dance production - Rambert Dance Company's Swamp at Sadler's Wells
- Outstanding achievement in dance - San Francisco Ballet for their season at Sadler's Wells
- Best performance in a supporting role - Amanda Harris for Othello at Trafalgar Studios
- Best actress - Clare Higgins for Hecuba at the Donmar Warehouse
- Best musical actor - Nathan Lane for The Producers at Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
- Best musical actress - Laura Michelle Kelly for Mary Poppins at the Prince Edward
- Best director - Nicholas Hytner for The History Boys at the Lyttelton
- Best new play - The History Boys by Alan Bennett at the Lyttelton
- Best new musical - The Producers at Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
- Special award - Alan Bennett for his outstanding contribution to British theatre

Rocker Doherty in on-stage fight
Rock singer Pete Doherty has been involved in a fight with his band's guitarist at their biggest gig to date.
Babyshambles played for 5,000 fans at London's Brixton Academy on Tuesday. The former Libertines singer traded blows with guitarist Patrick Walden. They were separated and bundled off stage before returning to end the set. The show was earlier held up due to audience overcrowding. On Monday Doherty faced blackmail and robbery charges in court, which he denies. He is out on £50,000 bail and the judge agreed to extend his 2200 GMT curfew deadline by two hours so he could play the Brixton gig.
Babyshambles, which he formed after his acrimonious departure from the Libertines, played a warm-up show at The Garage, north London, on Monday. On Tuesday, Doherty and his three bandmates were introduced to the crowd by Mick Jones, the former Clash guitarist who produced the Libertines' second album. Babyshambles took the stage to a frenzied reception at 2200 GMT, launching into their last single, Killamangiro, which reached number eight in December. But the group had to stop during the next song to persuade fans not to push forward and allow security guards to pull people out of the crush. Doherty appealed to fans to calm down, saying: "There's a few people getting hurt down the front, you've got to move back."
The music resumed minutes later but after several more songs, the singer appeared to accidentally disconnect Walden's guitar, leading the pair to trade kicks and punches. Bouncers stepped in and the band left the stage, but returned after five minutes and finished their 50-minute performance with no further trouble. Doherty, 25, had to be home by midnight to observe the curfew, which is one of the conditions of his bail. On Monday, the judge agreed to allow him to perform on condition that requests for changes to his bail terms were "not too regular an occurrence". The singer was arrested with fellow musician Alan Wass on 2 February after an alleged dispute with documentary-maker Max Carlish at a London hotel. They are next due in court on 18 April.

The Sound of Music is coming home
The original stage production of The Sound of Music is to be performed for the first time in the Austrian capital, 40 years after the film was released.
The first full-scale theatrical production of the musical will make its debut in Vienna on Saturday. Julie Andrews starred in the 1965 film version of the Rogers and Hammerstein classic set in the Alpine country. But despite being one of the most successful musicals of all time, it is barely known inside Austria.
The film was never shown in any cinema in Austria and was not broadcast on television until the early 1990s. The musical is based on the true story of the von Trapp family who formed a singing troupe and escaped from Nazi-occupied Austria in 1938.
Sensitivities about Nazism during wartime Austria and issues towards the von Trapp family themselves could explain Austria's reluctance to embrace the musical. Another source of irritation for Austrians is the song Edelweiss, which is considered an traditional folk song by many filmgoers. The song was actually an invention by Rodgers and Hammerstein. Many also consider the film to portray a kitsch image of Austria, including yodelling, goat-herds and lederhosen. The production is being staged at a Viennese opera house, the Volksoper, beginning on Saturday. Maria, the novice nun who falls in love with Baron von Trapp, will be played by Austro-Australian actress and singer Sandra Pires.

Download chart debut is delayed
The inclusion of downloaded music in the official singles chart has been delayed for a month.
The British Phonographic Industry (BPI) had planned to include download formats in the chart from 20 March. But the date has been put back to 17 April to create a "level playing field" for independent labels. The BPI is concerned that independent repertoire is not adequately represented online and said they were looking at ways of rectifying it.
BPI chairman Peter Jamieson said: "The inclusion of download formats in the Official UK Singles Chart is the most significant development in the charts for 20 years.
"But for a multitude of reasons the current chart representation of independent repertoire at the major download outlets is poor. "I am very pleased we have secured this delay on behalf of independents. We have to try and establish a realistic 'level playing field' of opportunity. The Official UK Charts are run by The Official UK Charts Company (OCC) - a joint venture between the BPI and the British Association of Record Dealers (BARD). At an OCC board meeting on Wednesday, the OCC board agreed with BPI members that the 20 March start date be postponed. Download formats will now be included in the Official UK Singles Chart for the first time in the chart published on 17 April - the sales week beginning 10 April. The US has already merged downloaded singles into its Billboard Hot 100 chart.

Rapper films music video in jail
A US rapper awaiting trial for murder has filmed part of a music video in jail, angering a sheriff who says he was tricked into letting TV crews in.
C-Murder, a former member of rap group Tru, was filmed in his orange prison suit for the video for his Y'all Heard of Me single in a New Orleans jail. He is awaiting a second trial after an original conviction was thrown out. "I'm not pleased," Jefferson Parish Sheriff Harry Lee said. "He will not make another video in my jail." Footage for the video was filmed by two crews who had permission to interview C-Murder - one from Court TV and one from a local cable show.
But Mr Lee said he did not know the rapper had filmed the video and made an album behind bars, and said he was fooled into letting the cameras in. The rapper's lawyer Ron Rakosky said: "The bottom line is, we didn't do anything wrong." Mr Rakosky said it was better than C-Murder, real name Corey Miller, "just sitting there, wasting away". "Here's a guy in jail, making constructive use of his time instead of withering away," he said. "He's lost more than three years of his life, locked up for a crime he did not commit."
But local group Victims and Citizens Against Crime said he should not be working behind bars. "He is a suspect in a murder case. I don't think he should be allowed these privileges, especially earning money, until his name is totally cleared," the group's president Beverly Siemssen said. In 2003, C-Murder was found guilty of killing a 16-year-old in a nightclub, but that decision was thrown out last April. He is now facing a second trial on a charge of second-degree murder. With two brothers in the group Tru, he had two US top 10 albums in the late 1990s before going solo, when he scored another three top 10 albums.

Music man to the Oscars
Bill Conti's job of musical director of the Oscars show is not for the faint-hearted since conducting the orchestra is the ultimate plate-spinning assignment.
This year marks Conti's 17th turn at the helm of the Academy Awards orchestra. "The excitement is a live performance as a musician," he says. "All of your colleagues, everyone in the film industry is in the theatre. All the important people. "I guess it's just a television show but we always think it's a bit more.' The orchestra strikes up more than 110 times during the average Oscars show. As well as playing the presenters and winners on and off stage, it also performs during the commercial breaks to entertain the live audience in the house.
"It's a very busy evening, it takes a certain amount of preparation of music, orchestrating, sketching rehearsing, before the show. But you don't know what the unexpected will be and as the musical director, it's exciting," explains Conti. And much of the preparation goes into mastering scores that will never be performed. "We don't know who the winners will be. So when they say, 'the winner is', we have five different pieces of music in front of us, they say the name, we play the appropriate one immediately," adds Conti.
The orchestra is often called upon to play when the winners ramble on too long during their acceptance speeches, despite being told to be brief by the show's producers.
The decision to drown out or 'kill' the offending star with music is relayed from the director's box to the orchestra via Conti's earpiece. "I don't feel good about it at all. It's not my call though," he says. "When the director says 'music' the orchestra plays and he takes a long shot of the hall. We don't usually see the person speaking while his microphone is cut off. "The person that's been cut off, who's 10 feet from me, is glaring at me like it's death time." On occasions, some stars have taken it upon themselves to send a warning shot across the bows of the musical director before they start to speak. "Julia Roberts, when she came on, she asked me to not get ready to play because she had so much to do," he says. Conti received an Oscar in 1983 for the original score of The Right Stuff. He also received two nominations in the original song category in 1976 for Gonna Fly Now from Rocky and in 1981 for the title song from For Your Eyes Only.
"It's a moment in the sun," he says. "When people get up there, some people, this is hard to believe, people that spend their lives in front of the camera or audiences entertaining, might get a little flustered. "But there's this moment in time when the biggest award that they could possibly get in their life has been handed to them and they're either not in control or they want to thank everyone that they ever met."
The image of the Oscars telecast is one of slick presentation and smooth transitions between performances and the award categories. Behind the scenes, the key players, such as Conti, have a bewildering array of technical props to deal with. "There's a big script and video monitors you have to watch and there are also audio controls. I can control hearing in my ears, the left ear or the right ear - different things at different times.
"I have to communicate with the director. I have a little microphone that's attached to my headset. To open up that microphone, I have a footswitch," he explains. Conti's most nerve-wracking moment came during his first Oscars show as musical director, in 1977, when a member of the orchestra alerted him that they could smell smoke. Conti immediately told the show's director: "I start cursing and screaming, I tell him we're not going to die for this show - you must do something or I'm going to climb out of this pit with 60 musicians and we're going to be home in 10 minutes. "'Oh no Bill don't do anything," came the response. "Imagine these elegantly dressed ladies and gentlemen of the orchestra, 60 or so of them in the pit and while we're playing, firemen with their helmets and their hatchets crawling among us trying to find the reason for the smoke." The smell turned out to be new paint smouldering on the music stands. "No one died, it's not a big story, but it was scary at the time," laughs Conti. When the ceremony is over, the music director attends the annual Governor's Ball with his family. "I have a drink and relive the show," he says. "I'm not for too much carousing. I go home and unwind. It takes me about a day."

Baghdad Blogger on big screen
A film based on the internet musings of the "Baghdad Blogger" has been shown at the Rotterdam Film Festival.
The film has been directed by the man who calls himself Salam Pax, the author of the weblog about Iraqi life during and after the war. The movie version comes in the form of a series of shorts made by Pax on a hand-held camera. Baghdad Blogger is among a number of films about Iraq showcased at the Dutch festival, which runs until Sunday. Following the fascination with the writing of Salam Pax - not his real name - he began a regular column in The Guardian newspaper and was given a crash course in documentary film-making. For the film he travelled Iraq to document the changing landscape of the country and the problems it has faced since the invasion, speaking to ordinary Iraqis about their experiences. The festival will also see the screening of Underexposure, one of Iraq's first features to emerge since the toppling of Saddam Hussein.
Director Oday Rasheed made the film on discarded 1980s Kodak film taken from the remains for the former Ministry of Culture building. It centres on the lives of families and strangers going about their everyday business as Baghdad is under siege. Rasheed said the title was refers to the isolation felt by Iraqis under Saddam's regime and the difficult time the country is now experiencing. "Saddam's regime was hell, but now I think the hell has doubled," Rasheed said. The festival was also due to screen murdered Dutch film-maker Theo Van Gogh's film about the treatment of woman under Islam, but it was withdrawn due to safety fears. Van Gogh was shot and stabbed in November 2004, following death threats he received about his film Submission.

Church urges Nelly show boycott
Church ministers are trying to prevent rapper Nelly performing in Arkansas, saying they do not want his "vile and filthy lyrics" in their town.
More than 20 Jonesboro ministers urged music fans to boycott Nelly's 12 March concert at Arkansas State University in a bid to have it cancelled. "Jonesboro is a wonderful city because of what does not come here," said the Reverend Adrian Rodgers. But a venue spokesman said more than 5,500 tickets had been sold so far.
Mr Rodgers, of the Fullness of Joy Church, said he was concerned about the rapper's lyrics that include references to drugs, sex and violence, and songs that the minister said were demeaning to women. Ministers were worried that bringing such acts to Jonesboro would lead to problems. "Tear the tickets up," Mr Rodgers said. "Do not go and do not allow your children to go."
Tim Dean, director of the Arkansas State University venue, said ticket sales had been brisk. "It would appear that with ticket sales over 5,000, many others have expressed their right to find Nelly's music entertaining and worth spending their time and money on," he said. Nelly has sold more than 30 million singles and albums worldwide, and in September 2004 simultaneously occupied the number one and two positions in the US albums chart. He has had 12 UK hit singles, including Hot in Herre, Dilemma and recent number one Over and Over.

Rap feud in 50 Cent's G-Unit crew
US rap star 50 Cent has said he has thrown protege The Game out of his G-Unit gang in a feud that has apparently involved two shootings.
In a radio interview on Monday, 50 Cent said the newcomer was disloyal in conflicts with other rappers. A man was shot in the thigh outside New York's Hot 97 studios while 50 Cent was on air. More shots were fired outside his management offices two hours later. 50 Cent appeared on The Game's debut album, which was number one in the US. 50 Cent, whose second album is about to be released after his debut made him one of hip-hop's biggest stars, has been involved in recent rivalries with fellow artists including Fat Joe, Nas and Jadakiss.
He has claimed credit for the success of The Game, who has become the hottest new star on the rap scene. Both were drug dealers and were shot before turning to music.
In an interview with Hot 97 on Saturday, The Game described some of 50 Cent's rivals as "my friends" and said he would not turn on them. "Nas is one of my friends, and Jada's really a homie," he said. "50's beef is 50's beef and I really don't know where all this stems from." When 50 Cent appeared on the same station two days later, he said The Game was no longer a member of G-Unit. "Every record he's selling is based on me being on his record with him," he said. When the shooting took place outside the studio, the interview was ended and the rapper was escorted out of the building by security personnel.
An unidentified 24-year-old Los Angeles man is stable with a gunshot wound to the upper thigh. Police say The Game's associates may have heard the interview and gone to the studio, where they confronted 50 Cent's entourage. Officers are also investigating a later shooting in which eight bullets were fired into the door of 50 Cent's management company, Violator. No arrests have been made in relation to either incident. 50 Cent's second album, The Massacre, is released on Thursday, five weeks after The Game's debut, Documentary, went to number one.
Elliott Wilson, editor-in-chief of hip-hop magazine XXL, said the feud would boost publicity for 50 Cent's release. "It helps him obviously in terms of exposure. You can't ask for better promotion," he said. But he added: "I think he's making more and more enemies. "You definitely feel like is he doing too much of a Tupac spiral, like me against the world. You bring more people wanting to see you fail." Tupac Shakur was shot dead in 1996.

Prodigy join V Festival line-up
Essex act Prodigy are to headline the second stage at this year's V Festival, joining main stage headliners Scissor Sisters and Franz Ferdinand.
The event, which is in its 10th year, will be held at two venues - Hylands Park in Essex and Weston Park in Staffordshire on 20 and 21 August. Meanwhile, rock veterans New Order have joined the T in the Park line-up alongside Athlete and Green Day. The Manchester band will play on 9 July at Scotland's biggest festival. It will be their debut performance at the music event which is held over the weekend of 9 and 10 July in Balado near Kinross. Other bands at the sold-out festival include Queens of the Stone Age, The Killers, Keane, The Streets and Foo Fighters.
A month later at the V Festival, Prodigy will play at Weston Park on Saturday 20 August and Hylands Park on Sunday 21 August and the Chemical Brothers vice versa. It will be the Chemical Brothers' only UK festival performance of the year. V festival director Bob Angus said: "With the Prodigy and the Chemical Brothers now confirmed to headline the second stage, we are headed for a really stellar line-up. "We pride ourselves on putting on an unbeatable live music experience and V Festival 2005 will not disappoint." Tickets for the V festival go on sale on Friday 11 March.

DJ double act revamp chart show
DJ duo JK and Joel are taking over BBC Radio 1's flagship chart show on Sunday, adding showbiz news, celebrity interviews and between-song banter.
They hope to boost ratings for the long-running show, which has been overtaken in popularity by independent radio's Hit 40 UK rundown. "Radio 1's chart show is an institution and remains the station's single most popular show," says JK, also known as Jason King. "For years people have been tuning in at four o'clock with their tape recorders ready to record their favourite tunes. Not that I ever did that. "But things have moved on a lot now so it was time for a change."
That change involved ejecting previous host Wes Butters and relocating King and DJ partner Joel Ross from their weekend afternoon Radio 1 slot. The pair have worked together for a decade - meeting on Viking Radio in Hull before moving to Manchester station Key 103 and winning two Sony Radio awards. They also presented gadget series Playboyz and car show Motor Maniacs for cable TV channel Granada Men and Motors, and Pure Soap on BBC Three.
On the revamped chart show their cheeky, laddish banter will punctuate star interviews and competitions, film and DVD charts plus a look at future single releases, in addition to the singles chart itself. "The chart rundown is no longer the only point of the programme," says Ross. "The show used to be the only way to discover who was in the Top 40. Now you can just click on the internet to find that out, so the show has plenty of extra items too." The show's reduced reliance upon the Top 40 also reflects the fact that music fans are now more likely to download songs in digital format rather than buy them on compact disc, vinyl or cassette.
"I personally buy downloads rather than CD singles," says 27-year-old Ross. "Even my grandma can download songs now. JK is still struggling with the technology, though." "But it's premature for people to say that the singles chart is dead," Ross adds. "While sales of singles on traditional formats are down, interest in songs has been revived by download sales, which will be incorporated into our main chart rundown from April. "Music fans still want to know what is the most popular song of the week."
Ross will be plumping for chart success from rapper Verbalicious and the Stereophonics on Sunday, while King is more of an R&B and dance music fan. "So listeners will get the advantage of both our music tastes," says King, 30, who describes outgoing host Butters as "an extremely professional and competent broadcaster".
"The advantage Joel and I have is that we're a double act, with a rapport between us that makes the show much more interactive," King says. "Wes has a great broadcasting career ahead of him. And if not, I could always use a cleaner," he jokes. Ross says the pair have done their best to ignore the weight of expectation placed upon the revamped show. "Other people can worry about that, we are going to continue doing what we do well," he says. "At the end of the day this is a radio show that is meant to be entertaining. Nobody died."

Rapper 50 Cent scores chart first
Rapper 50 Cent has become the first solo artist to have three singles in the US top five in the same week.
His track Candy Shop remained at the top of the charts, while Disco Inferno crept up from six to five. 50 Cent also appears on rap protege The Game's song How We do, number four in the US but now outside the UK top ten. The pair had a recent dispute which saw The Game thrown out of 50 Cent's rap collective G-Unit, accusing him of disloyalty in an ongoing feud.
50 Cent, who burst onto the music scene in 2003, has had less success in the UK charts, with three singles making the top ten. His debut album, Get Rich And Die Tryin', narrowly missed out on becoming a UK chart topper.
But in the US, he headed the 2003 end of year charts for the album and R&B and hip hop artists. Newcomer The Game's debut reached the top of the charts five weeks ago, while 50 Cent's second collection The Masscre was released in the US at the end of last week. Last May, R&B star Usher scored a chart first, with three concurrent singles in the US Top 10, a feat which was previously matched only by The Bee Gees and The Beatles. The hit songs were taken from the 24-year-old's Confessions album, which topped the American chart for eight weeks.

Goodrem wins top female MTV prize
Pop singer Delta Goodrem has scooped one of the top individual prizes at the first Australian MTV Music Awards.
The 21-year-old singer won the award for best female artist, with Australian Idol runner-up Shannon Noll taking the title of best male at the ceremony. Goodrem, known in both Britain and Australia for her role as Nina Tucker in TV soap Neighbours, also performed a duet with boyfriend Brian McFadden. Other winners included Green Day, voted best group, and the Black Eyed Peas. Goodrem, Green Day and the Black Eyed Peas took home two awards each. As well as best female, Goodrem also took home the Pepsi Viewers Choice Award, whilst Green Day bagged the prize for best rock video for American Idiot. The Black Eyed Peas won awards for best R 'n' B video and sexiest video, both for Hey Mama. Local singer and songwriter Missy Higgins took the title of breakthrough artist of the year, with Australian Idol winner Guy Sebastian taking the honours for best pop video. The VH1 First Music Award went to Cher honouring her achievements within the music industry. The ceremony was held at the Luna Park fairground in Sydney Harbour and was hosted by the Osbourne family. Artists including Carmen Electra, Missy Higgins, Kelly Osbourne, Green Day, Ja Rule and Natalie Imbruglia gave live performances at the event.

REM announce new Glasgow concert
US band REM have announced plans to perform for 10,000 Scottish fans in a rescheduled gig.
The band will play in what has been dubbed Europe's biggest tent on Glasgow Green on Tuesday, 14 June. They were forced to pull out of a concert at the SECC in Glasgow last month after bassist Mike Mills contracted flu. Fans who bought tickets for the original 22 February show can attend the rescheduled concert. The June gig will act as a warm-up for REM's open air concert at Balloch Castle Country Park, on the banks of Loch Lomond, four days later.
Promoters Regular Music booked Glasgow Green as the SECC was not available on the most suitable date. Mark Mackie, director of Regular Music, said: "It is fantastic news and it really shows REM's commitment to their Scottish fans that they are coming back to Glasgow for what will be a truly unique gig." The REM gigs will kick-start what promises to be a memorable summer for Scottish music lovers.
Grammy Award winners U2 will play Hampden on 21 June while Oasis will also perform at the national stadium in Glasgow on 29 June. Coldplay have announced a concert at Bellahouston Park in Glasgow on 1 July and T in the Park will be held at Balado, near Kinross, from 9-10 July. Ticketweb and the SECC box office will write to customers who bought tickets for the February gig asking if they want to attend the new show. Those who bought tickets in person are being urged to return to the point of purchase. Anyone who cannot make the concert will be given a refund. The cut-off date for swapping tickets is 1 April, when those remaining will go on sale to the public.

Rapper 50 Cent ends protege feud
Rapper 50 Cent has ended his public feud with his protege The Game as the pair said they wanted to be good role models for their communities.
The row blew up when 50 Cent threw The Game out of his G-Unit crew and accused him of being disloyal. A member of The Game's entourage was reportedly shot outside a radio station where 50 Cent was being interviewed. But the pair shook hands as they handed over money to music projects for New York's deprived areas on Wednesday.
The Game, whose real name is Jayceon Taylor, told a news conference: "I want to apologise. I'm almost ashamed to have participated in the things that went on over the last few weeks." Chart-topper 50 Cent, real name Curtis Jackson, said the truce came on the anniversary of the death of the Notorious BIG in 1997, who was part of a volatile feud between the east and west coast rap scenes. "We're here today to show that people can rise above the most difficult circumstances and together we can put negativity behind us," 50 Cent said.
"A lot of people don't want to see it happen, but we're responding to the two most important groups - our family and our fans." The Boys Choir of Harlem got a cheque for $150,000 (£77,800) from 50 Cent, while The Game handed over $103,500 (£53,400). The Game also made a contribution to the Compton schools music programme. 50 Cent announced he has launched the G-Unity Foundation "to help people overcome obstacles and make a chance for the better in their lives".
"I realised that if I'm going to be effective at that, I have to overcome some of my own," he said. "Game and I need to set an example in the community." 50 Cent is no stranger to feuds, with rapper Ja Rule among the targets for ridicule in his songs. On his latest album, released earlier this month, he turned his attentions to Fat Joe and Nas, who have both worked with Ja Rule. Both he and The Game have admitted drug dealing in the past and have both been shot.

Musicians to tackle US red tape
Musicians' groups are to tackle US visa regulations which are blamed for hindering British acts' chances of succeeding across the Atlantic.
A singer hoping to perform in the US can expect to pay $1,300 (£680) simply for obtaining a visa. Groups including the Musicians' Union are calling for an end to the "raw deal" faced by British performers. US acts are not faced with comparable expense and bureaucracy when visiting the UK for promotional purposes.
Nigel McCune from the Musicians' Union said British musicians are "disadvantaged" compared to their US counterparts. A sponsor has to make a petition on their behalf, which is a form amounting to nearly 30 pages, while musicians face tougher regulations than athletes and journalists. "If you make a mistake on your form, you risk a five-year ban and thus the ability to further your career," says Mr McCune.
"The US is the world's biggest music market, which means something has to be done about the creaky bureaucracy," says Mr McCune. "The current situation is preventing British acts from maintaining momentum and developing in the US," he added.
The Musicians' Union stance is being endorsed by the Music Managers' Forum (MMF), who say British artists face "an uphill struggle" to succeed in the US, thanks to the tough visa requirements, which are also seen as impractical. The MMF's general secretary James Seller said: "Imagine if you were an orchestra from the Orkneys? Every member would have to travel to London to have their visas processed."
"The US market is seen as the holy grail and one of the benchmarks of success, and we're still going to fight to get in there. "It's still very important, but there are other markets like Europe, India and China," added Mr Seller. A Department for Media, Culture and Sport spokeswoman said: "We're aware that people are experiencing problems, and are working with the US embassy and record industry to see what we can do about it." A US Embassy spokesman said: "We are aware that entertainers require visas for time-specific visas and are doing everything we can to process those applications speedily." "We are aware of the importance of cultural exchange and we will do our best to facilitate that," he added.

Angels by Robbie Williams is the song Britons would most like played at their funeral, a survey has suggested.
While the melancholy hit topped the UK poll, Europeans favoured Queen's more upbeat anthem The Show Must Go On as their first choice. Frank Sinatra's My Way was second in the UK vote with Monty Python's Always Look on the Bright Side of Life in third place. More than 45,000 people were surveyed by digital TV station Music Choice.
The European chart, which included Denmark, France and Germany, put Led Zeppelin's Stairway to Heaven in second and AC/DC's Highway to Hell in third. Queen's Who Wants to Live Forever was highly favoured by both UK and European voters.
Both lists featured only one traditional or classic song each, with Britons requesting the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards' Amazing Grace and their continental counterparts opting for Mozart's Requiem. "Wanting to share your most treasured musical gem with those you're leaving behind is the perfect way to sign off and leave a lasting impression," Music Choice music and marketing manager Simon George said.

US critics laud comedy Sideways
Road trip comedy Sideways has had more praise heaped on it by two US critics' associations, adding to honours it has already picked up.
The Chicago Film Critics Association (CFCA) named it winner in five categories including best film and best actor for Paul Giamatti. But the director award went to Clint Eastwood for Million Dollar Baby. The Southeastern Film Critics also awarded Sideways its best film of the year accolade. Director Alexander Payne was named best director, and he also won best screenplay shared with Jim Taylor. The CFCA awarded Thomas Haden Church the best supporting actor prize and Virginia Madsen the best supporting actress award for their roles in the film.
Sideways has already been voted best film by critics associations in New York and Los Angeles and has been nominated for a Golden Globe. British actress Imelda Staunton won the CFCA best actress for the gritty abortion drama Vera Drake, adding to a growing list of awards she has won for her performance in the Mike Leigh film. Scrubs star Zach Braff was named best new director for his debut Garden State. Michael Moore's controversial documentary Fahrenheit 9/11 won the best documentary, while A Very Long Engagement won best foreign film. The Chicago critics have yet to name a date for when their awards ceremony will be held.

U2 stars enter rock Hall of Fame
Singer Bruce Springsteen has inducted Irish rock band U2 into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, in New York.
The lavish ceremony, celebrating the 50th anniversary of rock 'n' roll, also saw the induction of the Pretenders, Percy Sledge, the O'Jays and Buddy Guy. "This was a band that wanted to lay claim to this world and the next one, too," said Springsteen. Bono, The Edge, Adam Clayton and Larry Mullen Jr, who formed U2 at school in 1977, begin a world tour on 28 March. Introducing the band, Springsteen mocked Bono as the man who "single-handedly pioneered the Irish mullet", poking fun at "one of the best and most endearingly messianic complexes in rock 'n' roll". But he also spoke of the group's enduring stature, adding that it was the only band of the last 20 years where he knew all four members' names.
U2's contemporaries, the Pretenders, led by Chrissie Hynde - took to the stage to perform My City Was Gone with inductee Neil Young. "We are a tribute band," said Hynde, 53. "We're paying tribute to James Honeyman-Scott and Pete Farndon, without whom we would not have been here," she said, referring to the premature deaths of two of the band's guitarists from drug overdoses.
Britain's Rod Stewart introduced Percy Sledge, citing his best-known hit When a Man loves a Woman as "one of the best performances I've ever heard". Justin Timberlake introduced soul group the O'Jays, a gospel-style quartet from Ohio, who performed a medley of their best-known songs including Back Stabbers, Love Train and For the Love of Money. "Anyone who's ever written, produced or performed something soulful stands in the shadows of these giants," said Timberlake.
Joining the ceremony at New York's Waldorf Astoria were legendary R&B star Bo Diddley, who performed with Eric Clapton and Robbie Robertson.
Clapton, alongside BB King, also introduced fellow guitarist Buddy Guy and recalled seeing him play as a teenager in England. "He was for me what Elvis was probably like for other people," he said. "My course was set and he was my pilot," said Clapton who joined Guy and King in a performance of Let Me Love You Baby. Also performing at the ceremony was veteran musician Jerry Lee Lewis who continued his reputation as a rowdy piano-pounder despite his 69 years, kicking over his stool and sitting on the piano during a rendition of Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin' On.

Tough schedule delays Elliot show
Preview performances of the £3m musical Billy Elliot have been delayed to give the child actors a less arduous rehearsal schedule.
Director Stephen Daldry made the decision to re-schedule the previews to protect the young stars. Three boys will rotate the demanding role of ballet dancer Billy, which requires them to sing, dance and act. The show's opening night on 12 May at the Victoria Palace Theatre in London remains unaffected by the changes. Preview performances will now be held on 14, 20 and 27 April. "This is one of the most ambitious projects I have been involved with," said Daldry. "The decision has been made to push back our preview performances in order to give our company, with a cast including 45 children, a little extra time so they are as fully prepared as possible."
He added: "The young Billy Elliots in particular, making their professional stage debuts in the West End, will benefit from a little extra time to familiarise themselves with all aspects of the production."
The three boys playing Billy are James Lomas, 15, George Maguire, 14, and Liam Mower, 12. The other major child parts will also be rotated between young actors. Such are the demands of the show that producers set up a stage school in Newcastle to train potential stars for the show. Child labour laws also mean the young actors can only work for a limited period each week. Adult actors in the show include Tim Healy as Billy's father and Haydn Gwnne as his dance teacher Mrs Wilkinson. Sir Elton John has composed the music. Daldry directed the successful film version of Billy Elliot, adapted from Lee Hall's script. Both were nominated for Oscars, alongside Julie Walters, who played Billy's teacher.

Singer Ian Brown 'in gig arrest'
Former Stone Roses singer Ian Brown was arrested after a fight during a concert in San Francisco on Tuesday, his spokesman has said.
A fan jumped on stage and attacked the singer, who then became involved in a fracas with a security guard, Fiction Records spokesman Paul Smernicki said. He said Brown was arrested at his hotel after the show at the Great American Music Hall but released without charge. San Francisco police said they could find no record of his arrest. Mr Smernicki said he had been told a fan "rugby-tackled" the singer during the gig, which resulted in "pushing and shoving".
Brown then got into a brawl with another man who tried to restrain him - without realising he was a security guard, Mr Smernicki added. The star went off for 15 minutes before returning to finish his set. Police took witness statements and apprehended Brown at his hotel, Mr Smernicki said. But he was released without charge and "as far as we're aware, that's the end of it", Mr Smernicki added. A spokesperson for the San Francisco Police Department said he may have been detained but they could find no record of the incident. Brown, 42, was lead singer with The Stone Roses, one of the most seminal bands in British rock, until they split in 1996. He has since forged a successful solo career, scoring nine UK top 30 singles since 1998. In 1998, he was sentenced to four months in jail for using threatening behaviour towards an aeroplane captain and stewardess.

No UK premiere for Rings musical
The producers behind the Lord of the Rings musical have abandoned plans to premiere the show in London because no suitable theatre was available.
The £11.5m show will make its debut in Toronto in March 2006, after it was found that all three West End theatres with sufficient capacity were booked. The musical is not expected in London before December 2006. Producer Kevin Wallace said it would be "worth waiting for". "It will be like nothing they have ever seen before." "I know there will be a lot of disappointed British Tolkien fans who hoped to see the show in London, but we couldn't get a London theatre in time," added the British producer. The world premiere of the stage musical, co-produced by Canadian theatrical impresarios David and Ed Mirvish, will take place at Toronto's Princess of Wales Theatre next year.
"Toronto really wanted this premiere. The Tolkien books and films are hugely popular in Canada," said Mr Wallace, shortly after signing the deal in Canada. "We hope the anticipation and excitement over here will create an even bigger buzz by the time we open in London." Auditions begin in Canada on Thursday, but up to five British actors may join the cast, under a deal struck with Canadian Actors' Equity. The music for the show is being written by Bollywood composer AR Rahman, who was behind Andrew Lloyd Webber's West End musical Bollywood Dreams, and in conjuction with the Finnish group Varttina.
"There will be no singing and dancing Hobbits. The music will be in a very traditional mould and draw on ethnic traditions," assured Mr Wallace. The musical's British director is Matthew Warchus, best known for staging the worldwide stage hit Art. "The production will be a hybrid of text, physical theatre, music and spectacle never previously seen on this scale," he said. "Only in the theatre are we actually plunged into the events as they happen. The environment surrounds us and we are in Middle Earth." New Zealander Peter Jackson took 10 years to bring JRR Tolkien's fantasy trilogy to the big screen, winning Academy Awards for best film and best director for the final film The Return of the King in 2004.

Dame Julie pops in to see Poppins
Mary Poppins star Dame Julie Andrews watched the hit stage version of her classic film at a charity performance in London's West End.
It was the first time Dame Julie, who shot to fame as the nanny in the 1964 Disney movie, had seen the musical, staged at the Prince Edward Theatre. She watched Laura Michelle Kelly, 23, reprise the role on stage. The show has been one of the West End's hottest tickets since opening in December, winning two Olivier Awards. Kelly was named best musical actress at last month's ceremony and the musical also won best choreography.
But Kelly said she was "very nervous" about meeting Dame Julie because she was "my absolute hero". The gala performance saw Dame Julie, 69, return to the theatre where she had her first starring role in a performance of Humpty Dumpty in 1948. The Mary Poppins musical has been masterminded by theatre impresario Sir Cameron Mackintosh and directed by Richard Eyre with choreography by Matthew Bourne. Sir Cameron said he hoped the production, which cost £9m to bring to the stage, was a blend of the sweet-natured film and the original book by PL Travers. Proceeds from Thursday's show will go to charities including Absolute Return for Kids (Ark), international relief agency Operation USA and drama school Lamda.

Snow Patrol bassist exits group
Snow Patrol had "no other course of action" but to ask their co-founder and bassist to leave the band, lead singer Gary Lightbody has said.
Mark McClelland had been in the band for more than 10 years since its formation at Dundee University. Lightbody said "over the last 18 months touring has taken its toll on the rest of the band's relationship with him". He said: "This is the hardest decision we have ever had to make and believe us when we say we didn't make it lightly." The group, originally from Northern Ireland, has only achieved mainstream success in the last year with the single Run and award-winning album Final Straw. In a statement on the band's website, Lightbody said: "I started the group with Mark 10 years ago and he was a massive part of Snow Patrol and my life throughout that decade."
He added: "It got to the stage that things couldn't go on as they were, so we felt there was no other course of action but this. "I know you will all be distressed and may not understand this news but we had to do what was best for the band." Snow Patrol are currently working on the follow-up to their breakthrough third album. The band is set to play support to U2 on a number of summer stadium gigs. Last month, they were the big winners in Ireland's top music honours, the Meteor Awards, picking up accolades for best band and album. It followed nominations for the Brit Awards and the Mercury Music Prize. The band formed in 1994 when Lightbody and McClelland met as students at Dundee University.

Fockers keeps US box office lead
Film comedy Meet The Fockers, sequel to Meet The Parents, has topped the US box office for a third week.
The movie, which stars Ben Stiller, Robert De Niro, Dustin Hoffman and Barbra Streisand, took $28.5m (£15.2m), making a total of 204.3m (£109m). Michael Keaton thriller White Noise was second with $24m (£12.8m) despite negative reviews. Martin Scorsese's Howard Hughes biopic The Aviator came third with $7.6m (£4m) and a total of $42.9m (£22.8m). Children's adventure Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events, starring Jim Carrey and Meryl Streep, fell two places to fourth position with $7.4m (£3.9m).
It is also the ninth Jim Carrey film to hit the $100m (£53.2m) mark, according to Exhibitor Relations. And Fat Albert, a live-action adaptation of Bill Cosby's TV cartoon, fell one place to number five, with takings over the three days beginning on Friday of $5m (£2.6m). Ocean's Twelve took sixth place in the US chart with $5.4m (£2.8m), but it led the non-US chart at the weekend, according to Hollywood Reporter, with an estimated $17.7m (£9.4m) and total takings of $137m (£73m). The Incredibles took $300m (£160m) outside the US, while Meet the Fockers topped box office charts in Australia and Mexico with non-US takings of $19.35m (£10.2m).

Spider-Man creator Stan Lee is to get a multi-million dollar windfall after winning a court battle with comic book company Marvel.
A judge has upheld Lee's demand for 10% of Marvel's profits from the hugely successful Spider-Man films. Spider-Man and its sequel made $1.6bn (£857m) at box offices worldwide. Of the cut now due to Lee, 82, who created Spider-Man in 1962, his lawyer said: "It could be tens of millions of dollars, that's no exaggeration." US District Court Judge Robert W Sweet ruled Lee should get a tenth of profits generated since November 1998 by Marvel TV and movie productions involving the company's characters. Lee took legal action in 2002, saying Marvel shut him out of "jackpot" profits from the first blockbuster film.
He said the company - where he worked for more than 60 years - had gone back on agreement to give him the 10%. As well as Spider-Man, Lee co-created the Incredible Hulk, X-Men, Daredevil and Fantastic Four characters. He said: "I am gratified by the judge's decision although, since I am deeply fond of Marvel and the people there, I sincerely regret that the situation had to come to this." The ruling also means he is entitled to a slice of profits from DVD sales and certain merchandise. Marvel said it would appeal and did not expect the decision to impact on financial forecasts for 2004 and beyond. The New York court did not rule on Lee's claims to a share of profits from some Spider-Man and Hulk movie merchandise, which will be decided at a future trial, Marvel said.

Fry set for role in Hitchhiker's
Actor Stephen Fry is joining the cast of the forthcoming film adaptation of The Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy.
Fry will provide the voice of The Guide, an electronic book which accompanies the story's hero Arthur Dent on his travels around the galaxy. Martin Freeman, John Malkovich, Bill Nighy and Alan Rickman are co-starring in the film, due for release in May. The late Douglas Adams' original 1977 scripts have also been turned into a series of successful books.
"Being asked to do the voice of The Guide is like having your birthday on Christmas Day, discovering a winning lottery ticket in your stocking and having chocolate poured all over you," said Fry, a self-confessed fan of the book. The film's executive producer Robbie Stamp said that Adams, who died in 2001, would have been "delighted" with the choice of Fry for the role.
"His humour and intelligence are perfect for the voice of The Guide," added Mr Stamp. Adams wrote the screenplay based on his book before his premature death, while a new radio series was aired 26 years after the first broadcast and included many of the original cast members. Hollywood star Malkovich will play religious cult leader Humma Kavula, which was especially created by Adams for the new film. Freeman, who starred in hit BBC comedy The Office, will play the role of Arthur Dent, who begins his intergalactic voyage following the destruction of the Earth.

British actress Antonia Bernath is making her debut in Kisna - the Warrior Poet, marking a growing trend for non-Indian stars to appear in Bollywood films.
Directed by Bollywood veteran Subhash Ghai, the film is set in the British Raj and Bernath plays an army general's daughter who falls in love with a rural boy, Kisna. "I liked the fluid nature of film-making. We improvised quite a lot," says Bernath. "At times it felt very chaotic but Mr Ghai was quite clear about what he wanted." Picked from more than 200 girls in an audition in London, Bernath cut short her education at Bristol's Old Vic Theatre School to take up the opportunity. It is not often that somebody gets to play the lead role straight out of a drama school. She spent three weeks learning Hindi and taking dance lessons. "Initially, I was a bit sceptical about how people would respond to me," Bernath says. "But I found the Hindi film industry very warm and encouraging. I even had a few offers before the work on Kisna was completed."
Films are one of India's biggest exports and those like Lagaan and Monsoon Wedding have broken the traditional boundaries of colour and culture. Spurred by this, Bollywood producers are trying to go global in all aspects of film-making, be it technical or artistic.
From young heart-throbs like Nick Moran of Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels to model Sophie Dahl, many non-Indian stars want to make the most of this opportunity. "Bollywood has truly gone global," says Taran Adarsh, editor of Indian film journal Trade Guide. "Directors are now attempting to woo non-Asian audience to increase their share in the overseas film market." Kisna has been shot simultaneously in Hindi and English, with the English print shortened by an hour to accommodate the Western audience. The film even has a song composed in English by AR Rahman, the director of the popular West End musical, Bombay Dreams. "Identification is a popular cinematic device. Use of European or American actors can be viewed as a step in that direction," says Adarsh.
The cast of Kisna also includes British actors Michael Maloney, Caroline Langrishe and Polly Adams.
Another actress, Annabelle Wallace, plays the lead role in a bilingual romantic comedy Dil Jo Bhi Kahey (Whatever the Heart Says), which also stars Indian screen legend Amitabh Bachchan. Actor and Producer Aamir Khan's forthcoming venture The Rising is set against the backdrop of the Indian mutiny of 1857, with British actor Toby Stephens in a key role. But it isn't only the Western actors looking eastwards. Bollywood sweetheart Aishwarya Rai, recently seen in Bride and Prejudice alongside New Zealand actor Martin Henderson, is building her international career. And, many other Bollywood stars have their eyes set on Hollywood. "Hollywood or Bollywood, it's the box office that determines whether something is a passing phase or a trend," says Adarsh.
Kisna - the Warrior Poet opens in the UK on 21 January.

Richard and Judy choose top books
The 10 authors shortlisted for a Richard and Judy book award in 2005 are hoping for a boost in sales following the success of this year's winner.
The TV couple's interest in the book world coined the term "the Richard & Judy effect" and created the top two best-selling paperbacks of 2004 so far. The finalists for 2005 include Andrew Taylor's The American Boy and Robbie Williams' autobiography Feel. This year's winner, Alice Sebold's The Lovely Bones, sold over one million. Joseph O'Connor's Star of the Sea came second and saw sales increase by 350%. The best read award, on Richard Madeley and Judy Finnigan's Channel 4 show, is part of the British Book Awards. David Mitchell's Booker-shortlisted novel, Cloud Atlas, makes it into this year's top 10 along with several lesser known works.
"There's no doubt that this year's selection of book club entries is the best yet. If anything, the choice is even wider than last time," said Madeley. "It was very hard to follow last year's extremely successful list, but we think this year's books will do even better," said Richard and Judy executive producer Amanda Ross. "We were spoiled for choice and it was tough getting down to only 10 from the 301 submitted."

Dirty Den's demise seen by 14m
More than 14 million people saw "Dirty" Den Watts killed off on Friday, marking EastEnders' 20th anniversary, according to unofficial figures.
Den's death came 16 years after he was supposedly shot in 1989. But he came back to the show in September 2003. The audience for BBC One's one-hour special averaged 13.7 million and peaked at 14.2 million in the last 15 minutes, overnight figures showed. Den died after being confronted by Zoe, Chrissie and Sam in the Queen Vic.
If the ratings are confirmed, the episode will have given the soap its highest audience for a year. The overnight figures showed almost 60% of the viewing public tuned into EastEnders between 2000 and 2100 GMT, leaving ITV1 with about 13%. "We are very pleased with the figures," a BBC spokesman said. "It shows viewers have really enjoyed the story of Den's demise." The show's highest audience came at Christmas 1986, when more than 30 million tuned in to see Den, played by Leslie Grantham, hand divorce papers to wife Angie.
Two years later, 24 million saw him apparently shot by a man with a bunch of daffodils by a canal. More than 16 million viewers watched his return in 2003. The show's ratings have since settled down to about 12 million per episode. Grantham hit the headlines in May after a newspaper printed photographs of him apparently exposing himself via a webcam from his dressing room. He also allegedly insulted four co-stars. He apologised for his "deplorable actions" and "a moment's stupidity".

Hollywood hunts hits at Sundance
The Sundance Film Festival, the movie industry's top destination for uncovering the next independent hits and new talent, opens on Thursday.
The event will see screen executives decamp from Hollywood to Park City, Utah, for 11 days to search for low-key movies that could make it big in 2005. Open Water, Napoleon Dynamite, Garden State and Super-Size Me were all snapped up at last year's festival. But stars like Keanu Reeves and Pierce Brosnan also have films showing there. The festival is being opened by a screening of quirky comedy Happy Endings, starring former Friends actress Lisa Kudrow and Maggie Gyllenhaal, on Thursday.
Kudrow's Friends co-star, David Schwimmer, plays a divorced drunkard in Duane Hopwood, while Brosnan stars as a hit man in comedy The Matador. Keanu Reeves appears in coming-of-age tale Thumbsucker while Kevin Costner and Michael Keaton are among the other big names whose films are involved. Robert Redford founded Sundance in 1981 and it has gone on to showcase future successes such as Reservoir Dogs, The Blair Witch Project and The Full Monty. But it has received criticism that it has become more commercial and mainstream over the years. "As much as the press argues that Sundance has completely changed, it hasn't changed that much," festival director Geoffrey Gilmore said. "It's still a place for discovery. It's a place for common ground among film-makers and audiences more than it is the celebrity stuff." Other films generating interest before this year's festival include Hustle & Flow, about an aspiring rapper, The Squid and the Whale, an autobiographical film by writer-director Noah Baumbach, and comedy/drama Pretty Persuasion. It also has two new international cinema competitions.

Actress Roberts takes spider role
Actress Julia Roberts will play the part of a spider in a new film version of children's classic Charlotte's Web.
She will voice Charlotte, who teams up with a girl to save their friend Wilbur the pig, in the story by EB White. The film - a mix of live action and animation - will be Roberts' first project since the birth of her twins, Hazel and Phinnaeus, two months ago. Oprah Winfrey will voice a goose, John Cleese will voice a sheep and Steve Buscemi a rat in the 2006 film.
Ten-year-old Dakota Fanning will play Fern, the girl at the centre of the story, in the film to be directed by 13 Going on 30 film-maker Gary Winick. Filming is due to begin in Melbourne, Australia, later this month. Charlotte's Web has sold 45 million copies since it was published in 1952. An animated version was made in 1973 but this will be the first live action film. The actor who will voice Wilbur the pig has yet to be revealed.

Film production 'falls' 40% in UK
The number of British films produced in the UK fell 40% in 2004, with movies starring Johnny Depp and Jude Law among those affected, Screen Daily has said.
Twenty-seven British films were made in the UK last year following a drop in funding, compared with 45 in 2003, according to the trade weekly. It attributed the drop to tighter tax laws and reduced funding from sources such as the National Lottery. UK and US co-productions in Britain fell from 102 in 2003 to 81 last year.
Last year the government closed tax loopholes that many film investors had taken advantage of to fund films in the UK. Several projects were shelved as they faced the implications of this clampdown, coupled with the reduction in movie funding from traditional sources including the lottery and Miramax Films. Shooting on period drama Tulip Fever, which was to star Jude Law and Keira Knightley, was postponed indefinitely while shooting of The Libertine starring Johnny Depp was moved to the Isle of Man.
"There isn't anything coming in to replace (the funds)," said The Libertine's executive producer Marc Samuelson. "We are in a hiatus." Films with "medium" budgets of up to £9m, a similar level to box office hits Vera Drake, Calendar Girls and Enduring Love, are expected to be worst hit by the tax clampdown. The strength of the pound against the dollar is expected to have resulted in a fall in the number of US films shot in the UK during 2004, Screen International added. Big budget co-productions, such as the Harry Potter series, continued to be shot in the UK, however. The UK Film Council said the drop was partly due to 2003 being an especially good year for British film production, when Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason, Wimbledon and Thunderbirds were all filmed in the UK.
"The drop was expected as there was no way 2003's record level of production could be bettered," the council's spokesperson said. "The reduction in indigenous film production in 2004 was due to a variety of factors, including the continuing long-term trend towards co-production of films in more than one country and changes to financing arrangements." It was "too early" to predict whether the downward trend in UK production would continue throughout 2005, the UK Film Council said. In September the government introduced subsidies worth up to £4m per film for medium budget films, under new Treasury measures. It is also due to announce a replacement for UK film tax relief scheme Section 48 in July.

Fantasy book wins Hollywood deal
A British author has had the film rights to her children's bestseller snapped up for a seven-figure sum, with Ridley Scott set to direct.
Michelle Paver's Wolf Brother, a fantasy set 6,000 years ago, is the first in a planned series of six books. Film studio Fox has bought the rights for around $4m (£2.13m) for Scott's company Scott Free to develop. The director said he was "thrilled" with the project. "Wolf Brother is an enchanting book," he said. Paver, who lives in London and previously worked as a lawyer, began writing the book in 1982 while studying biochemistry at Oxford University.
She was an established author of love stories when she turned the work-in-progress into a children's novel. It was published in 2004, with Paver earning an advance of $5m (£2.8m) - the highest sum ever paid for a debut children's book. Wolf Brother tells the story of Torak, a 12-year-old hunter who lives in the forest. After his father is killed he teams up with a wolf cub and sets out to rid the forest of an evil force. Paver is currently writing the second book in the series. "Michelle Paver lives and breathes the worlds she writes about," said a spokesman for the author. "I've told her about the film deal but at the moment she is writing the second book and her mind is 6000 years away deep in the primeval forest."

The comic book genius of Stan Lee
Stan Lee, the man responsible for a string of comic superheroes that have become household names, has won a court battle for a slice of the profits from the hit Spider-Man movies.
Many marvel at the man who gave his characters extraordinary powers and everyday headaches - a formula which revolutionised comics. Born in 1922 to poor working-class Jewish immigrants from Romania, Stan Lieberman, got a job in Timely Publications, a company owned by a relative. He was assigned to the comics division and - thanks to a fertile imagination - rose to editor by the age of 18. For more than 20 years, he was "the ultimate hack" - knocking out crime stories, horrors, westerns, anything to sate the appetite of his juvenile readership. Words of more than two syllables were discouraged. Characters were either all good or bad, with no shades of grey. So embarrassed was Lieberman by much of what he was writing that he refused to put his real name on the byline. He assumed the "dumb name", Stan Lee, now legally adopted.
By the time he was 40, Lee had decided he was too old for the comic game. His British-born wife, Joan, suggested he had nothing to lose and, for his swansong, should write the kind of characters he really wanted to create. After a rival comic had come up with a superteam consisting of Batman, Superman and Wonder Woman, Timely needed to respond.
Lee's answer, in 1961, was the Fantastic Four - a team of astronauts who gained super powers after being bombarded with cosmic rays. They were to change Lee's life, and the comics industry, forever. Lee gave each character individual, everyday teenage problems such as dandruff, ingrown toenails and acne. They would frequently fall out with their parents and each other. The fan letters poured in. Without immediately knowing it, Stan Lee had ushered in the golden age of comics, and his imagination was rekindled. His Marvel universe spawned the new title of Marvel Comics. Soon after, nerdy Peter Parker was transformed - after a bite from an irradiated spider - into someone who could crawl up the sides of New York's skyscrapers. Spider-Man was born. He was to become an icon of modern popular culture. Spidey, as he is affectionately known, had quite extraordinary powers - yet he had problems at work, at home and with his girlfriends. At last, the teenager was no longer just the sidekick, but the main hero. And the hero was no longer just brawn, he had brains too.
"Just because he's a hero and has super powers doesn't mean he doesn't have problems," Stan Lee told the BBC. The Incredible Hulk, The Mighty Thor, Iron Man and the rest all grappled with problems like drug abuse, bigotry and social inequality. Radically, Lee gave the artists responsible for the comic designs credits for their work. Jack Kirby, Frank Miller, John Romitaand and others achieved cult status in their own right. Other superheroes broke new ground in other ways. Daredevil was blind, Black Panther was black and Silver Surfer pondered the state of humanity. Lee's influence remains. Some years ago the Marvel hero, Northstar, came out of the closet. In its heyday, Marvel was selling 50 million copies a year. Until he retired from editing in 1971, Stan Lee wrote all the copy for Marvel's covers.
In 1999, his Stan Lee Media venture, aimed at marrying comic-strips with the internet, went spectacularly wrong. Lee went bankrupt and his business partner landed in prison for fraud. In 2001 though, he started a new company entitled POW! (Purveyors of Wonder) Entertainment, which is currently developing films and television programmes. His latest project is a superhero based on a real person - Jay J Armes, who has metal claws after losing both hands aged 12 and fights crime with a tiger. But his 40-year-old creations are still as enduring as ever - with X-Men, The Hulk and Daredevil have all been turned into Hollywood action movies in the last five years. But Spider-Man has been the biggest box office hit, with the 2002 original and its 2004 sequel taking almost $1.6bn (£857m) in ticket sales around the world - before DVD and merchandise sales are counted. It seems Stan Lee is as indestructible as his heroes.

Bangkok film festival battles on
Organisers of the third Bangkok International Film Festival have been determined to carry on with this year's event despite the ravages of the Asian tsunami disaster.
The festivities have been scaled down, red carpets have been mothballed and profits from ticket sales are being donated to the tsunami relief fund. Apart from this, however, the festival has continued as originally planned. "When the disaster happened, we naturally asked ourselves if we should cancel," said the festival's executive director, Craig Prater. "The decision was made that we would continue, but that the focus would change.
"Our premieres became fundraisers, the opening night was visibly toned down and 10% of every ticket sold goes to the disaster fund," he continued. "But we feel like we've turned a page. We've acknowledged our position, and now it's business as usual."
Mr Prater's sentiments were echoed by Christine Rush, director of the festival's sister event, the Bangkok Film Market. "We have been careful to be respectful of the Thai nation's recovery from this terrible disaster," she said.
"However, the nation's recovery very much depends upon it continuing its economic life. "We are encouraging attendees to keep the victims in mind and aggressively support the aid organisations helping out," she added. Given the conspicuously low audience figures, that support may be more symbolic than significant. However, poor ticket sales have less to do with any fallout from the disaster and more to do with administrative and promotional difficulties.
The eclectic programme contains a wide range of titles, including such Oscar hopefuls as Ray Charles biopic Ray and Mike Leigh's abortion drama Vera Drake. That said, the absence of Thai subtitles on most film prints might have proved offputting to local cinemagoers.
On a more positive note, the celebrity guests attending the event have generated huge media interest in this busy capital city. Problems securing air transport, the clash with last Sunday's Golden Globes ceremony in Los Angeles and other factors have forced some big names to cancel.
But the festival has still attracted such Hollywood directors as Oliver Stone and Joel Schumacher, alongside such screen stars as Michael Douglas, Jeremy Irons and Jean-Claude Van Damme. Irons, whose film Being Julia is in competition for the festival's Golden Kinnaree awards, said he had wondered whether he should attend after December's catastrophe. "I questioned whether I should come when such a tragedy had happened," the British actor said. "I thought it might be in rather bad taste. But then I spoke to the organisers and I was encouraged to let life go on. "Now I've come here I'm very glad. What impresses me about Thai culture is they get over these things far quicker than we do in the West," he continued. "Basically I was invited here by Thailand. If they still want you to come, you should."
Now in its third year, Bangkok is a relatively recent addition to the hectic film festival calendar. And while it has yet to attain the stature of more established events held in Hong Kong, Tokyo and Pusan in South Korea, Mr Prater predicts it will soon become their equal. "It's grown awfully fast in three years - maybe too fast," he concedes. "We've had some bumps in the road, but that's only because the festival is still a baby. "I have no doubt in my mind that in five years, this will be the top Asian film festival in the world." The Golden Kinnarees will be awarded on Friday. The festival itself runs until 24 January.

Carry On star Patsy Rowlands dies
Actress Patsy Rowlands, known to millions for her roles in the Carry On films, has died at the age of 71.
Rowlands starred in nine of the popular Carry On films, alongside fellow regulars Sid James, Kenneth Williams and Barbara Windsor. She also carved out a successful television career, appearing for many years in ITV's well-loved comedy Bless This House. Rowlands died in Hove on Saturday morning, her agent said.
Born in January 1934, Rowlands won a scholarship to the Guildhall School of Speech and Drama scholarship when she was just 15.
After spending several years at the Players Theatre in London, she made her film debut in 1963 in Tom Jones, directed by Tony Richardson. She made her first Carry On film in 1969 where she appeared in Carry On Again Doctor. Rowlands played the hard-done-by wife or the put-upon employee as a regular Carry On star. She also appeared in Carry On at your Convenience, Carry On Matron and Carry On Loving, as well as others.
In recent years she appeared in BBC mini-series The Cazalets and played Mrs Potts in the London stage version of Beauty and the Beast. Agent Simon Beresford said: "She was just an absolutely favourite client She never complained about anything, particularly when she was ill, she was an old trouper. "She was of the old school - she had skills from musical theatre and high drama, that is why she worked with the great and the good of directors. "She didn't mind always being recognised for the Carry On films because she thoroughly enjoyed making them. She was a really lovely person and she will be much missed." Her last appearance on stage was as Mrs Pearce in the award-winning production of My Fair Lady at the National Theatre. Previously married, she leaves one son, Alan. Her funeral will be a private, family occasion, with a memorial service at a later date.

Tautou 'to star in Da Vinci film'
French actress Audrey Tautou, star of hit film Amelie, will play the female lead in the film adaptation of The Da Vinci Code, it has been reported.
The movie version of Dan Brown's best-selling novel is being directed by Ron Howard and also stars Tom Hanks. Tautou will play Hanks' code-cracking partner, according to various newspapers. She is currently starring in A Very Long Engagement, directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet. Jeunet was also responsible for directing Tautou in Amelie in 2001, which launched the actress into the mainstream.
She also starred as the lead role in critically-acclaimed film Dirty Pretty Things in 2002. Oscar-winning director Ron Howard chose Tautou for the part, preferring a French actress to a big name Hollywood star. UK actress Kate Beckinsale had been widely tipped as a possibility for the role alongside Vanessa Paradis and Juliette Binoche. The thriller upon which the movie is based has sold more than 17 million copies and is centred on a global conspiracy surrounding the Holy Grail mythology. The Louvre Museum, scene of the gruesome murder at the beginning of the novel, recently gave permission for filming to take place there, showbusiness newspaper Variety reported. The $100m movie will be produced by Columbia/Sony Pictures and is due for release on May 19, 2006 in the United States and France.

Double win for Sea Inside
Spanish movie The Sea Inside has been named best picture and star Javier Bardem best actor at the Bangkok International Film Festival.
Based on the true story of a paralysed man's battle to end his life, The Sea Inside was best foreign language film at the 2005 Golden Globe Awards. Annette Bening and Ana Geislerova shared the best actress award at the Bangkok festival. This year's event was scaled down following the Asian tsunami disaster.
Falling Down and The Phantom of the Opera director Joel Schumacher won a lifetime achievement award while Hong Kong director Wong Kar-Wai was honoured for promoting Asian cinema. "It's a great honour, I want to share this honour with my Thai colleagues," Wong said. French writer Christophe Barratie and Korean writer Park Chan-Chook shared the best screenplay award for Les Choristes and Old Boy respectively. Now in its third year, the Bangkok International Film Festival is donating profits from ticket sales to the tsunami relief fund.

BBC denies Blackadder TV comeback
The BBC has said there are no plans in the pipeline for a new series of hit comedy Blackadder, which ended in 1989.
Tony Robinson, who played the servant Baldrick, told ITV1's This Morning the show's star, Rowan Atkinson, was "more keen than he has been in the past". Robinson added he would "love" to do another series, each of which was set in a different era, ranging from the 15th century to World War I. But the BBC said on Thursday there were no plans for a comeback.
In the final series all the main characters were killed off charging towards German lines after being ordered out of their trench. The poignant finale was later voted the best farewell episode of a TV series. A host of other UK actors, including Hugh Laurie, Stephen Fry and Miranda Richardson, also appeared in the show. Blackadder returned for a one-off special filmed to celebrate the arrival of the millennium in 1999. It was shown at the Millennium Dome in Greenwich before being screened on BSkyB.

Despite sporting a corduroy cap pulled low over his face plus a pair of dark glasses, Robert Redford cuts an unmistakable figure through the star-struck crowds at Sundance.
It's a rare downtown appearance for the man who started the annual festival in Park City, Utah back in the 1980s. Now in its twenty-first year, Sundance continues to grow. Some 45,000 people are estimated to have descended on this small ski town with nothing but movies on the mind. It's an opportunity to meet and make deals. Redford wanted Sundance to be a platform for independent film-makers, but the commercial success of many showcased films have led to criticism that the festival is becoming too mainstream.
Smaller festivals like Slamdance and XDance, which take place during the same week in Park City, are competing for Sundance's limelight. But Redford is not worried. "The more the merrier," he says. "The point was to create opportunities for people who may not have them. "Once independent film had a place where the work could be seen, suddenly the merchants came. With them the celebrities came, then the paparazzi - and suddenly it began to take on a whole new tone," explains Redford.
"People started to say we had gone mainstream and Hollywood, but actually Hollywood came to us because suddenly there was good business in independent film," he adds. International film-makers have always been celebrated here, but 2005 is the first year a dedicated World Dramatic and Documentary competition is being held.
Redford wants the festival to encompass viewpoints he believes the American media fails to reflect, particularly how the US is perceived internationally. He has never hidden the fact that he is a Democrat. But he reserves particular disdain for the current Republican administration. "It's the ability to maintain the importance of dissent in a democratic system which right now is under threat with the attitude of this administration," he says. "I think many voices are being shut down or accused of being unpatriotic if they want to express another point of view. That's very unhealthy and very dangerous.
"If we take that policy into the world, there will be the same victims and the same consequences." Sundance isn't just one big screening. There are discussion panels and Q&A sessions with directors tackling controversial topics like America's "culture wars" and the Iraq war. While Redford wishes the festival to be a forum for dissent, the profile of the audience is fairly monolithic. Educated, middle class and predominantly white Americans comes Sundance, with views from the same end of the political spectrum - anti-war and socially liberal. But Redford knows this and started the Sundance TV Channel in an effort to reach a wider audience. "When you look at the films here, what we are presenting is very much egalitarian. And it's about good films and good story-telling be it African America, Asian, women, gay, lesbian. "Sooner or later we will do away with those stereotypical labels and people will say 'it's just a film by so-and so'."

Ronnie Corbett has joined fellow comedy stars Victoria Wood and David Jason in attacking the declining standards of British television programmes.
Speaking to the Radio Times, the Two Ronnies star said there is too much bad language and reality TV. "You get fed up watching shows with not much care and love," he complained. Corbett, soon to reunite with Ronnie Barker for a new Two Ronnies series, also criticised quiz shows like the BBC's They Think It's All Over. "It's just laughing at each other and thinking, 'Aren't we clever?'" said the 74-year-old comedian. Corbett is the latest comedy star to bemoan the "dumbing down" of modern TV programmes. In an interview published in the Radio Times in January, Victoria Wood slated comedian Sacha Baron Cohen for his character Ali G's "horrible" brand of "victim" humour.
"With so many good writers and good performers, it's a shame people can't just write a script and have other people learn it," she said. And last week Only Fools and Horses star David Jason criticised British TV for being "too safe and too cheap". "We've got to be careful not to dumb down for the audience," he said. "They shouldn't be sitting at home on the sofa vegetating." Corbett said he and Barker were always mindful of their family audience while making The Two Ronnies. "Our material was good-natured," he said. "We knew what would upset the average man in the street. "There's a lot of swearing on TV today. They even have documentaries with the f-word."
Corbett goes on to criticise "reality programmes where they put people in a house for a fortnight and film them doing everything". The Two Ronnies ran from 1971 to 1987 and attracted 17 million viewers at its peak. Its bespectacled stars will return later this year in The Two Ronnies Sketchbook, which will combine classic sketches with newly recorded material. Corbett claims he and Barker differ from today's celebrities in that they did not allow their success to go to their heads. "We were never temperamental, fractious or walked out slamming doors," he said. "We were fussy though," he added. "We wanted everything done properly."

Smith loses US box office crown
New comedy Diary of a Mad Black Woman has ended Will Smith's reign at the top of the North American box office.
Based on a play by Tyler Perry, who also stars as a gun-toting grandmother, the film took $22.7m (£11.8m) in its first three days of release. After topping the chart for two consecutive weeks, Smith's romantic comedy Hitch dropped to second place with takings of $21m (£10.9m). Keanu Reeves' supernatural thriller Constantine dropped a place to three. Based on the Hellblazer comics, the film took $11.8m (£6.1m) on its second week of release. Two new entries came next in the chart, with Wes Craven's horror movie Cursed, about a werewolf loose in Los Angeles, in fourth position with $9.5m (£4.9m).
Action comedy Man of the House, starring Tommy Lee Jones as a Texas ranger assigned to protect a cheerleader squad, came in at fifth with $9m (£4.6m). Clint Eastwood's boxing drama Million Dollar Baby - recipient of four Academy Awards, including best picture - continued to perform well in sixth place with takings of $7.2m (£3.74m). Martin Scorsese's Hollywood biopic The Aviator - which won five Oscars, all in minor categories - held on in ninth place. The low-budget feature Diary of a Mad Black Woman stars Kimberly Elise as a woman thrown out on the streets by her philandering husband. With the help of her grandmother Madea (one of three roles played by Perry), she plots revenge. Perry, 34, is one of America's best-known black playwrights but is a newcomer to film. Once made homeless after investing his own money in unsuccessful productions of his work, he now lives in the mansion in which Diary of a Mad Black Woman was filmed.

BBC to pour £9m into new comedy
The BBC is to invest £9m in developing new comedy and entertainment programmes outside London.
The changes come as part of a shake-up of several departments to create shows that appeal to a wider range of people. Changes are also being made to teams in the factual and daytime departments outside London. Director of television Jana Bennett said the changes were about "getting the best ideas on screen as efficiently and effectively as we can". "The new structure in each genre is designed to ensure that happens," she said.
A number of new roles are being created in each department, including a head of comedy commissioning based in Glasgow. The new person will be in charge of the £9m budget and their role will be to develop shows outside the capital, both within the BBC and with independent production companies. Jane Lush, controller of entertainment commissioning, said, "Entertainment and comedy are incredibly important to our audiences; I'm confident these changes will help us get the very best programmes on screen." Similar positions will also be created in the other departments, with the new commissioning editor for documentaries based in Bristol and the daytime commissioning editor in Birmingham. Ms Bennett said the new roles would benefit those making programmes within the BBC as well as those making shows for the channel independently. "A strong independent sector and a flourishing in-house production base are not mutually exclusive and will stimulate the competition that will deliver the best ideas to the audience," she said.

How the Academy Awards flourished
The 77th annual Academy Awards are taking place on 27 February with the stars of the movie-making world once again holding their breath to discover who will be showered with the honours this year. But from humble beginnings, how did the modern day extravaganza become the behemoth it is today?
HOW IT ALL STARTED The first Academy Awards were handed out in 1929 at a comparatively low-key dinner held at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel - just over the road from their modern day home.
Just 250 guests attended with ticket prices at $5.
The first film to win was Wings, which starred Clara Bow in the only silent movie to win the big award. For the first 10 years or so, the winners list was handed to the newspapers so they could publish them at 11pm, but in 1940 the winners were published in the Los Angeles Times at 8.45pm meaning guests entering the ceremony knew already knew the results. As a result the sealed envelope system was introduced, leading to the secrecy and suspense-filled night that happens today. WHEN AND WHERE The tradition of holding the awards at a banquet continued until 1942 but with increasing interest came a growing guest list and it became impractical to host it as a dinner.
The ceremonies were then transferred to theatres with the famous Grauman's Chinese Theatre the first to host the expanded event. Other venues included the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion and the Shrine Auditorium. They are now held at the Kodak Theatre, which opened in 2002 just across the road from its original home and holds 6,000 people. Until 1954 they were held on a Thursday, then swapped around from Monday to Wednesday before Sunday night was settled on, although the month swapped from May to April to March and now its current month of February. The first televised ceremony was in 1953, with Bob Hope as the MC. WHO WAS OSCAR? There is no solid evidence as to how the trophy became to be known as Oscar.
One popular story is that Academy librarian Margaret Herrick said the statue looked like her uncle Oscar. A journalist apparently overheard this conversation and used the phrase in an article.
The first time it is thought to have been used in print was when columnist Sidney Skolsky used it to describe Katherine Hepburn's first best actress win in 1934. The Academy officially adopted the nickname in 1939. The trophy was designed by MGM art director Cedric Gibbons. Since its inception 2,530 Oscars have been handed out. In support of the war effort, the Academy handed out plaster Oscar statuettes during WWII. After the war, winners exchanged the plaster awards for the real thing. Fifty-five statues were stolen in en route to the awards in 2000, 52 were recovered nine days later. Winners were unaffected as a new batch was rushed out. WHO SITS IN JUDGEMENT? The Academy was set up in 1927 as a non-profit organisation with 36 members from different film disciplines. Douglas Fairbanks Sr was the first president and oversaw the first awards. There are now 5,700 members of the Academy - with membership by invitation only to those who are seen to have achieved distinction in the movies and are therefore seen as fit to judge their peers. Some of the criteria for admittance includes: film credits that reflect the high standards of the Academy, receipt of an Academy Award nomination, achievement of unique distinction, earning of special merit, or making an outstanding contribution to film. THE STARS WHO LEFT EMPTY-HANDED While many of the biggest films and movie-makers have been honoured by the Academy, there is still surprise at those that did not receive any nominations that later went on to become classics.
Among the overlooked films were Hobson's Choice, Dirty Harry, The 39 Steps, The Searchers and King Kong. Actors that failed to win for their iconic roles included Al Jolson in the Jazz Singer (1927), Humphrey Bogart in Casablanca (1944), Gene Kelly in Singing in the Rain (1952) and Henry Fonda in 12 Angry Men (1957). Alfred Hitchcock also failed to win an award despite five nominations. His enduring influence on the horror genre was finally recognised with an honorary gong in 1968. THE SHOW ALWAYS GOES ON Not even war has halted the glittering Hollywood event. There were calls for it to be cancelled in 2003 during the war in Iraq, but as it didn't stop during World War II or the Vietnam war.
Documentary winner Michael Moore ensured nobody forgot about the Iraq war though and used his acceptance speech to criticise the American invasion. The ceremony was muted with the glitz turned down and many female stars opting for demure dark dresses. The ceremony has been postponed on three occasions. Los Angeles floods in 1938 saw it put back a week. The death of Martin Luther King saw it postponed for two days in 1968 as a mark of respect and there was a 24-hour delay following the assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan. CONTROVERSIES AND OTHER GAFFES Three people have refused Oscars, including actor George C Scott who said the whole thing was "demeaning". Writer Dudley Nichols refused his Academy Award in 1935 for his screenplay for The Insider because the Writers' Guild was striking at the time. Marlon Brando turned down his best actor Oscar for The Godfather in 1973 in protest as Hollywood's apparent discrimination against Native American people. He sent along a woman called Sacheen Littlefeather to collect his award. She was later revealed to be Native American actress Maria Cruz.
The following year Robert Opal interrupted proceedings when he streaked, flashing a peace sign as well as everything else. The TV network managed to pan away and avoid too much nudity. Opal was murdered in 1979. Frank Capra was the butt of one major gaffe in 1934 when the host opened out best picture envelope and declared "come on up and get it, Frank" to which Frank Capra bounded up to the stage before realising that he had meant Frank Lloyd had won for Cavalcade.
Capra vowed he would never to go the awards again but went the following year to collect his award for It Happened One Night.

Hoffman hits out over modern film
Hollywood legend Dustin Hoffman has hit out at the quality of current films and theatre productions.
The star of Rain Man and Tootsie said the film culture was "in the craphouse" at a press conference on Tuesday. The 67-year-old also said he stopped working a few years ago because he lost his "spark" for acting. Hoffman is in the UK to publicise his new comedy, Meet the Fockers, which also stars Robert De Niro, Barbra Streisand and Ben Stiller.
He said: "You go to the cinema and you realise you're watching the third act. There is no first or second act. "There is this massive film-making where you spend this incredible amount of money and play right to the demographic. "You can tell how much money the film is going to make by how it does on the first weekend. "The whole culture is in the craphouse. It's not just true in the movies, it's also true in the theatre. "Broadway, and now London is the same, special effects are in great demand. It's not a good time culturally."
Hoffman also said he stopped working a few years ago and moved into directing and writing. He said: "I just lost that spark I always had. "A couple of years ago I didn't like the parts I was getting. "Studios weren't interested in the kind of films that people of my generation wanted to see. "I thought I would stop and just try writing and directing. I wasn't aware of the depression that set in." Recently, Hoffmann has returned to film, with roles in I Heart Huckabees, Finding Neverland and now Meet the Fockers, which is the sequel to Meet the Parents. Meet The Fockers opens in the UK on Friday.

Johnny Depp: The acting outlaw
Johnny Depp, whose latest role was Peter Pan creator JM Barrie in Finding Neverland, is celebrated as one of Hollywood's most maverick talents. Depp has become an unlikely major star, given his preference for taking dark and idiosyncratic roles instead of surefire box office hits. He has had a long-running working relationship with the equally unconventional director Tim Burton. Depp was born in Kentucky in 1963 and at first wanted to be a rock star, playing in a number of bands and supporting acts such as Iggy Pop and The B-52s in Florida. On a visit to Los Angeles, his former wife introduced him to actor Nicolas Cage.
In 1984 he started his film career playing a doomed teenager in horror film Nightmare On Elm Street. Two years later he played a soldier in Oliver Stone's Vietnam epic Platoon. But it was TV that first made Depp a star. He played undercover cop Tommy Hanson in the US series 21 Jump Street for three years from 1987.
In 1990 he began his partnership with Burton in the dark fairy tale Edward Scissorhands, about a young man with blades for hands. He won plaudits in 1993 for the downbeat film What's Eating Gilbert Grape, where he played a sensitive youth looking after an overweight mother and a retarded younger brother, played by Leonardo DiCaprio. Another role under Burton, Ed Wood, starred Depp as the crazed cult film-maker Wood, in 1994. He played a much more serious, sensitive role in his next major film, Donnie Brasco, where he portrayed an undercover cop infiltrating a mafia ring. In 1997 he directed his only film to date - The Brave, the story of an Indian man offered money to appear in a snuff film.
Two years later he played Hunter S Thompson in Terry Gilliam's ambitious but poorly-received big screen adaptation of Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. He worked again with Tim Burton in the 1999 horror film Sleepy Hollow, and appeared opposite Dame Judi Dench and Juliette Binoche in Chocolat. His performance in Pirates of the Caribbean, which earned him Golden Globe and Bafta nominations, had many critics thinking he based it upon the mannerisms of his friend, Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards. His latest role in Finding Neverland explored JM Barrie's relationship with Sylvia (Kate Winslet) and her children. Depp's charismatic performance drew an audience of adults and children alike into Barrie's vivid imagination, and he was called the "fifth child of the group" by the film's director Marc Forster.
He has two children of his own with French singer Vanessa Paradis, having previously been in a long-term relationship with British model Kate Moss. The theme of children's literature in Depp's career - and his long association with Tim Burton - are set to continue in his next role, playing Willy Wonka in a remake of Roald Dahl's classic Charlie and the Chocolate Factory. British TV comedy fans might also remember Depp's guest role in the final episode of BBC sketch programme The Fast Show, cited as his favourite show. It was another surprise move in Depp's varied and intriguing career.

Patti Smith to host arts festival
Rock star Patti Smith has been made artistic director of this year's Meltdown festival, to be held at London's South Bank Centre in June.
The punk pioneer follows Morrissey, David Bowie and Nick Cave in directing 15 days of concerts and events. Smith has yet to decide the line-up for Meltdown, which begins on 11 June. "I want to touch on all aspects of our culture, perhaps with readings from Genet, and I have an idea for Jeremy Irons to read Proust," she said.
The 58-year-old US singer of Because the Night told The Observer newspaper that the festival would be her response to these "material, exploitative and greedy times". "It is important we explore the new, but we should also salute the best art there is, aesthetically and spiritually," she said. Last year's Meltdown festival, directed by the ex-Smiths star Morrissey, included appearances by singer Jane Birkin, Nancy Sinatra and playwright Alan Bennett. He also persuaded punk band The New York Dolls to reform for a reunion show.

Roxy Music on Isle of Wight bill
Roxy Music will appear at June's Isle of Wight music festival, along with Morrissey, Supergrass and Idlewild.
REM have already been confirmed as headliners for the three-day event, which takes place from 10-12 June. Original band members Bryan Ferry, Phil Manzerana, Andy Mackay and Paul Thompson will take to the stage on the Saturday night of the festival. The band are also working in the studio on new material, their first since the 1982 album Avalon. Roxy Music were formed in 1971 by Ferry, Mackay and Brian Eno, with Manzanera joining the following year. Their first hit was 1972's Virginia Plain, with other hits including Street Life, Love Is The Drug and the 1981 John Lennon cover, Jealous Guy. Roxy Music's back catalogue was re-released in 2000, leading to the band undertaking a world tour in 2001. Morrissey will also play on Saturday at the festival, while Supergrass and Idlewild have been confirmed for the Friday.

Music mogul Fuller sells company
Pop Idol supremo Simon Fuller has sold his 19 Entertainment company to an US entrepreneur in a $156m (£81.5m) deal.
Robert Sillerman's Sports Entertainment Enterprises, which is to be renamed CFX, recently also bought an 85% share in the estate of Elvis Presley. Mr Fuller has been appointed to the CFX board and will plan and implement the company's creative strategy. The 19 firm handles a roster of music artists, TV shows and PR strategies for stars including the Beckhams. The deal sees Mr Fuller receive £64.5m in cash and about 1.9 million shares in Sports Entertainment. There will also be a further £19.2m in either cash or stocks by the end of the financial year in June. Mr Fuller has signed a long-term agreement with the company which will see him continue to expand and develop entertainment brands. He said: "This is a hugely exciting new partnership for myself and 19 Entertainment.
"CKX will provide 19 with a powerful platform for global growth and allow us to fully take advantage of all the amazing opportunities that lie ahead. I cannot wait to get started."
Mr Fuller was the creative drive behind Pop Idol and its US offspring American Idol. 19 Management runs the careers of many of its successful contestants including Will Young, Gareth Gates and Kelly Clarkson. The company was set up 15 years ago by Mr Fuller, taking the name from his first successful single - 19 by Paul Hardcastle. Fuller was the driving force behind the Spice Girls phenomenon, using canny marketing and catchy pop songs to secure their place as the most lucrative girl group in history. He then put together S Club 7, who had their own TV show as well as a music career. Mr Sillerman's deal to buy the Presley estate sees him control the operation of Graceland, as well as money from the late star's music and films. Presley's daughter Lisa Marie retains possession of Graceland and many of her father's "personal effects".

Johnny Cash manager Holiff dies
The former manager of Johnny Cash, Saul Israel Holiff, has died at the age of 79, his family said.
Mr Holiff, who was also a concert promoter, managed Cash's career between 1960 and 1973, quitting when he thought the singer's career had peaked. "I was guilty for underestimating him repeatedly," he once said. The Canadian music manager, who also managed Tommy Hunter and the Statler Brothers, had been in declining health, according to his family. An entrepreneur from an early age, Mr Holiff served as a rear air gunner in the Royal Canadian Air Force during World War II, afterwards setting up a drive-in restaurant. He briefly dabbled in acting, before setting up offices in Nashville and Los Angeles for his concert and artist promotion business. In 1970, RPM weekly magazine presented Holiff with a special award as the Canadian music industry's man of the year. Mr Holiff retired when he was in his late 40s, returning to education as a mature student at the University of Victoria, where he graduated with a degree in history. He passed away on 17 March. According to his wishes, there will be no funeral service.

DVD review: Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
This third Harry Potter film brought a change of director and a dramatic visual shake-up that really shines on DVD.
Gone are the warm, bright colours found in the two earlier films, Alfonso Cuaron brings in a bleak and cold feel that is simply gorgeous - and looks even better here than in the cinema. It is all part of the progression of Harry's story into darker areas, but you'll spend time just marvelling at the beautiful Hogwarts landscape.
This is the first Potter film where you get so lost in the screen adaptation that you forget the book. It is the third year at Hogwarts and studies are interrupted, as they always are, by a calamity that only Harry, Ron and Hermione can put right.
It sounds corny. But Harry is no longer the winsome hero, he is a moody teenager and Daniel Radcliffe pulls it off very well. Emma Watson is ever better as Hermione, and the young stars are joined by the usual myriad famous actors including Gary Oldman and Emma Thompson. The film itself is the reason to buy this DVD. But it is laden with behind-the-scenes extras, including funny, if shallow, interviews with all the main cast. But what seems like a long list of features can be swiftly whittled down to the few that you are going to watch. Younger viewers will go for the games which include a Magic You May Have Missed memory test, and Crookshanks chasing off after Scabbers. Adult viewers will ignore those and go straight to the deleted scenes. You will understand why they were deleted but it is fun to see more footage - and not have to hunt through endless menus to find it, as we did on the first Harry Potter DVD. The most interesting pieces are an interview with JK Rowling in Creating The Vision and Conjuring A Scene, a short featurette about the making of the film's big moments.

UK 'world's biggest music buyer'
UK consumers are the biggest music buyers in the world, according to new figures released on Tuesday by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI).
But global sales of recorded music were flat in 2004, with growing sales in DVD music videos offset by online and physical piracy in major markets. The UK music industry recorded an overall 3% increase in volume sales, mostly due to its robust albums market. However, world music sales declined by 1.3% to $33.6 billion (£17.7 billion). The UK CD albums market grew by 4.5% in 2004 with a record 174.6 million units sold. On average every Briton buys 3.2 CDs per person per year.
Around 26,000 albums are released in the UK each year, making Britain second only to the US in terms of the number of releases. Overall sales were driven by new UK-signed artists such as Keane, Katie Melua and Scissor Sisters, whose debut album sold almost 1.6 million copies in the UK. "A slew of great new British artists have met UK music fans' demand for great music," said BPI chairman Peter Jameson. The best-selling album globally was Usher's Confessions - one of eight albums to sell more than five million copies in 2004.
The growth in the DVD market and a sharp increase in sales of digital music ensured a strong market in the US. The total number of tracks downloaded last year were up more than tenfold on 2003. Digital sales in the US in the first two months of 2005 are already more than double that of the same period in 2004.
However, some markets in Continental Europe and Asia - notably Sweden, Finland, France, Spain and South Korea - have been drastically hit by internet piracy. Australia, Italy and the Netherlands also saw a decline. "On the positive side digital sales are booming," said John Kennedy, chief executive of the International Federation of Phonographic Industries (IFPI). "However, commercial piracy and illegal file-sharing are continuing to depress our markets. "The priority in the coming year is to step up the advance of legitimate digital sales and sustain our anti-piracy efforts." "The main choice today's music fan now has to make is whether to get music legally or illegally," added Mr Jameson.

Pixies take on Reading and Leeds
Pixies, Foo Fighters and Iron Maiden will headline this summer's Leeds and Reading festivals.
The trio of rock heavyweights will top the bill for the three-day events at Bramham Park, near Wetherby, and at Richfield Avenue, Reading. They are the Pixies' and Iron Maiden's only UK festival gigs, while Foo Fighters are also at T In The Park. The Killers, Razorlight and Queens of the Stone Age are also playing the twin festivals, to be held on 26-28 August. Other acts in this year's line-up include The Charlatans, Marilyn Manson and Kings of Leon. Pete Doherty's band Babyshamblers will appear on the NME/Radio One stage along with Kasabian, Black Rebel Motorcycle Club and Bloc Party.
Organiser Mean Fiddler said more acts were still to be confirmed for the summer event. "We are all very excited to be going back to Reading and intend to have a fantastic time," said Iron Maiden's Bruce Dickinson. "We're sure fans will too." It will the first time the veteran British metal band have played Reading in 23 years. At Leeds, Iron Maiden will headline the first day of the festival on the Friday, Pixies will follow on Saturday and the Foo Fighters will close the event on Sunday. The Pixies will headline the first day of Reading, while Foo Fighters will play on Sunday and Iron Maiden will close the event. Weekend tickets are now on sale priced at £125 each.

Vera Drake leads UK Oscar hopes
Mike Leigh's film Vera Drake will lead British hopes at this year's Academy Awards after getting three nominations.
Imelda Staunton was nominated for best actress for her role in the abortion drama, while Leigh received nods for best director and original screenplay. Kate Winslet was also nominated in the best actress category for her role in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind. And Clive Owen and Sophie Okonedo both got nominated for supporting roles in Closer and Hotel Rwanda respectively. Owen has already been made bookmakers' favourite for best supporting actor for the role in Closer that has already clinched him a Golden Globe award.
And it is the first nomination for actress Okonedo, chosen for her performance in Hotel Rwanda, about the 1994 Rwandan genocide. It is also a debut nomination for Staunton, 49, who told BBC News 24 she had not thought the film would appeal to Academy voters. "It was an extraordinary time making the film and I can't believe what has happened this morning," she said. "I hope it just shows Mike up to be the extraordinary filmmaker he is. "We are also dealing with a very difficult subject matter and it is amazing to have it accepted in this way." Leigh, who had previously received three Oscar nominations for Secrets and Lies and Topsy Turvy, told BBC News 24 the latest success was "amazing". He said: "We hoped that Imelda Staunton would get a nomination but I never expected to get director and screenplay. It's just absolutely wonderful.
"I think people are aware that it's about life - and I hope it is the warmth and compassion that really talks to people." Winslet said she was "ecstatic" about the fourth nomination of her career. "Being nominated means so much to me. To be nominated for a film that was released a while ago, I feel so honoured and overwhelmed," she said. John Woodward, chief executive of the UK Film Council, said it was "extremely heartening" to see British filmmaking talent recognised on the global stage. "Britain has a hugely talented industry and these nominations show why National Lottery investment in film pays major dividends for our culture and economy." Among a total of 24 British nominees, composer Andrew Lloyd Webber and lyricist Charles Hart are up for best original song for Learn To Be Lonely, from The Phantom of the Opera movie.
Cinematographer John Mathieson, who was nominated for Gladiator in 2001, is also up for The Phantom of the Opera. And Finding Neverland has garnered two more nominations for Brits. Gemma Jackson, who has also worked on Bridget Jones's Diary and Iris, is up for art direction while costume designer Alexandra Byrne, whose previous films have included Captain Corelli's Mandolin and Elizabeth, is in the running. The UK has two contenders in the best live action short film category. Wasp was made by ex-children's TV presenter Andrea Arnold while Little Terrorist is the work of Ashvin Kumar. This year's awards will be handed out in Hollywood on 27 February.

Moreno debut makes Oscar mark
Catalina Sandino Moreno has joined a rare group of actresses who have been nominated for an Oscar for starring in a foreign language film.
The Colombian-born actress was the final hope for director Joshua Marston, who scoured the US and Colombia for a lead for Maria Full of Grace. The film sees the 23-year-old play a teenage drug mule who smuggles heroin by swallowing pellets in condoms. Plaudits have been raining down on her for her gritty performance, making it all the more surprising that this is her first film. Her previous acting experience was in amateur productions in her home city of Bogota at the Ruben Di Pietro theatre academy. She has already received a nomination for the Independent Spirit Awards leading actress category but these rarely overlap with Academy Awards, instead recognising quirkier, low-budget films. And at the 2004 Berlin Film Festival the jury could not choose between her and Charlize Theron's Oscar winning performance in Monster so gave them a tied award. Sandino Moreno is now being regarded as one of the most promising actresses around at the moment. But she is taking her time committing to her next project, hoping to land a strong Spanish script and would love to be able to work with directors Pedro Almodovar or Alejandro Amenabar.

Film actress Annette Bening is up for an Oscar for her starring role in the award-winning film Being Julia.
Bening, who was born in Texas in 1958, has gained prominence for a string of key roles. Although an Oscar has so far eluded her, her status as one of Hollywood's favourite actresses remains solid. One of the biggest Oscars buzzes in recent years was for Bening's role as troubled Carolyn Burnham in 1999's American Beauty. But her deliciously neurotic portrayal of surburban life turning sour was overlooked in favour of Hilary Swank's leading role in Boys Don't Cry. After opening her career in the theatre - and gaining a Tony Award nomination in 1986 - Bening had a low-key spell in television. She then made her film debut as a sex-starved wife in 1988's The Great Outdoors, opposite comics Dan Akroyd and John Candy.
Following a cameo in Postcards From The Edge, Bening's breakthrough role came in 1990, playing seductive con artist Myra Langtry in The Grifters - a role that won her an Oscar nomination. Despite some rave reviews, Bening did not win the best supporting actress Academy Award.
However the high-profile performance enabled Bening to capture roles in a number of big budget Hollywood productions, co-starring with some of Hollywood's greatest players, including Robert De Niro and Harrison Ford. But it was her role opposite Warren Beatty in 1991 gangster flick Bugsy which had the greatest impact. Bening played Virginia Hill, another role which won her high critical acclaim, but the film only picked up two of a staggering 12 Oscar nominations.
Bugsy was the start of a very significant liaison for Bening - she married Beatty, with whom she had a child as the couple promoted the film in Europe. The couple now have four children together. A pair of contrasting yet successful performances peppered Bening's career in the mid-1990s. She played Michael Douglas' opposite number in romantic comedy The American President, and as a "fiery" Queen Elizabeth I in a contemporary adaptation of Shakespeare's Richard III.
Bening was the first choice to play the female lead in American Beauty, director Sam Mendes' film debut which was a critical and commercial success - but the actress had to be content with a Bafta award for her strong performance. But current film Being Julia has made Bening an award-winning actress rather than the perennial nominee, with success at the Golden Globes. The witty tale of revenge and love set in 1930s London sees the eponymous theatrical diva - played by Bening - grow tired of her success and fall for a young American - and could be the role which finally wins her the coveted Academy Award.

Oscars steer clear of controversy
The Oscars nominations list has left out some of the most controversial films of the past year in favour of safer, less contentious cinema.
If best film nominees were drawn on the basis of column inches, two of the front-runners would have had to be Michael Moore's Bush-baiting documentary Fahrenheit 9/11 and Mel Gibson's The Passion of the Christ. Both films polarised opinion but had critics talking, and the public turning up to see them - Fahrenheit 9/11 breaking US box office records for a documentary, and The Passion of the Christ making more than US$370m (£196m) in the US alone. But this year's Academy Awards have shied away from the big name controversies, with The Passion of the Christ - a film accused of being anti-Semitic - receiving nominations only in the 'minor' categories of cinematography, makeup and musical score.
Fahrenheit 9/11 has also been overlooked, despite winning the Palme d'Or at the Cannes International Film Festival in 2004.
Moore's caustic documentary may have been affected by its distributors' decision to enter it in the best picture category, rather than best documentary, says Tim Dams, the news editor of trade magazine Screen International. But he also believes the strong political viewpoint of Moore's film does not sit well with the Academy. "If you look at past Oscar winners and nominees, the very conservative Oscar voters tend to go for very conservative, epic-style pictures. Fahrenheit 9/11 didn't really fit in to that category. "They tend to go for films like Titanic, Gladiator, and the Lord of the Rings, films with scale that often aren't too contentious," he said. While he said the Oscar voting panel were not "snubbing" Moore's film, he thought it was unlikely a documentary could ever seriously compete in a best film category. "I think it's more a misjudgement by the people putting it out rather than a deliberate snub," he said.
The problem with Mel Gibson's film, he believed, was that the voting panel may have been cautious in nominating a film with dialogue in Aramaic, an ancient Middle Eastern language.
"Hollywood doesn't tend to like foreign-language films - no-one's ever tried doing a film in a dead language," he said. But aside from these two films, some potentially contentious pictures have won nominations. The German film The Downfall, a biopic tracing the final days of Nazi leader Adolf Hitler in his Berlin bunker, has been recognised in the best foreign film category. The film has caused some controversy in showing Hitler as a fallible but human man, rather than a semi-mythical, historical monster. But Mr Dams said: "It's not an inflammatory film. It has done very well in Germany, and it's a film that portrays Hitler as a human rather than some kind of devil or monster." Another 'contentious' film, Mr Dams said, has gained a nomination in the best documentary section through the force of its charm.
Independent film-maker Morgan Spurlock may have forced fast-food giant McDonalds to withdraw its 'super size' portions in the US after he went on a month-long diet eating nothing but McDonalds meals - and filmed his progress.
The film has been a hit around the world. Mr Dams said: "It's a political film, but it's quite fun and punky and well-paced. "Morgan Spurlock is a really likeable guy. It's a very accessible film, and it doesn't beat you over the head with its views. "While in Fahrenheit 9/11 there are moments of comedy, I think the way that Super Size Me is put together - the fact it's a very likeable film - means it's won through on charm." Dam's pick at this year's Oscars? The Aviator, Martin Scorsese's biopic of aviation pioneer and Hollywood player Howard Hughes. Tinseltown, it seems, likes nothing more than a picture about one of its own.

Actress Nicole Kidman has won a restraining order against two paparazzi photographers who she claims left her fearful of leaving her Sydney mansion.
The Oscar-winning star took action against Jamie Fawcett and Ben McDonald after a bugging device was found outside her home earlier this week. Lawyers for the pair denied allegations they had planted the device. The Australian actress is currently in Sydney to film her latest movie, Eucalyptus, with Russell Crowe. Kidman was prompted to take action following a reported high-speed car chase with members of the paparazzi in Sydney last weekend.
According to local newspaper the Daily Telegraph, the incident involved paparazzi driving through red lights and on the wrong side of the road in pursuit of Kidman's vehicle. Lawyers for Mr Fawcett and Mr McDonald denied that the pair were involved in the chase. Kidman sought the "apprehended violence" orders - normally used in Australia in cases of domestic violence and similar incidents - after being advised to do so by local police. "Nicole would like to make it clear that she acknowledges she is a public figure and that reporters and photographers have a job to do and she respects that," said Kidman's publicist Wendy Day. "However, these are specific actions against two individuals who, over a period of time, have caused her to feel threatened, intimidated and unable to leave her home without fearing for her safety." Magistrate Lee Gilmore, who issued the restraining order at Waverley Local Court in Sydney, said she understood the photographers were entitled to earn a living but there had to be limits to their behaviour. "Miss Kidman says she's willing to put up with some of it, but it's gone beyond that," she said. "I do believe the allegation in relation to the driving is a serious issue."

Bookmakers back Aviator for Oscar
The Aviator has been tipped by UK bookmakers as the favourite to win the best film award at this year's Oscars.
Ray star Jamie Foxx is clear favourite in the best actor category while Million Dollar Baby's Hilary Swank is tipped to win the best actress prize. Bookmakers predict Cate Blanchett will be named best supporting actress. William Hill and Ladbrokes have given The Aviator 4/9 and 8/13 odds of winning best film, with Million Dollar Baby in second place at 9/4.
Bet Direct and Bet 365 also tip The Aviator, with the majority of bookmakers regarding Finding Neverland as the outsider. The Aviator is also widely tipped to win the best director prize for Martin Scorsese. British star Clive Owen is second favourite at William Hill to take the best supporting actor award, for his performance in Closer. The favourite in that category is Sideways star Thomas Hayden Church. Vera Drake star Imelda Staunton has 5/1 odds of winning the best actress Oscar at Bet 365 and William Hill, ahead of fellow UK star Kate Winslet who has odds of 25/1 at William Hill.
Mike Leigh is the outsider in the best director category for Vera Drake, a position he holds jointly with Ray's Taylor Hackford at bookmakers VC Bet. This year's Academy Awards will be handed out in Hollywood on 27 February. X Factor judge Sharon Osbourne will present Sky television's live coverage of the event. Meanwhile, Clive Owen's best supporting actor nomination has led a bookmaker to shorten his odds of becoming the next James Bond. He has moved from 4/1 to 5/2 favourite to play 007, with Hugh Jackman and Ewan McGregor joint second favourite. "Clive Owen's nomination has sparked a betting frenzy from James Bond fans, who feel that his heightened global recognition will have done his chances of becoming the next Bond a world of good," said William Hill spokesman Rupert Adams.

Van Gogh festival film withdrawn
Murdered director Theo van Gogh's controversial film Submission has been pulled from the Rotterdam Film Festival because of security fears.
It was one of three of his works to be shown as part of a freedom of expression event in tribute to the late film-maker's life. The film is critical of the treatment of women under Islam. Its TV screening is thought to have led to his murder. The 10-day Dutch festival begins on Wednesday. Submission was made with liberal Somali-Dutch politician Ayaan Hirsi Ali and was due to be shown on 30 January. Van Gogh was shot and stabbed to death in November 2004 several months after receiving death threats following Submission's first broadcast on Dutch television. Two of Van Gogh's other films will be shown as planned, including the theatrical world premiere of his last feature 06/05.
Festival director Sandra den Hamer said: "The festival reflects what happens around us and within cinema itself." The festival opens with the French film The 10th District Court, Moments of Trials made by Raymond Depardon. The event sees 14 films competing to win three Top Tiger Awards which aim to introduce promising new talent. New sections added to this year's festival include Cinema of the Future and Cinema of the World, with special focus on Russian and south-east Asian productions. There is also an Iraqi-German offering entitled Underexposure, which looks at life in Iraq after Saddam Hussein.

Douglas set for Indian adventure
Actor Michael Douglas is to co-produce and star in an adventure film about a diamond robbery set in India.
The new picture is expected to be similar to Douglas's action films of the 1980s, Romancing The Stone and The Jewel Of The Nile. Another Hollywood star is being lined up to co-star, while the rest of the cast will be Indian. Aishwarya Rai, star of Bride and Prejudice, is the "preferred choice" of the Indian studio involved in the film.
On a visit to India, the 60-year-old actor said he hoped to start shooting Racing The Monsoon next year. Douglas added that it had been inspired by a Wall Street Journal article about India's 'angadias', who courier money and diamonds around India.
The actor's own production company, Further Films, is working in partnership with two Indian film-making concerns to bring the picture to the screen. Shailendra Singh, the founder of India's Percept Films, said there would be "a lot of India" in the movie - and that an Indian train would play a big role. "The train will be a crucial part of the film. The chase and most of the stunts will be on the train," said Mr Singh. Swashbuckling adventure film Romancing The Stone saw Douglas's female co-star Kathleen Turner win a Golden Globe award for her performance in 1985.

Vera Drake scoops film award
Oscar hopefuls Mike Leigh and Imelda Staunton were both winners at the 2004 Evening Standard British Film Awards.
Vera Drake - Leigh's 1950s drama about a backstreet abortionist - was named best film and Staunton, who played the title role, was named best actress. Other winners included Paddy Considine, who was crowned best actor for his role in Dead Man's Shoes. Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason was named Evening Standard Readers' Film of 2004 at the central London ceremony.
Leigh was presented with his winner's statuette by Timothy Spall and Staunton's award was announced by Patrick Stewart, during the glittering ceremony at The Savoy on Sunday night. Evening Standard film critic Derek Malcolm said: "He [Leigh] has never made a film that is better controlled and technically more secure... If this isn't one of the films of the year, I don't know what is." The Alexander Walker Special Award - which honours those who have made a supreme contribution to British film - went to Tim Bevan and Eric Fellner, the co-chairmen of Working Title films. The production company is behind films such as My Beautiful Laundrette, Billy Elliot, About A Boy, Shaun of The Dead and Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason.
Simon Pegg, who stars in and co-wrote Shaun of the Dead, won the 2004 Peter Sellers Award For Comedy. Other winners included Emily Blunt and Nathalie Press who were jointly named ITV London Most Promising Newcomer Award for their performances in Pawel Pawlikowski's rites-of-passage story, My Summer of Love. Pawlikowski won the best screenplay statuette, while Roger Deakins won the Technical Achievement Award for his cinematography on The Village and The Ladykillers. Guests at the ceremony included Dame Judi Dench, Kim Cattrall, Charles Dance, Bill Nighy and Colin Firth. The awards, which were hosted by Jack Dee, are to be screened on ITV London on Tuesday at 2300 GMT.

Russian film wins BBC world prize
Russian drama The Return (Vozvrashchenie) has been named winner of the BBC Four World Cinema Award.
The film tells the story of two adolescent boys who are subjected to a harsh regime when their strict father returns after a 10-year absence. Directed by Andrey Zvyagintsev, The Return previously won the 2003 Golden Lion award at the Venice Film Festival. The prize was presented at an awards ceremony held in London on Thursday and hosted by Jonathan Ross. The winner was chosen by a panel which included X Files actress Gillian Anderson, critic Roger Clarke and Touching the Void director Kevin McDonald.
Ross, who is the presenter of BBC One's Film 2005, was also involved in the deliberations. A shortlist of six films from around the world had been drawn up from which the panel chose. Other nominees included the Motorcycle Diaries, Zatoichi and Hero. A viewer poll saw director Zhang Yimou's martial arts epic Hero emerge as the favourite with 32% of votes cast. Tragedy struck the production of The Return when one of the young stars, 15-year-old Vladimir Girin, drowned in a lake. The winner of the World Cinema Award last year was the French animated feature Belleville Rendezvous

The Incredibles movie has beaten Shrek 2 to the main prizes at Hollywood's animation awards, the Annies.
The superhero film was named best animated feature while Brad Bird won best director, writer and voice actor for his role as designer Edna Mode. The Incredibles won a total of 10 awards - but Shrek 2, which had seven nominations, went home empty-handed. The two movies will compete with Shark Tale in the best animated film category of the Oscars at the end of February.
The Incredibles' awards came despite Shrek 2's greater box office success. Shrek 2 took $881m (£468m) around the world, compared with $576m (£306m) for The Incredibles. SpongeBob SquarePants was named best animated TV show while TV comedy King of the Hill picked up two prizes including one for actress Brittany Murphy's voice work. Tom Kenny, who provides the voice for SpongeBob SquarePants, hosted Sunday's ceremony at the Alex Theater, Los Angeles. The awards are handed out by the International Animated Film Society. Finding Nemo won nine Annies last year.

Actor Scott is new Bond favourite
Bookmaker William Hill has stopped taking bets on who will be the next James Bond, following a succession of large wagers on actor Dougray Scott.
The firm closed the book on Friday, saying "insider information" could have contributed to the number of bets. "In the past gambles like this have often been right," William Hill spokesman Rupert Adams said. The closing list gave Scott odds of 6-9, followed by Oscar nominee Clive Owen at 5-2. Scott first found fame in the TV series Soldier Soldier and has since then starred in such films as Mission Impossible II and the wartime drama Enigma.
Mr Adams said one punter had placed a bet of £870 on the 39-year-old actor at odds of 8-1. "She told us she had some inside information, perhaps she knew he had been to a casting, but she wouldn't say," he said. Others thought to be in the running include Star Wars actor Ewan McGregor and Australian star Hugh Jackman, both of whom have odds of 4-1. Colin Farrell, Jude Law and Troy star Eric Bana have also been tipped for the role in the past.
A large number of bets on actor Colin Salmon to become the first black James Bond were dismissed as a publicity stunt a month ago. The next Bond film, originally due for release in 2005, has been delayed until 2006 due to Sony's takeover of the MGM studio. The most recent, Die Another Day, was released in late 2002 and saw Pierce Brosnan make his final appearance as the secret agent. The actor was originally due to make a fifth appearance as Bond, but was released from his contract in 2004.

Singer's film to show at festival
A documentary which takes a candid look at the life of chart-topping singer George Michael will be shown at this year's Berlin Film Festival.
A Different Story will screen in the Panorama section of the festival, which runs from 10-20 February. It features the singer talking about both his career and his personal life, from his days in Wham! through to more recent events. Michael will attend the festival to introduce the screening on 16 February. Director Southan Morris and executive producer Andy Stephens will also attend the festival.
The 93 minute film will see Michael discussing his early days in Wham! along with his later career, including his legal battles with record label Sony and his stance against the Iraq war and American politics. It will also touch upon his turbulent personal life, including his arrest in a Beverly Hills park toilet in 1998 for "lewd behaviour", and the death of his boyfriend Anselmo Feleppa from Aids. The film, which includes previously unseen footage of the singer also features contributions from Michael's former Wham! partner Andrew Ridgeley, as well as ex-Wham! backing singers Pepsi and Shirlie. Other contributors include Sting, Mariah Carey, Elton John, Noel Gallagher, Geri Halliwell and Simon Cowell. This year's festival will open with Man To Man, a historical epic starring Joseph Fiennes and Kristin Scott-Thomas. It will be one of 21 films competing for the festival's top prize, the Golden Bear. Other films in competition will include The Life Aquatic, a quirky comedy starring Bill Murray, and the biopic Kinsey, which features Liam Neeson. The full programme will be announced on 1 February.

De Niro film leads US box office
Film star Robert De Niro has returned to the top of the North American box office with his film Hide and Seek.
The thriller shot straight to the number one spot after taking $22m (£11.7m) at the box office. De Niro recently spent three weeks at the top with comedy Meet The Fockers, which was at number five this week. Oscar hopefuls The Aviator, Million Dollar Baby and Sideways all cashed in on their multiple nominations with stronger ticket sales.
In Hide and Seek, De Niro plays a widower whose daughter has a creepy imaginary friend. Despite lukewarm reviews from critics, the film took more than the expected $18m (£9.5m). "The element of a real actor in a psychological thriller certainly elevated it," said Bruce Snyder, president of domestic distribution at 20th Century Fox. Clint Eastwood's Million Dollar Baby led the Oscar hopefuls with $11.8m (£6.3m), coming in at number three during its first weekend of wide release. The Aviator, a film biography of Howard Hughes that leads the Oscar field with 11 nominations, was at number six for the weekend with $7.5m (£4m). Oscar best-picture nominee Sideways entered the top ten for the first time in its 15th week of release. It came in seventh $6.3 (£3.35m). Last week's top film, Ice Cube's road-trip comedy Are We There Yet?, slipped to second place with $17m (£9m), while Coach Carter fell two places to number four, taking $8m (£4.25m) in its third week. Rounding out the top ten were In Good Company - starring Dennis Quaid and Scarlett Johansson - Racing Stripes and Assault on Precinct 13.

Films on war triumph at Sundance
A study of the United States at war in the past 50 years has picked up one of the main awards at the 2005 Sundance Film Festival in Utah, in the US.
Why We Fight scooped the grand jury prize for documentaries at the world's leading independent film festival. British director Sean McAllister's The Liberace of Baghdad - about a pianist in war-torn Iraq - won a special prize in the world documentary category. Both Why We Fight and The Liberace of Baghdad were made for the BBC. Why We Fight is due to be screened on BBC Four in March.
The Sundance festival was founded by actor Robert Redford in 1981. This year's festival - which ended on Sunday after a 11-day run - has been dominated by the themes of war and politics. In the new world cinema drama category, the Angolan film The Hero triumphed to win the grand jury prize. The film - an Angolan/French/Portuguese production - tells the story of a veteran of the country's civil war who returns home to face a new battle of survival. Twelve films competing in the new world cinema documentary category focused on countries and people under siege.
Finnish film The Three Rooms of Melancholia looks at the war in Chechnya and Shake Hands With The Devil: The Journey of Romeo Dallaire tells the story of a UN mission to Rwanda during the 1994 genocide. But it was Dutch documentary Shape of the Moon - a study of an extended family in Indonesia - which took the top prize. Meanwhile, French-Israeli production Wall, which looks at Israel's controversial security wall separating it from the Palestinian territories, picked up a world cinema special jury prize for documentaries. In the main drama category, Forty Shades of Blue was named winner of the grand jury prize. The film tells the tale of a forbidden tug-of-love between a father, his Russian immigrant girlfriend and his son.
During its 24-year history, the Sundance Film Festival has showcased successes such as Reservoir Dogs, The Blair Witch Project and The Full Monty. Last year's festival provided a platform for hits such as Open Water, Napoleon Dynamite, Garden State and Super-Size Me. The festival is held in the mountain resort of Park City, east of Salt Lake City, which sees its population rise from 7,500 to 45,000 during the festival.

Career honour for actor DiCaprio
Actor Leonardo DiCaprio's "exceptional career" has been honoured at the Santa Barbara International Film Festival.
The star was presented with the award by Martin Scorsese, who directed him in Oscar-nominated movie The Aviator. "It's a lifetime achievement award, which is completely and utterly surreal, given I'm only 30 years old," DiCaprio said. "But what has it been? Almost 17 years now. I've done quite a few films." A retrospective of his movies was shown.
"What's really exciting, for me, is that this is what I really love doing," he added. "It's what I want to do for the rest of my life." DiCaprio began his movie career in horror film Critters 3, before moving onto roles in The Basketball Diaries, Romeo and Juliet, Titanic and Gangs of New York. The achievement award was created to commemorate the California festival's 20th anniversary and coincided with DiCaprio's portrayal of millionaire Howard Hughes in The Aviator.
Veteran actress Jane Russell, who starred in Hughes' 1943 film The Outlaw, said was impressed by DiCaprio's quest for authenticity when he previously discussed the role with her. "I was very happy that (DiCaprio) came and cared to come up and find out what (Hughes) was really like," she said. The Aviator has taken pole position in this year's Oscars race with 11 nominations, including nominations for best film, best actor for DiCaprio and best director for Scorsese.

Howl helps boost Japan's cinemas
Japan's box office received a 3.8% boost last year, with ticket sales worth 211bn yen (£1.08bn).
The surge was led by animated movie Howl's Moving Castle, which took 20bn yen (£102m) to become the biggest film in Japan in 2004. It is expected to match the 30.7bn yen (£157m) record of Hayao Miyazaki's previous film Spirited Away. Japan Motion Picture Producers figures showed that 170 million cinema admissions were made in Japan in 2004. The Last Samurai, starring Tom Cruise, was the biggest foreign movie hit in Japan last year, taking 13.8bn yen (£70.7m).
It was followed by Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, Finding Nemo and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King. The second highest-grossing Japanese film was romantic drama Crying Out Love in the Centre of the World, followed by Be With You and Pocket Monsters Advanced Generation. Japanese films accounted for 37.5% of Japan's box office total last year, with foreign films taking the remaining 62.5%. This represented a 4.5% gain for the proportion of Japanese films in 2004 compared to 2003. The number of Japanese films released rose to 310 in 2004 from 287 the previous year. Sales of movies on DVD and video amounted to 497bn yen (£2.54bn) for the year.

Keanu Reeves given Hollywood star
Actor Keanu Reeves, best known for his role in the Matrix movies, has been awarded a star on the prestigious Hollywood Walk of Fame.
The 40-year-old attended the unveiling of the star with his mother, Patricia, and thanked her for inspiring him to become an actor. "When I was 15 years old I asked my mom if it was OK to be an actor," Reeves said. "She said: 'Whatever you want'." His star is the 2,277th to be embedded in the pavement on Hollywood Boulevard.
The actor, who was born in the Lebanese capital Beirut, also spoke of how he dropped out of school to pursue an acting career. "Hollywood was calling," he said, "So I got in my car, a 1969 British racing green Volvo with holes in the floor and bricks holding up the seats. I was a young man full of hopes and dreams." Reeves first found fame in the teen comedy Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure, and went on to combine such blockbusters as Speed, The Devil's Advocate and the Matrix series, with smaller films including My Own Private Idaho. More recently he was seen in Something's Gotta Give alongside Jack Nicholson and Diane Keaton. His next film, the supernatural thriller Constantine, is released in the US later this month and opens in the UK in March.

De Niro completes box office coup
Robert De Niro has completed a transatlantic box office double by topping the UK and US film charts with two different films at the same time.
Comedy sequel Meet the Fockers, in which he stars with Ben Stiller, Dustin Hoffman and Barbra Streisand, shot to the top of the UK chart at the weekend. It took £7.2m in three days - eight times more than the number two, Closer. Assault on Precinct 13 was in third. At the same time, US audiences were won over by his new thriller Hide and Seek. In Meet the Fockers, he picks up the role of an uptight father and ex-CIA agent from 2000 hit comedy, Meet the Parents.
It is a big leap to his role in Hide and Seek, a supernatural horror in which he plays a widower whose daughter's imaginary friend turns nasty. In the UK box office chart, Meet the Fockers pushed Closer off the top spot while police action movie Assault On Precinct 13, starring rapper Ja Rule, made £750,000 in its first weekend. London Underground thriller Creep was another new entry at six while quirky comedy Sideways, which got five Oscar nominations last week, entered in eighth place. The Oscar nominations do not seem to have had an impact on fans' choices at cinemas. Leading contenders The Aviator, Million Dollar Baby and Ray all suffered substantial drops in takings compared with the previous weekend.

Hundreds vie for best film Oscar
A total of 267 films are eligible for the best film Oscar but only five will be chosen to go forward as nominees.
The Academy of Motion Picture, Arts and Sciences has sent out the first ballot papers with the full list of films vying for recognition. Among those expected to receive nominations are The Aviator, Million Dollar Baby and Sideways. Academy members will now vote for their favourites before the final nominees are announced on 25 January.
To be eligible for nomination a film must have been shown in a commercial theatre for seven consecutive days before the deadline of 31 December. Director Martin Scorsese's The Aviator, starring Leonardo DiCaprio went on general release on Christmas Day in the US, ensuring it just made the deadline. Studios have already begun lobbying voters, taking out full page adverts in trade publications such as Variety urging them to remember particular films when it comes to choosing what to back. Other movies tipped for possible success include Closer, starring Jude Law and Julia Roberts, Finding Neverland, with Johnny Depp as author JM Barry and Kinsey starring Liam Neeson as the famed sex scientist Alfred Kinsey. Meanwhile, design engineer Takuo Miyagishima will be awarded an Oscar at the Scientific and Technical Awards Dinner on 12 February 2005. Miyagishima is the 18th recipient of the Sawyer Award, which is "presented to an individual in the motion picture industry whose technological contributions have brought credit to the industry." The main Oscar ceremony will be held in Los Angeles on 27 February.

Day-Lewis set for Berlin honour
Actor Daniel Day-Lewis is to be presented with an award for his career in film at the Berlin Film Festival.
The 47-year-old, whose credits include his Oscar-winning performance in My Left Foot, will be presented with the Berlinale Camera award on 15 February. The honour, awarded since 1986, honours figures in cinema that the festival feels "particularly indebted to". Man to Man, a historical epic starring Kristin Scott Thomas, opens the German festival on 10 February. A candid documentary about the life and career of singer George Michael, A Different Story will also be screened at the 10-day event. '
Day-Lewis has competed four times at the Berlin Film Festival, with films In The Name Of The Father (1994), The Crucible (1997), The Boxer (1998) and Martin Scorsese's Gangs Of New York (2003). The festival praises him for his "sensational start" with roles in My Beautiful Launderette and costume classic A Room With A View, and a "great number of celebrated roles" in subsequent productions. Japan's oldest film studio will also be honoured along with Day-Lewis. Shochiku film studios, which was founded 110 years ago, will become the first cinematic institution to receive the Berlinale Camera award. Famous Japanese directors including Akira Kurosawa have had films produced at the studio.

US composer recreates Bach score
A US musicologist has recreated a lost musical score by German composer Johann Sebastian Bach.
The 1728 composition, called Wedding Cantata BWV 216, was found among the papers of Japanese pianist Chieko Hara, who died in Japan in 2001 aged 86. The work, written for the wedding of a daughter of a German customs official, was missing for 80 years. Joshua Rifkin - a composer and leading interpreter of Bach - has recreated the missing instrumental parts.
He said he originally wanted to let the lost cantata lie in rest. "Maybe a fragment should stay a fragment," said Rifkin. "Then I thought of palaeontologists, from one bone they figure the entire dinosaur. This is my dinosaur." The eight rediscovered pages consist of vocal pieces in German for soprano and alto, with the seven movements lasting for a total of between 20 and 25 minutes. The instrumental parts were entirely lost except for two recycled movements, a duet and an aria which had been used elsewhere in Bach's work. Rifkin likened the challenge to a "musical Rubik's cube". "I could not reconstruct what Bach wrote but I could give the people of today an idea of what his music was like," he said. "It sounds like Bach's music, but the listener should not know which part is Bach's and which part is mine."

US musical Sweet Charity has cancelled its run on Broadway after poor ticket sales for its early shows.
Star Christina Applegate had to pull out of pre-Broadway performances earlier this month with a broken foot. Producer Barry Weissler said he was "deeply proud" of the show, but said the decision to close it was "painful but fiscally responsible". Applegate, who starred in TV comedy Married With Children, had been hoping to make her Broadway debut in the show. The 33-year-old injured herself while performing in Chicago, and had been hoping to recover in time for its official New York opening on 21 April. She had received mixed reviews for performances in Minneapolis and Chicago. Previews of the $7.5m (£4m) show were due to begin on 4 April. Sweet Charity tells the story of Charity Hope Valentine, a dancer who always falls in love with the wrong man. It was first performed on Broadway in 1966 with Gwen Verdon in the title role, while Shirley MacLaine starred in the 1969 film version.

Ray Charles studio becomes museum
A museum dedicated to the career of the late legendary singer Ray Charles is to open in his former recording studio in Los Angeles.
His longtime publicist Jerry Digney said the museum would house "archive materials from recordings, to awards, to ephemera, to wardrobe". A tour bus used by Charles and his entourage over the years will also be on permanent display. It is hoped the museum will be ready for visitors in late 2007.
Mr Digney said the recording studio and offices had been used by Charles for many years, and was where he recorded much of his last album, Genius Loves Company. It is hoped the museum will also house an education centre. The building had been declared a historic landmark by the city of Los Angeles just before Charles' death in June 2004 at the age of 73. Following his death, Charles won eight Grammy Awards, including album of the year for Genius Loves Company, a collection of duets.

Pop star Britney Spears has attacked "false" and "desperate" US tabloid magazines, questioning their honesty after they reported she was pregnant.
In a letter on her website, the singer named celebrity tabloids Us Weekly, In Touch and Star as the worst offenders. "Until you face what is going on in your life, I guess you'll remain a false tabloid," the 23-year-old wrote. Stories about the state of her marriage to Kevin Federline and rumours about a pregnancy have recently appeared. But the chart-topping singer's letter did not shed any further light on those stories. In February, Spears clashed with Us Weekly for publishing pictures of her honeymoon in Fiji without permission. The couple, who married in Los Angeles last September, claimed staff took photographs of them which were later sold.
They said they allowed the pictures to be taken after they were assured they would only be used for a private scrapbook, which they later received as a souvenir. Us magazine was unrepentant about their decision to publish, saying: "Britney should start her own magazine if she'd like to dictate her own coverage." "Coming from a celebrity who sold pictures of both her wedding and her stepdaughter, it's unlikely the issue here is privacy," they added. Spears claimed that other magazines were approached with the pictures but chose to contact her instead.

Abba queen enters music rich list
The woman behind the Abba musical Mamma Mia! has joined a list of British-based music millionaires.
Producer Judy Craymer is the highest new entry in the Sunday Times' music rich list, with a £67m fortune. Ms Craymer remortgaged her home to finance her idea of a musical based around Abba's hits, which has since become a global triumph. Teenage soul singer Joss Stone is a new entry on a list of Britain's young music millionaires with £5m.
Ms Craymer, who developed Mamma Mia! with playwright Catherine Johnson and members of Abba, is at number 31 on the music rich list. But taking the top spot for a second year is former record label boss Clive Calder, whose wealth has risen to £1.3bn. Mr Calder is the man behind acts including Britney Spears. He made his fortune by selling his independent label Zomba to record giant BMG. Former Beatle Sir Paul McCartney is second on the list with £800m - up £40m on last year. Andrew Lloyd-Webber's wealth rose an estimated £300m on last year, to £700m, while theatre impresario Sir Cameron Mackintosh's fortune rose from £340m to £400m.
His recent hits have included the West End show Mary Poppins. But Pop Idol mogul Simon Fuller has seen his wealth plummet from £220m last year to £75m after selling his entertainment company 19 for less than expected, according to the Sunday Times. Joss Stone, the 17-year-old soul singer from Devon, was a new entry in the young music millionaires list. The list also features Charlotte Church, Coldplay, Daniel Bedingfield, Will Young and David and Victoria Beckham. At number one is Dhani Harrison, son of the late Beatle George Harrison, who has inherited £140m. The Beckhams - who qualify thanks to Victoria's former singing career - are in second place with £75 million between them - up £10m on last year.

Casino Royale is next Bond movie
Casino Royale, author Ian Fleming's first James Bond book, is to be the next Bond film, with Goldeneye director Martin Campbell behind the camera.
It will be the 21st James Bond film to hit the big screen, and speculation has been rife over who will play the lead. Casino Royale was turned into a spoof spy movie by John Huston in 1967, with David Niven in the lead role. Pierce Brosnan led the past four Bond films but said producers axed him after offering him the chance to return. Among the favourites to take over the coveted role are Scottish actor Dougray Scott, Oscar nominee Clive Owen and Australian star Hugh Jackman. Producers say no decision has yet been made on who will become the seventh actor, including Niven, to play Bond on film. Kill Bill director Quentin Tarantino had talked of wanting to take on the Casino Royale project, and said he had spoken to Brosnan about it.
Shooting on Casino Royale is expected to begin once Campbell has finished work on The Legend of Zorro, a sequel to The Mask of Zorro, starring Catherine Zeta Jones and Antonio Banderas. Producers Barbara Broccoli and Michael G Wilson expect the film to be released in 2006.
The script will once again be developed by Neal Purvis and Robert Wade who have both worked on two previous Bond movies. Fleming's book saw the introduction of Bond pitted against a Russian spy in a game of baccarat. Simultaneously, a woman arrives on the scene to take his eye off the game. The novel is one of Fleming's most violent and sadistic stories, with 007 suffering a savage beating from his nemesis Le Chiffre. In addition to the 1967 film, it was also adapted for television in 1954 with actor Barry Nelson as an Americanised "Jimmy" Bond. MGM Vice Chairman Chris McGurk said: "Martin (Campbell) is an incredibly exciting film-maker. Goldeneye was a wonderful movie and helped reinvigorate the Bond franchise. We're thrilled to have him back to direct the newest Bond." New Zealand-born Campbell moved to the UK in 1966 and directed TV series such as The Professionals, Minder and Bergerac. His film credits include Edge of Darkness, Vertical Limit and Beyond Borders, which starred Angelina Jolie and Clive Owen.

Organisers say this year's Berlin Film Festival, which opens on Thursday with period epic Man to Man, will celebrate a revitalised European cinema.
Of the 21 films in competition for the Golden and Silver Bear awards, more than half are from Europe with France particularly well represented. Festival director Dieter Kosslick says this strong showing signals "a new consciousness for European films". "They're on an incredible winning streak," he told the Reuters agency. "This isn't to say there aren't any good American films," he continued. "It's just that there are more good European films."
However, Mr Kosslick refused to accept that widespread opposition to the Iraq war had turned audiences against Hollywood imports. "There is no anti-American mood," he said. Some 350 films will be screened at this year's festival, with a further 300 shown at the European Film Market that runs alongside it. More than a dozen celebrities are scheduled to attend, among them Will Smith, Kevin Spacey and Keanu Reeves. But Mr Kosslick says more would be coming had the Academy Awards not been brought forward to 27 February. "I'm not worried that we won't be able to fill the red carpet with stars," he said, though he admitted the festival may be moved to January next year to avoid a similar clash. The 10-day Berlinale runs until 20 February.

India to deport Bollywood actress
India has ordered the deportation of Iranian-born model and actress Negar Khan to Norway after saying she was working illegally on her visa.
Khan has had raunchy roles in music videos and Bollywood films over the past two years. The distressed actress told media she was being driven straight to the airport after a routine appointment at the Bombay immigration office. Immigration officials said she had been warned about her visa last year.
Khan told an Indian news channel on her mobile phone: "They are not even letting me go home to get my bags. I have no clothes or money on me. "They did not give me any notice. I don't know why they are taking me away like this. There is nothing wrong with my visa. It says I work here... They are not allowing me to even call a lawyer." Bipin Bihari, deputy police chief in Bombay, said Khan was being sent back to Norway, from which she holds a passport, on the first available flight. "She was on a visitor's visa but she has engaged in several commercial ventures," he said. "We issued notices last year, in view of which she had gone back to Norway, but she has returned again this year to work." One of Khan's biggest successes was the steamy Hindi song Chadti Jawani (Rising Youth). Khan was involved in controversy when topless photos alleged to be of her appeared in a Norwegian magazine.

Ray DVD beats box office takings
Oscar-nominated film biopic Ray has surpassed its US box office takings with a combined tally of $80m (£43m) from DVD and video sales and rentals.
Ray's success on DVD outstripped its $74m (£40m) US box office total, earning more than $40m (£22m) on the first day of the DVD's release alone. Ray has been nominated in six Oscar categories including best film and best actor for Jamie Foxx. The film recounts the life of blues singer Ray Charles, who died in 2004. In its first week on home entertainment release the film was the number one selling DVD, with the limited edition version coming in at number 11. Sony horror film The Grudge, starring Michelle Gellar, was the US' second best-selling DVD, with Jennifer Lopez and Richard Gere's romantic comedy Shall We Dance? at number three. Foxx's critically acclaimed performance as Ray has already earned him a Screen Actors Guild Award for best actor, as well as a prestigious Golden Globe. Ray director Taylor Hackford, responsible for the classic 1982 film An Officer and a Gentleman, has also received an Oscar nomination in the best director category. The film's three other Oscar nominations are for costume, film editing and sound mixing.

Hanks greeted at wintry premiere
Hollywood star Tom Hanks was in London's Leicester Square for the UK premiere of Polar Express.
The West End landmark was turned into a festive landscape complete with snow and carol singers to celebrate the arrival of the animated film. "This is Leicester Square like you've never seen it before," said Hanks, who plays five roles in the movie. Polar Express is based on a children's book which tells the story of a young boy's journey to meet Santa Claus. The 48-year-old actor crossed a three-metre high bridge built in the square, which he said was "almost impossible to get across". Hundreds of fans greeted the star, all wearing Santa hats, and mince pies were on offer. Hanks said that the new film has an "elegant message". "Christmas is a special time of the year and you get out of it what you put into it," added the two-time Academy Award winner.
"I believe in the spirit of Christmas and I think that's embodied in Santa Claus," he said. Polar Express uses technology similar to that used in Lord of the Rings to bring Gollum to life. The "performance capture" technique enables Hanks to play a number of roles, including the eight-year-old boy who is at the centre of the story, and Father Christmas. It is directed by Robert Zemeckis, who has previously worked with Hanks on Forrest Gump and Castaway.

Women in film 'are earning less'
Women in the UK film industry earn less than their male counterparts despite being better qualified, according to a study released on Wednesday.
Only 16% of women earn more than £50,000, compared with 30% of men. Women make up a third of the workforce. The research was carried out jointly by the UK Film Council and industry training body Skillset. It also found that women in the industry were less likely than men to be married or have dependant children.
The study, which claims to be the most in-depth so far conducted, found 60% of women in the film industry hold degrees, compared with 39% of men. Whilst 17% of men in the industry had no qualifications, this was true for only five per cent of women. In the lower salary bracket, 35% of women earn less than £20,000 a year, compared to only 18% of men. The research found very few women worked in the camera, sound, electrical and construction departments, but they made up a majority of those working in make-up and hairdressing.
UK Film Council chief executive John Woodward said: "Whilst the UK has benefited hugely from its highly-qualified film production workforce there are still many barriers facing people who want to get in and stay in the industry." "Developing the film production workforce must be underpinned with a commitment to diversity as well as training." The workforce is largely focused around London, with 78% in the industry based in the capital and the south east of England. The industry depends heavily on word of mouth, with 81% being recruited in that way. In total, only five percent of the workforce is made up of ethnic minorities, although in London the figure rises to 24%. The necessity of completing unpaid work experience to get into the workforce has also shot up, from 5% before the 1980s, to 45% after 2000.

Vera Drake's Bafta triumph hope
At the Bafta film awards on Saturday night, there is the prospect that a home-grown movie could walk off with a clutch of trophies.
Vera Drake, Mike Leigh's tale about a 1950s backstreet abortionist, is nominated in 11 categories. These include best film, best director and best actress shortlist for Imelda Staunton who plays the eponymous character. The film has spent months being lauded with prizes, from the Venice Film Festival to five awards from the London Critics' Circle on Wednesday night.
The Baftas has a tradition of honouring British cinema, and this year Vera Drake is the obvious candidate to be heaped with praise. Empire magazine's reviews editor Dan Jolin said the film had "a very good chance" of doing well on Saturday, predicting that it would collect five or six awards. "I don't think it's going to do a Lord of the Rings-style sweep, but Imelda Staunton is a shoo-in for best actress," he said.
"A best director prize for Mike Leigh and best British film are also likely and it could steal some awards from heavily-nominated competitors The Aviator and Finding Neverland." Mr Jolin tipped another contender - most likely The Aviator - to walk away with the Bafta for best film, and added that Finding Neverland had been lavished with nominations but not trophies. Strong Oscar contenders Million Dollar Baby and Sideways did not figure in the Bafta nominations, giving Vera Drake greater potential to walk away with the big prizes.
"There is a sense that this film is ours and we should slap our own guys on the back. Out of all the films in the running for the Baftas, Vera Drake is the true blue British one."
"If Mike Leigh is going to win awards for anything, it should be Vera Drake at this year's Baftas", said Mr Jolin, adding that the film was probably his most technically accomplished and lavish work yet. Mr Jolin also tipped Phil Davis for a best supporting actor prize for his role in Vera Drake but felt that Heather Craney could be outdone by Kate Winslet or Natalie Portman in the supporting actress category. "If there is anywhere where this film is going to win, it will be at the Baftas," he said.
The Guardian's film critic Peter Bradshaw felt that there "might well be" a sweep of awards for Vera Drake on Saturday night. "I hope that Bafta voters will respond to the extremely high standard of acting from the whole cast of the film. If Bafta can't do so, what hope is there?" he said. Mr Bradshaw felt that Mike Leigh's "masterpiece" was entitled to the best film award - leaving Dead Man's Shoes, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, My Summer of Love and Shaun of the Dead to slug it out for the best British film trophy. "I will be cheering if Vera Drake wins a whole host of awards," he added.

The new big-screen version of The Magic Roundabout, released in the UK on Friday, is the latest attempt to turn children's television into box-office gold.
Recent years have seen a less-than-successful adaptation of the 1960s puppet show Thunderbirds and a moderately successful version of E Nesbit's Five Children and It, previously filmed by the BBC in 1991. He-Man and Transformers, which were cartoon favourites in the 1980s, will soon receive their own costly makeovers. With screen versions of The A-Team, The Dukes of Hazzard and even Blake's Seven on the cards, nostalgia is clearly big business. But some critics complain that these expensive takes on iconic series of yesteryear do not match up to our fond memories of the originals. The new version of The Magic Roundabout, which will be released as Sprung! in the US, replaces the stop-motion models of the 1960s TV show with polished, computer-generated animation.
In a similar fashion, the 2004 Thunderbirds used human actors and special effects in place of the original's puppets and models. The films are squarely pitched at younger audiences. Pop stars Robbie Williams and Kylie Minogue provide voices in The Magic Roundabout, while the now-defunct boy band Busted performed the Thunderbirds theme song. But while some reviewers have been won over, there has nonetheless been a significant backlash. "This CG-animated adventure airbrushes the sly charm and trippy otherworldliness which made the 60s stop-motion Roundabout a cult hit," writes Stella Papamichael on the BBC Movies site.
And the recent puppet comedy Team America: World Police was in part provoked by its directors' outrage that Gerry Anderson's Thunderbirds was remade without its signature mannequins. Dan Jolin, reviews editor of Empire magazine, says classic children's TV shows have a built-in audience that make them ideal for reinvention.
"I can understand why people are taking these intellectual properties and repackaging them for the kids of today. "But I think it's backfiring. What's next - The Clangers on some distant planet, with some giant CGI Soup Dragons chasing after them?" Despite Thunderbirds' disappointing global box-office performance - the film cost $42m (£22m) but only recouped $21m (£11m) - the nostalgia craze shows no signs of abating. It can therefore be only a matter of time before some other TV favourites receive the Hollywood treatment.
After the success of Garfield: The Movie, Britain's shabby tabby
surely deserves his own film vehicle. With only 13 episodes made of the 1974 series, there is plenty of room to explore the lives of the pink cat, Professor Yaffle and the Mice of the Marvellous Mechanical Mouse Organ.
have already had one big-screen outing - 1977's Wombling Free. But with environmental issues still occupying our thoughts it is high time they made a comeback. Advances in special effects technology could do wonders for the BBC's supernatural comedy
. And the success of Pirates of the Caribbean must surely herald a comeback for TV's most popular cartoon buccaneer,
. It might also remind viewers the lewd character names often associated with the show never actually existed.
The Magic Roundabout is out in the UK on 11 February.
How about bringing Catweazle to the big screen? He could give Gandalf a run for his money!
Thundercats!! I loved it. Should be fun to see on the big screen, if some effort is put in! it will bring my youth back!
Get your hands off the Clangers! Is nothing sacred?
Make a movie version of the Banana splits!
What about Keanu Reeves and Richard Gere in a remake of The Wooden Tops? Or perhaps Robbie Williams could get his much mooted acting career off the ground by taking on the role of Andy Pandy.
You forgot to mention the grearest of them all, Danger Mouse! But then again, it couldn't be better than the original series, could it?
It's always nice to see these old toons re-released, but after the abysmal Thunderbirds movie (and the song!) I think I've been completely put off. Just leave these classics alone as good memories.
I think remakes are a good idea. As the world moves on people tend to look more and more into the past to things that make them feel safe. I believe this is the whole reason "retro" has become so popular. As long as a remake does justice to the original then all it can do is create a wider audience and possibly entice a new generation of persons to enjoy and revive and old series. Personally i'd like to see cartoons such as Transformers, Thundercats and M.A.S.K. get full Hollywood remakes.
Leave them alone, why ruin something that we all have very fond memories of in the first place? The thunderbirds film was apalling, not a patch on the puppet series I grew up with and the Magic Roundabout will never be the same without the voice of Eric Thompson.
Love to see Transformers with real actors and CGI. And make it at least a 15 rating.
Part of the reason for the success of such classics as the Magic Roundabout was that the characters were not the sweet and cuddly creatures that you would expect. They were moody, sarcastic, and rather human. Just looking at the pictures of the animations for the new film show that these characteristics have not been preserved. Dougal never smiled like that! Films of this sort have an unfortunate habit of Disneyfying everthing, and they just lose the real magic that made the show special in the first place.
I have fond memories of Bod (not least of which because I look like him) and would like to see someone attempt to make it into a film. It's got all the right material for an american blockbuster - no plot and no story. Bod would likely be played by Tom Cruise and would undoubtedly have a girlfriend or two.
It's all very well and good remaking these classic TV shows and films with all the latest technology for a 'new' audience, but for me a lot of the original charm is lost when they do this, and seems more like a money making exercise to cash in on the original success of the programme than reinventing or improving it. It maybe that to an audience who have never seen the originals they can watch them without prejudice, but to people who have grown up with all these shows such as Thunderbirds and Magic Roundabout which are part of our childhood, they are never going to live up to expectation. It does pose the question though that with all the long line of remakes being made, are film-makers running out of original ideas?
All I can say is bring back Danger Mouse, probably the greatest kids' show ever. I recently re-watched some episodes and realised that there was a level of humour shown in Danger Mouse that was completely lost on me when I was a child.
There WAS a new Captain Pugwash cartoon made a couple of years back. Again, like so many of these nostalgia programmes, the animation - this time computer created flat-cell like animation - failed to match the original's cut out paper technique for inventiveness, and was woefully inadequate. We live in a sampling world - the music industry has been pludering past decades for inspiration, clipping sounds from 20 years ago is much cheaper and easier that doing something new. Seems that the film and TV is doing the same now - it's just cheaper to take ideas from the past and rework them, rather than being daring and trying something new.
It got to be Mr.Benn. The story line about a man who changes in a fancy dress shop, steps into a door way and appears in another time and place would be amazing! If they got a decent producer and writer the story line could be great. And who to play the lead role? Well if it was a comedy then it would have to be someone like Steve Martin. If its going to be an adventure then Johnny Depp playing a role similar to the Pirates Of The Caribbean Character.
Muffin the Mule perhaps ? After all, grannies and grandpas go to the cinema as well you know!
Why can't the British film industry try making Gerry Anderson's UFO or Captain Scarlet, or Saphire and Steel, or The Tomorrow People.
In today's media, it seems the past is the future. TV shows such as Battlestar Galactica have new remakes, DJ's are sampling or re-working 70's and 80's music. Even computer games from 10-15 years ago are getting modern re-workings. Personally, I think it shows that no one has any originality any more! Why not just leave our misty-eyed nostalgia alone.
Mary, Mungo and Midge. But of course for most of the episodes the lift would be out of order and they would have to use the stairs. Plus would Mary be more of a Vicky Pollard character as she lives in a high rise council block? Yeah but no but I wasn't even there!
I'd like to see Mr. Benn, with Brad Pitt in the title role. Sean Connery could play the mysterious costume shop owner.
It demonstrates a profound lack of imagination in today's film-makers that they continually try to remake and remodel the past in an effort to cash in on nostalgia. There are plany of modern children's book that would make excellent films or TV programmes, why not use them instead of rehashing the past?
Mr. Benn with Rowan Atkinson as the lead.
Would have loved to see Dungeons & Dragons made, but unfortunately the film that it was made into didn't come up to scratch. The only one that isn't to be remade as yet is Thundercats, which I'd like to see.
I'm an expat living in Norway, and I recently went through a period of buying the DVDs of many of my favourite children's programs for my 2 daughters. My dearest wish, however, is to see a feature length version of Noggin the Nog appear on The Big Screen!! Very Scandinavian...
I believe that Childrens classics should be left well alone, and I will not be surprised if the Magic Roundabout does not do well at the Box Office, especially since it will be going up against The Spongebob Squarepants movie, popular among children because it's original, witty, and modern. The Magic Roundabout will never appeal to the children of today as it did all those many years ago.
How about classics like Chorlton and the Wheelies, Rentaghost, Terrahawks, Bod.....oh the list could go on and on!!!
If a Transformers movie is indeed on the cards then I'll be the first one on Amazon buying a copy, eagerly waiting at the front door with a frothy mouth and a nervous twitch. Repackage my childhood and sell it to me at an extortionate price! I don't care! Till then I'll have to make do with the Citreon C4 advert.
I'd luv to see Willow the Wisp on the big screen but sadly without the late Kenneth Williams doing the voices it wouldnt be the same. And who remembers Trap Door voiced by the late Willie Rushden, superb children's programme. Could Morph hold his own in a big screen movie??? Or even Jamie and the Magic Torch....hmmmmm, I could go on and on. Danger Mouse? At 34 I'm showing my age. :-)
Noggin the Nog was one of the best children's programs. The problem with bringing it to the big screen is that no-one could approach Oliver Postgate's wonderful voices. So in general leave well alone. The originals are good because they are of their time and the methods used are an integral part of the story.
Just imagine what could be achieved by using CGI in a remake of Fingerbobs... the already disturbing hand antics of the bearded hippy, Yoffi could take on a whole new level with a more life-like Fingermouse
Bob the Builder, Postman Pat and Fireman Sam together in an epic adventure of fire, post and bricks. In the ultimate struggle to save the women they love from the evil clowns, Krusty and Gobo. Will they triumph or will they fail miserably? Find out this Fall.
One puppet show that I personally would love to see made into a live action movie is Joe 90. It would be worth the price of admission alone to see the large screen version of Joe's car. Of course, Gerry Anderson's Supermarionation is a rich seam of material worthy of big-screen, big-budget action. It was only that Thunderbirds The Movie was targetted as a children't movie that really let it down. After all, the children that remember those shows with such affection are now the parents of children themselves.
It's only because the people who were children when these programmes were first shown have grown up and are plundering their childhoods, isn't it? I'd hate to see Bagpuss with perfect animation - I love that 'done in a shed' clunkiness and you couldn't recreate the magic. Perhaps if the remakes were done in a 'Look Around You' mock-authentic style I might be interested ...
Chorton And The Wheelies or Jamie And His Magic Torch; that would be mega!
This re-gurgitation of old films and TV shows makes me angry - it is corporate laziness resting on the safety of other people's ideas, because it guarantees to bring in the $$$. The same can be said of modern day pop bands who release other peoples material, Will Young etc. The sad fact is nostalgia sells big bucks in the short-term. The fact that they will be forgotten in 6 months time is irrelevant (e.g. Starsky & Hutch) Hence, the market is saturated with this mindless drivel, but it can only be stopped if people stop buying it!
I pray they never do a remake of Chorlton And The Wheelies. I'm only 27 and don't remember the series from when it was on TV, but have the set on DVD and it's a classic. The fact it's so great comes from the fact that there were very few special effects involved and compared to today's stuff it looks amateurish. Thats the appeal though, it's so innocent (like Chorlton himself) and it would be a real shame if they did remake it.

Stars shine on Bafta red carpet
Hollywood stars brought a touch of glamour to London on Saturday for the biggest night in the British film calendar.
Cate Blanchett, Leonardo DiCaprio and Richard Gere were just some of the actors who attended the 2005 Bafta film awards. They emerged from limos at Leicester Square to an uncertain British climate that threatened rain one moment and promised late winter sunshine the next. But the gods were certainly shining on the thousands of film fans who lined the red carpet to meet their idols. Screaming built up into a crescendo as more and more big name stars appeared. The biggest cheer of the night was reserved for The Aviator star Leonardo DiCaprio, who paused in the chilly February air to sign autographs for the throngs. He said the ear-piercing welcome was "unlike anything I've ever encountered. It's very intense and very loud."
Best actress winner Imelda Staunton, who wore a green chiffon dress that sparkled with sequins and beads, told the BBC News website that Vera Drake was the highlight of her career. Her role as a backstreet abortionist in the gritty low-budget film has already led to a clutch of awards and an Oscar nomination. She said: "Never in a million years did I think this was going to happen. "Being here and just being nominated is great, but I hope it means more people will go and see the film as well." Rooting for Staunton in the best actress category was Cate Blanchett, herself nominated for her supporting role as Hollywood icon Katherine Hepburn in The Aviator.
Shivering in a floor-length shimmering Armani dress, the Australian-born actress stopped to sign autographs and joked: "It's tight but I love it." Glamour was also brought to the evening by actress Sienna Miller, supermodel Claudia Schiffer - who was supporting her director husband Matthew Vaughn - Troy actress Diane Kruger and star of the TV programme The OC, Micha Barton. Wearing a caramel-coloured floaty frock by the designer Alexander McQueen, Miller told reporters the red carpet experience was "intense, nerve-wracking and cold". The younger stars of British film were also represented in the shape of Emma Watson, who plays Hermione in the Harry Potter films. The 14-year-old said she was hoping to meet DiCaprio and Keanu Reeves but joked that "they are probably a little too old for me".
Actor Christian Slater, who is currently starring in One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest in London's West End, was greeted by cries of "Christian, Christian" by the ever vocal crowd. Keanu Reeves, who presented the best actress award, said being on the red carpet was an "exciting" part of his job. "It is always surreal and when it is nice, it is nice," he said. Martin Scorsese, whose movie The Aviator went on to win best film, said being honoured in the UK meant a lot to him. He said: "I am a great admirer of British cinema since the 1930s and 40s, up until now.
"They give me a new energy when I see the best coming out of England and every two or three years is a whole new cycle of tough and young film-makers, and even the older ones are making good films. "To recognise me in this way is a great honour." British actor Clive Owen, who has won a Golden Globe and a Bafta for his supporting role in Closer, said it "meant a lot" to be at the ceremony. He said: "Just to be here really, at the Baftas. The bottom line is it is a celebration of British films."

Bafta to hand out movie honours
Movie stars from across the globe are attending this year's Bafta film award ceremony.
British stars Imelda Staunton and Clive Owen are hoping for awards at the Odeon in London's Leicester Square. Hollywood stars Leonardo diCaprio, Pierce Brosnan, Christian Slater and Richard Gere are also in the audience for the biggest night in UK film. Hollywood blockbuster The Aviator, starring DiCaprio, leads the field with 14 nominations, including best movie. It is up against Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, Finding Neverland, The Motorcycle Diaries and British film Vera Drake, which has 11 nominations.
Staunton is one of the favourites to land the best actress award for her gritty role as a backstreet abortionist in the small-budget film. She arrived at the ceremony wearing a green silk and chiffon low cut evening dress decorated with beads. "It's lovely to be here at home, to be on British soil. It's very nice indeed," she told reporters.
Asked whether she was nervous about her best actress nomination she said: "It's out of my hands, there's nothing I can do. I'm here with a lot of mates and we're going to have a very nice evening." Other nominees in the best actress category include Charlize Theron for Monster, Ziyi Zhang for House of Flying Daggers and UK star Kate Winslet, who has two nods for her roles in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and Finding Neverland. DiCaprio faces competition from Bernal, Jamie Foxx, Jim Carrey and Johnny Depp in the best actor category. The crowed screamed when he arrived on the red carpet."It's unlike anything I've ever encountered. It's very intense and very loud," he told the BBC.
"It's the first time I've come to the Baftas because it's the first time I've been nominated...I've appreciated British cinema for a long time and to be recognised like this is a special honour." Gere, who is presenting the best film award, said: "It's a big party, I had no idea it was going to be this big. It's crazy, I think it's bigger than the Academy Awards."
British actor Owen is hoping to repeat his Golden Globe success with a best supporting actor award for his role in Closer. He raised one of the biggest cheers of the night when he walked down the red carpet. "I was always a huge fan of Closer as a play, so when I got the call to appear in the film, it was a huge thrill for me," he said. "The whole experience has been a treat and I'm very fortunate to have been given the role." His co-star Natalie Portman is up against Blanchett, Heather Craney, Julie Cristie and Meryl Streep in the best supporting actress category. Mike Leigh is up for the best director award for Vera Drake, alongside Martin Scorsese for The Aviator, Michael Mann for Collateral, Michel Gondry for Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and Marc Forster for Finding Neverland.
The Orange British Academy Film Awards will be shown on BBC One at 2010 GMT.

Stars pay tribute to actor Davis
Hollywood stars including Spike Lee, Burt Reynolds and Oscar nominee Alan Alda have paid tribute to actor Ossie Davis at a funeral in New York.
Veteran star Ossie Davis, a well-known civil rights activist, died in Miami at the age of 87 on 4 February 2005. Friends and family, including actress Ruby Dee his wife of 56 years, gathered at the Riverside Church on Saturday. Also present at the service was former US president Bill Clinton and singer Harry Belafonte, who gave the eulogy. "He would have been a very good president of the United States," said Mr Clinton. "Like most of you here, he gave more to me than I gave to him."
The 87-year-old was found dead last weekend in his hotel room in Florida, where he was making a film. Police said that he appeared to have died of natural causes. Davis made his acting debut in 1950 in No Way Out starring Sidney Poiter. He frequently collaborated with director Spike Lee, starring in seven Lee films including Jungle Fever, Do The Right Thing and Malcolm X. Attallah Shabazz, the daughter of activist Malcolm X, recalled the famous eulogy delivered by Davis at her father's funeral. "Harlem has come to bid farewell to one of its finest hopes," she said, quoting the man she knew as Uncle Ossie. "Ditto." "Ossie was my hero, and he still is," said Aviator star Alan Alda, a family friend for over forty years. "Ossie was a thing of beauty."
"I want so badly someday to have his dignity - a little of it anyway," added Burt Reynolds, Davis's co-star in the 90s TV comedy Evening Shade. Before the midday funeral, scores of Harlem residents formed a queue outside the church to pay their respects to Davis. "It is hard to fathom that we will no longer be able to call on his wisdom, his humour, his loyalty and his moral strength to guide us in the choices that are yet to be made and the battles that are yet to be fought," said Belafonte, himself an ardent civil rights activist who had been friends with Davis for over 60 years. "But how fortunate we were to have him as long as we did."

Aviator and Vera take Bafta glory
Hollywood blockbuster The Aviator and low-budget British movie Vera Drake have shared the main honours at the 2005 Bafta film awards. The Aviator was declared best film, and its star Cate Blanchett won best supporting actress. But Vera Drake scored best director for Mike Leigh while Imelda Staunton took the hotly contested best actress award. Jamie Foxx won best actor for Ray, while British actor Clive Owen took best supporting actor for Closer. The two actors have repeated their success at the Golden Globes in January. But big British hope Kate Winslet walked away empty-handed on Saturday despite two nominations for best actress. Celebrating his win, the Oscar-nominated Owen told reporters: "The whole award season is new to me because I haven't won anything before. All of that is a bit overwhelming." Blanchett, who won a Bafta in 1999 for her leading role in Elizabeth, said: "Winning a Bafta means an enormous amount to me." She thanked the woman she played, Katharine Hepburn, for paving the way for women to work in film. "Thank you very much, I'm sure you're pleased, although you're not able to see this," she said.
The Aviator took four awards in all, also collecting best make-up and hair and production design, while Vera Drake also scooped best costume design. Staunton, who is up for an Oscar for her role in Vera Drake, arrived wearing a green silk and chiffon beaded evening dress. "Thank you very much. I'm so thrilled and so grateful and I'm delighted that the success of Vera Drake has boosted sales of hair nets and pinnies, which is very good," she said on accepting her award. Her director Leigh, who beat Martin Scorsese to the best director award, told the audience: "We always say it was a surprise and sometimes I've said it and not meant it. On this occasion, given the other names, it's a real surprise and an extraordinary honour. "It's an immense privilege to have been allowed the freedom to make as uncompromising a film as I think Vera Drake is and an epic with such a small budget." Best actor Foxx could not make the ceremony, but actress Helen Mirren read out his acceptance speech. "I'm honoured and proud to receive this Bafta. I'd like to thank the late Ray Charles himself." He apologised for not being in London, joking: "Unfortunately I'm stuck driving a car in LA at gunpoint and I can't get away." DiCaprio, who lost out on the best actor Bafta to Foxx, will face him again at the Academy Awards in two weeks' time.
"It's the first time I've come to the Baftas because it's the first time I've been nominated," he told reporters on the red carpet. "I've appreciated British cinema for a long time and to be recognised like this is a special honour." Other winners included The Motorcycle Diaries which took best foreign film and best music, while Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind won best original screenplay and best editing. Best British film was My Summer of Love, the story of two young women and their developing relationship, while Foxx's movie Ray, a bio-pic of late singer Ray Charles, also took best sound. Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban won the Orange Film Of The Year, voted for by the public.
The Orange British Academy Film Awards are being shown on BBC One from 2010 GMT.

Film star Fox behind theatre bid
Leading actor Edward Fox is one of the men behind plans to reopen a Swansea theatre thought to be Wales' oldest.
The star of film and TV hits Day of the Jackal and Edward and Mrs Simpson has joined forces with Swansea-born actor-director Terry Palmer. They will set up a charity to raise money to buy the Palace Theatre, and hope to reopen it to audiences in summer 2006. It is estimated that £500,000 is needed to buy the Grade II listed building. The Palace Theatre, which will be known as The Pavilion Repertory Theatre, was sold to an undisclosed bidder at auction 13 months ago for £340,000. Before that it had been used as a nightclub for 10 years.
Oscar-winner Sir Anthony Hopkins, who was born in nearby Port Talbot, made his professional debut there, and Charlie Chaplin and Lily Langtry have also trodden its boards. Fox told the South Wales Evening Post that after visiting the theatre he was surprised by its beauty. "A lot of money needs to be spent on it, but all the bones are there - it just needs a beautiful skin," he said.
"To call it a jewel is not an over-estimation. There are not many theatres left like this. "The hope for the immediate future is that we can attract enough people to come forward to allow it to prosper," he told the newspaper.
Fox first found fame in the 1960s. One of his most memorable roles was as an assassin in the Day of the Jackal in 1973, and he won a TV Bafta as the Prince of Wales in 1980 for Edward and Mrs Simpson. He was brought on board to save the theatre by Mr Palmer, a long-standing friend of 40 years. "Two years ago I decided to return to Swansea and do something for the city," said Mr Palmer. He said he was excited by the idea of running the Palace as a charity where young actors could develop, and with an annual Shakespeare festival in the summer. "If in five years' time the theatre can function in all areas without me, I shall be well satisfied having helped to create a vital living theatre for the city," he added. Keith Poulton, a business adviser from Swansea, has already committed an undisclosed amount of money to the project. "We need at least £75,000 to secure a deposit on the building and we've only got two months to do that," said Mr Poulton. "A few benefactors have expressed their interest and Mr Fox is going to give it an awful lot of time," he added. Last year, roads around the theatre were cordoned off when masonry from its roof fell onto a car, but engineers said they were happy that it was safe.

Shark Tale DVD is US best-seller
Oscar-nominated animation Shark Tale has raked in $80m (£42.4m) in the first week of its US DVD release becoming the year's best-selling home video so far.
The tally for its DVD and video sales soared past the film's opening week US box office takings of $56m (£29.7m). Shark Tale is now the sixth-highest earning DVD for first week sales. The all-time first-week record is held by 1995's Lion King followed by Shrek 2, Finding Nemo, the original Shrek, and Monster's Inc.
Shark Tale, whose voice cast includes Will Smith, Robert De Niro, Renee Zellweger and Martin Scorsese, sold more than 6 million DVDs and videos across the United States and Canada. It becomes the highest first-week earner for February, outshining My Big Fat Greek Wedding which sold four million units in 2003. Films which are expected to earn strong home video returns are usually timed for release in the busiest retail season which falls before Christmas. The best-selling home video of last year was the Dreamworks hit Shrek 2, which took an estimated $458 m (£242.7m) in North America alone.

Lopez misses UK charity premiere
Jennifer Lopez cancelled an appearance at the UK charity premiere of her new movie saying she was too ill to fly.
The actress and singer dropped out at the last minute and has now cancelled all European promotion of the film Shall We Dance? and her new album. She said: "I very much wanted to be in London but unfortunately I'm not well. At the advice of my doctors I'm unable to travel." Co-star Richard Gere attended the event held in aid of the tsunami appeal. Thousands braved the cold weather to see the stars in London's Leicester Square. The red carpet boasted waltzing dancers in honour of the film's ballroom dancing theme. The film's director Peter Chelsom said he was disappointed that Lopez did not attend.
"It's a shame. I know it's true that she's not well because she has also cancelled her promotional tour. I've heard she has swollen glands." Gere, 55, greeted the crowd and signed autographs, accompanied by his wife Carey Lowell. Other stars who turned out on the night included Honor Blackman, Strictly Come Dancing presenter Tess Daly and actress Anita Dobson. Lopez issues a statement apologising for her absence. "I'm so proud of Shall We Dance and was looking forward to visiting London," she said. "This film was a labour of love for me, and I want to thank everyone involved in bringing it to you, from the cast, to the film director, to the crew." Lopez appeared at the Grammy awards on Sunday, singing a duet with her third husband Marc Anthony.

Film row over Pirates 'cannibals'
Plans to portray Dominica's Carib Indians as cannibals in the sequel to hit film Pirates of the Caribbean have been criticised by the group's chief.
Carib Chief Charles Williams said talks with Disney's producers revealed there was "a strong element of cannibalism in the script which cannot be removed". The Caribbean island's government said Disney planned to film in Dominica. The Caribs have long denied their ancestors practised cannibalism. Disney was unavailable for comment. "Our ancestors stood up against early European conquerors and because they stood up...we were labelled savages and cannibals up to today," said Mr Williams.
"This cannot be perpetuated in movies." Shooting on the sequel is expected to begin in April, with hundreds of Dominicans applying to be extras in the movie.
About 3,000 Caribs live on the island of Dominica, which has a population of 70,000. Many Caribs were killed by disease and war during colonisation up to the 1600s. Mr Williams said he had received support from indigenous groups around the world in his efforts to have cannibalism references removed from the film. But he admitted there were some members of the Carib council who did not support the campaign. He said some did not "understand our history, they are weak and are not committed to the cause of the Carib people". The first Pirates of the Caribbean film took $305m (£162m) at the box office in the US alone. The cast and crew are to work on two sequels back-to-back, with the first to be released in 2006.

Super Size Me wins writers' award
Super Size Me director Morgan Spurlock has won the Writers Guild of America's award for documentary feature writing.
The Oscar-nominated film followed Spurlock as he ate only McDonald's fast food for an entire month. Spurlock was given the award at a special ceremony at the Roosevelt Hotel in Hollywood on Tuesday. Organisers said the rising popularity of documentary films led them to honour a writer for a documentary screenplay for the first time.
Producer Brian Grazer presented the award to Spurlock and the film's backers, Roadside Attractions, Samuel Goldwyn Films and Showtime Independent Films. Spurlock set out to discover the effect of living on nothing but McDonald's for a month, upgrading to supersize portions when offered. The film followed his 25lb weight gain and the health effects on his body, including his liver and cholesterol levels. McDonald's announced it was to scrap its "supersized" meals last year, but denied the move was as a result of the negative publicity created by Spurlock's film. Spurlock was given his award on the same day the European Court of Human Rights ruled that two UK activists should have been given legal aid in their long fight against a McDonald's libel action. Helen Steel and David Morris, from north London, dubbed the "McLibel Two", were found guilty in a 1990s trial of libelling the company in a leaflet they had been handing out At the end of the case the High Court in London ruled McDonald's had been libelled and awarded the company £60,000 in damages, later reduced to £40,000 on appeal. But he found the leaflet was true in some aspects.

Original Exorcist to be screened
The original version of horror prequel Exorcist: The Beginning, dropped by producers over claims it was not scary enough, is to have its world premiere.
The film, directed by Paul Schrader, will be screened on 18 March at the International Festival of Fantastic Film in Brussels. The psychological drama stars Stellan Skarsgard and foreruns the 1973 film. Schrader was replaced by director Renny Harlin who made a new version of the film which debuted in 2004. The prequel project was originally announced in 2001, with actor Liam Neeson in the lead role and John Frankenheimer as director. However Frankenheimer pulled out in 2002, a month before he died.
Skarsgard then replaced Neeson in the role of Father Merrin, made famous by Max Von Sydow in the 1973 film. Principal footage was shot in Morocco and Rome at a reported cost of $32m. However, in August 2003 it emerged that producers Morgan Creek were shelving Schrader's version of the film, having complained it was not scary enough. As well as replacing Schrader with Harlin - the director behind Die Hard 2 and Cliffhanger - the producers also changed most of the cast, but Swedish star Skarsgard stayed in the Merrin role. Harlin's film, released in the UK in October 2004, received lukewarm reviews but went on to make over $76m (£40.7m) worldwide. The festival screening will be the first time that Schrader's film has been seen in public. Reports that it will be released either in cinemas or on DVD have yet to be confirmed. Other films at the festival in the Belgium capital, which runs from 11-26 March, include the US horror hit Boogeyman and the forthcoming sequel Ring 2, as well as a selection of films adapted from the works of Jules Verne.

Oscar nominees lack pulling power
This year's clutch of Oscar nominees have been the least popular for 20 years according to box office figures.
In the US the five nominated for best film have been seen by 50% fewer people than movies in previous years. While the awards are not based on box office popularity there is concern for the ratings of the televised ceremony. "We don't have a Titanic or a Lord of the Rings out there. I think it's fair to say it does concern us a bit," said Academy executive director Bruce Davis. About 51 million people in the US have seen this year's nominees, compared with between 100 million and 118 million in recent years. The last time combined attendance was so low was in 1984 when Amadeus beat The Killing Fields, A Passage to India, Places in the Heart and A Soldier's Story to best picture, when 41 million saw the five films. Last year's ceremony attracted the highest audience in four years as viewers tuned in to see Lord of the Ring: Return of the King sweep the board.
And the show reaped its biggest audience in 1997 when Titanic took home 11 Oscars.
The film had taken $500m (£264m) worldwide before the ceremony, and eventually took $1.8bn (£952m). "Eyeballs starring at the movie screen translates to eyeballs staring at the TV screen," said Paul Dergarabedian of box office tracker Exhibitor Relations. "People like to have a vested interest in what they're watching. "When Titanic does $1.8bn in worldwide box office, you've got a lot of people with a vested interest." Past years have also seen blockbusters such as Saving Private Ryan, Forrest Gump and Ghost compete for Oscars. The biggest box office hitter among this year's nominees is The Aviator, which has taken $90m (£48m) in the US, although takings in the UK have reached only £7m so far.
Low-budget move Sideways and Finding Neverland have so far grossed about $45m (£24m) each. The year's biggest blockbusters do actually feature in the Oscar nominees but in the animation category. Shrek 2 and The Incredibles took $436m (£231m) while The Incredibles took $259m (£137m). Mel Gibson's The Passion of the Christ, which took $370m (£196m) in the US, was largely ignored by Academy voters.
But many in the film industry do not equate award and box office success. "I have never equated the Academy Awards with how much money a movie takes in," said Nikki Rocco, head of distribution at Universal which released nominee Ray. "That's the People's Choice Awards. This is not about the public. This is about the industry bestowing awards on what they think are the best films of the year."

Hitch holds on to US box office
Will Smith's first romantic comedy, Hitch, has topped the North American box office for a second weekend.
Smith plays a New York "date doctor" with love worries of his own in the movie, which took $31.8m (£16.8m). It held off a strong challenge from the new Keanu Reeves sci-fi thriller Constantine which opened at number two with $30.5m (£16.1m) Constantine, based on the Hellblazer comics, stars Reeves as an exorcist who must send Satan's minions back to hell. Two family films came next in the chart, with Wayne Wang's comedy Because of Winn-Dixie, about a young girl and an abandoned dog, in third position with $10.85m (£5.73m).
Comedy adventure Son of the Mask, came in at number four with $7.7m (£4.1m), just ahead of Oscar favourite Million Dollar Baby at five.
Smith's comedy will be the first US movie released this year to top the $100m (£52.7m) mark. It's success continues a strong trend of Hollwood movie-going this year with figures for the popular President's Day weekend 13% greater than last year. Oscar contenders The Aviator, starring Leonardo DiCaprio as Howard Hughes and wine-tasting comedy Sideways, both held onto positions in the top 10.

Tarantino to direct CSI episode
Film director Quentin Tarantino is to direct an episode of US television series CSI: Crime Scene Investigation.
The Oscar-winning Pulp Fiction director has also written an original story for the season finale episode. CSI's co-producer, Carol Mendelsohn, said the episode would have "more bugs and blood" than usual. It is not Tarantino's first venture into TV. In 1995 he directed an episode of the medical drama ER and has also appeared in Alias.
Ms Mendelsohn said the production team had been trying for a while to get Tarantino to direct an episode of CSI, and added that he was a fan of the forensic drama. She said he finally agreed a few weeks ago while CSI was doing some location shooting in Las Vegas and the show's stars persuaded him. "He knows everything there is to know about CSI, and he is into the whole mythology of CSI," Mendelsohn said. "Quentin came in a couple of weeks ago. We had a story meeting with the writers. "He had a great idea, and it was so much fun to have him in the room... we are positively giddy." Filming is due to start in early April and the Tarantino-directed episode will be broadcast in the US on 19 May.

Bollywood DVD fraudster is jailed
A major distributor of pirated DVDs of Bollywood films has been sent to prison for three years.
Jayanti Amarishi Buhecha from Cambridge was found guilty of two trademark offences last month, and sentenced at Harrow Crown Court, London, on Tuesday. Buhecha, who made £26,000 per month from his illegal trade, was called "one of the biggest Bollywood pirates in the UK" by the sentencing judge. The British Phonographic Industry (BPI) worked for two years on the case.
An operation was launched against Buhecha in 2002 after complaints were received about his activities. The judge in the case, which lasted seven days, said that "a heavy penalty was called for because of the enormous damage Buhecha caused to legitimate business". Fake DVDs were manufactured in Pakistan and Malaysia and sold on wholesale to shops by Buhecha, who traded in conterfeit DVDs in 2002 and 2003.
In December 2002, he was stopped in his car by trading standards officers, who uncovered 1,000 pirated DVDs and faked inlay cards printed with registered trademarks. Despite being arrested and bailed, Buhecha was caught a second time at the end of 2003. His home and a lock-up in Cambridge were found to contain 18,000 counterfeit DVDs and further faked inlay cards. Buhecha was previously a legitimate distributor of Bollywood films, but was suspended and sued by his employers for dealing in illegal copies of Bollywood classic Mohabbatein. Legitimate Bollywood film distributors have hailed the conviction as "a major boost". Bollywood music and film suffers piracy at the rate of 40%, which is more than that suffered by mainstream productions. The BPI welcomed the news of the prison sentence, but warned there are plenty of other active counterfeiters of Bollywood films. The organisation's anti-piracy director David Martin said: "The problem simply will not disappear with Buhecha. Others and more will take his place, so it's vital that keep up our efforts in this field."

US 'afflicted' with awards fatigue
The film world and media may be wild about the Oscars but cinema-goers and the TV-viewing public are sick of watching award ceremonies, according to some LA film critics.
Bob Strauss, from the LA Daily News, thinks there are just too many televised gatherings of stars showering praise on each other. He came up with a colourful but unprintable description for these glitzy events, which roughly translates a "celebrity love-in". This echoed the views of Oscars host and comedian Chris Rock, who whipped up a media storm for saying he rarely watched them, calling award shows "idiotic". "As Chris Rock accurately said, they're about celebrity and fashion," Mr Strauss said. The recent Grammy music awards proved to be a ratings loser, and it seems Oscars organisers are determined not to go the same way.
Recently announced changes to the ceremony include lining up all five nominees on stage before announcing the winner.
Unsurprisingly, this prompted press speculation that the changes were aimed at boosting flagging advertising revenue. But Entertainment Weekly's Dave Karger maintained the Oscars only generated excitement outside the industry when a blockbuster, such as Titanic or Lord of the Rings, was nominated. The near constant flow of US film awards, representing directors, actors and producers' guilds, also means "few surprises" are left by the time the Oscar ceremony is upon us, he said. A quick scan of the Los Angeles Times and Los Angeles Daily News bears this out - speculation about who will win seems to have ground to a halt.
On Thursday, the Times simply printed a picture of the plastic tents going up outside the Kodak Theatre to protect the red carpet from rain. Variety and the Hollywood Reporter have also kept their focus firmly on industry-related news, while in the UK bets have closed on the best actor category, with Ray star Jamie Foxx a dead cert to win.
Screen International's US editor Mike Goodridge thinks 2004's films have simply not grabbed the public's imagination. "Film-makers haven't produced films that people adore this year," he said. "They adored Saving Private Ryan for example - people loved it and it made a ton of money. "2004's films could be a reaction to 9/11 - there was a realisation in America that things might not be so rosy after all. "Audiences don't necessarily want to see darker films such as Million Dollar Baby, Aviator and Finding Neverland, which end with casualty." As to whether Rock could pep up the awards, the critics were not hopeful.
Mr Strauss doubted whether Rock would make an impact, but added: "I'm all for lower ratings though - there are far more important things going on than the Oscars." Mr Karger said the comic might boost younger viewers, but Mike Goodridge thought Rock's humour could prompt America's conservative states to switch off. So despite all this, did the critics have any views on who would win?
"Clint Eastwood's Million Dollar Baby affected people emotionally, which is why it will beat Aviator, which was about technical artistry not feelings," Mr Karger said. "Eastwood has it in the bag," added Mr Strauss. "Oscar voters often vote with their hearts not their heads." And Mr Goodridge said best film and director were between Martin Scorsese's Aviator and Million Dollar Baby. Mr Karger, whose favourite film of the year was Mike Leigh's abortion drama Vera Drake, stayed upbeat about the awards despite his other comments. "I hope this is the year for small films to triumph," he said. "After all, it's still one of the biggest TV events of the year."

Critics back Aviator for Oscars
Martin Scorsese's The Aviator will win best film at the Oscars, according to the UK's leading movie critics.
But several of those surveyed by the BBC News website think the veteran film-maker will lose the best director prize to Clint Eastwood. Most of the critics tipped Jamie Foxx and Hilary Swank to scoop best actor and actress for Ray and Million Dollar Baby respectively. The jury comprised experts and critics from the top UK film publications. The panel also revealed which nominees they would personally prefer to win.
All expect The Aviator to win best film, but many think it will be a close race between Scorsese's Howard Hughes biopic and Eastwood's boxing drama Million Dollar Baby. The other films nominated are wine comedy Sideways, factual drama Finding Neverland, and Ray Charles biopic Ray.
"I'm pretty sure this is the year of The Aviator, though my own choice would be Sideways," said the Observer's Philip French. "Sideways should win but it doesn't have a hope," said Jamie Graham of Total Film, a position shared by Film 2005 presenter Jonathan Ross. "The form going in to the Oscars points to The Aviator, but I liked Million Dollar Baby more," said Tim Dams, news editor of trade weekly Screen International.
Five of the eight critics tipped Scorsese to win best director, with Mr Dams, Heat's Charles Gant and Empire's Angie Errigo plumping for Eastwood. Sideway's Alexander Payne, Ray's Taylor Hackford and British director Mike Leigh - nominated for period drama Vera Drake - are considered outsiders in this category. "Up until recently I could have sworn Scorsese would get it just for being Scorsese," Ms Errigo told the BBC News website. "But I'm beginning to think Eastwood will get it."
"I'd be very happy for Mike Leigh to win, but I don't think he has any chance," said Charles Gant, film editor of Heat. Foxx's portrayal of Ray Charles has already seen him win prizes at the Golden Globes, Baftas and Screen Actors Guild Awards. Mr Dams said this made him "out-and-out favourite" to be named best actor on Oscar night. "Everyone would be incredibly surprised if he didn't win," he said. "If you're a betting man, he's as close as you get to a certainty." "If Paul Giamatti was nominated for Sideways it would be a different game," says Total Film's Jamie Graham. "But Foxx will and should win."
With Vera Drake star Imelda Staunton nominated for best actress alongside Kate Winslet, Britain has a good chance of victory - on paper. Jonathan Ross, for one, will be very happy if Winslet wins for Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind. But while Wendy Ide of The Times still thinks Staunton has a chance, Heat's Charles Gant believes her Bafta win will cut little ice with Academy voters. "I'd like Staunton to win, but her chances are not that great," said Mr Gant, who predicted a second Oscar for Hilary Swank.
"I think Swank will win," said Mr French. "Imelda has got as far as she's going to get playing that role." Staunton is also the personal choice of Steven Gaydos, executive editor of industry magazine Variety. But while he tipped Swank to win, he predicted it would be a close contest. "Everything has the ability to flip by one vote and go the other way," he told the BBC News website. "There's not a sense that it's obvious how it's going to go." Meanwhile, thousands of people have voted in a BBC Radio Five Live poll to find the best film never to have won a best picture Oscar. The audience voted overwhelmingly for The Shawshank Redemption, the 1994 Frank Darabont tale of hope and humanity, which received 52% of the online votes and 68% of the text messages. The other two finalists, Citizen Kane and A Matter of Life and Death split the remaining votes roughly equally. This year's Academy Awards will be shown in the UK by Sky Movies 1 at 0130 GMT on Monday.
- Tim Dams, Screen International: Film - The Aviator; director - Clint Eastwood; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Angie Errigo, Empire: Film - The Aviator; director - Clint Eastwood; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Philip French, The Observer: Film - The Aviator; director - Martin Scorsese; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Charles Gant, Heat: Film - The Aviator; director - Clint Eastwood; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Steven Gaydos, Variety: Film - The Aviator; director - Martin Scorsese; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Jamie Graham, Total Film: Film - The Aviator; director - Martin Scorsese; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Wendy Ide, The Times: Film - The Aviator; director - Martin Scorsese; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Imelda Staunton.
- Jonathan Ross, Film 2005: Film - The Aviator; director - Martin Scorsese; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Tim Dams, Screen International: Film - Million Dollar Baby; director - Clint Eastwood; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Angie Errigo, Empire: Film - The Aviator; director - Martin Scorsese; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Philip French, The Observer: Film - Sideways; director - Martin Scorsese; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Imelda Staunton.
- Charles Gant, Heat: Film - Sideways; director - Mike Leigh; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Imelda Staunton.
- Steven Gaydos, Variety: Film - Million Dollar Baby; director - Clint Eastwood; actor - Don Cheadle; actress - Imelda Staunton.
- Jamie Graham, Total Film: Film - Sideways; director - Alexander Payne; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Hilary Swank.
- Wendy Ide, The Times: Film - Sideways; director - Alexander Payne; actor - Don Cheadle; actress - Imelda Staunton.
- Jonathan Ross, Film 2005: Film - Sideways; director - Clint Eastwood; actor - Jamie Foxx; actress - Kate Winslet.

Briton wins short film Oscar
Three of the five nominees in the live-action short film category at this year's Oscars were British. For Andrea Arnold, who won the category, Ashvin Kumar and Gary McKendry the past month has thrust them from relative obscurity into the limelight.
Arnold's gritty drama Wasp is about a single mother living on the breadline, while Kumar's Little Terrorist follows a young Pakistani Muslim boy, who gets stuck on the wrong side of the heavily armed Indian border. McKendry's entry, Everything In This Country Must, forces British soldiers and Catholics to challenge their relationship during the troubles in Northern Ireland. Last week, the trio attended an official screening of all the nominated short films at the Academy's headquarters in Beverly Hills. "I felt so privileged to have a thousand people watching my film on the biggest screen I've ever seen," says Arnold.
Set in her native Dartford, Wasp tells the story of a young mum, who, unable to find a babysitter, leaves her four young daughters outside a pub while she's on a date. The image that sparked the film was that of a wasp crawling into a baby's mouth. "The other nominees said they made their films for this reason or that - they had something to say. But I just start with an image I can't shake off, work outwards from that and see what comes out," she explains.
Since she presented children's TV shows Number 73 and Motormouth in the 1980s, Arnold has kept a low profile and is having trouble adapting to this sudden onslaught of attention. "I'm not interested in the publicity. It's not my personality. I'm overwhelmed by all the fuss," she said.
"It's all a bit like a beauty contest - all the films are great and so different. "But even though my film has won 30 awards worldwide (including one at Sundance last month), I'd still be proud of it - even if it hadn't won any." Asked what the nomination means to her, Arnold says she feels "flattered and honoured". "We've all been overwhelmed by the response and can't get it in perspective yet. I'm still reeling."
And she won't commit to an opinion of Hollywood yet. "I'm just in the middle of it, living moment to moment, day to day." But despite her reservations about the Academy Awards and the media frenzy that surrounds it, she accepts that it has opened doors for her. "People will definitely listen to what I want to do now, and the phone didn't stop ringing for a week after I got nominated." As for the future, Arnold firmly believes that you often get a stronger vision of the world with short films. "You're left more to your own devices, without people interfering as much." That said, she is currently working on a feature film with Dogville and Dancer In The Dark director Lars Von Trier.

The comedy Sideways has dominated this year's Independent Spirit Awards, winning all six of the awards for which it was nominated.
It was named best film while Alexander Payne won best director and best screenplay, along with writing partner Jim Taylor. It also won acting awards for stars Paul Giamatti, Thomas Haden Church and Virginia Madsen. Sideways is tipped to do well at Sunday's Oscars, with five nominations.
The awards, now in their 20th year, are given to films made outside the traditional studio system, and are traditionally held the day before the Oscars. Other winners included Catalina Sandino Moreno, who took best actress for her role as a drug smuggler in the Colombian drama Maria Full of Grace. Moreno is also nominated for best actress at the Oscars. The best first screenplay award went to Joshua Marston for Maria Full of Grace. Scrubs star Zach Braff won the award for best first feature for Garden State, which he wrote, directed and starred in. Oscar-nominated euthanasia film The Sea Inside from Spain won best foreign film, while Metallica: Some Kind Of Monster was awarded best documentary. Actor Rodrigo de la Serna took the best debut performance prize for The Motorcycle Diaries. The awards are voted for by the 9,000 members of the Independent Feature Project/Los Angeles, which includes actors, directors, writers and other industry professionals. Last year's big winner, Lost In Translation, went on to win the Oscar for best original screenplay, for writer-director Sofia Coppola.

Stars gear up for Bafta ceremony
Film stars from across the globe are preparing to walk the red carpet at this year's Bafta award ceremony.
The 2005 Orange British Academy Film Awards are being held at The Odeon in London's Leicester Square. A host of Hollywood stars, including Cate Blanchett, Leonardo DiCaprio, Keanu Reeves and Richard Gere, are expected to attend Saturday's ceremony. Hosted by Stephen Fry, the glittering ceremony will be broadcast on BBC One at 2010 GMT.
Other actors expected to add to the glamour of the biggest night in UK film are Gael Garcia Bernal, Imelda Staunton, Diane Kruger, Christian Slater, Anjelica Huston, Helen Mirren and former James Bond star Pierce Brosnan. Hollywood blockbuster The Aviator, starring DiCaprio, leads the field with 14 nominations, including best film.
It is up against Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, Finding Neverland, The Motorcycle Diaries and British film Vera Drake, which has 11 nominations. British hope Imelda Staunton is one of the favourites to land the best actress award for her gritty role as a backstreet abortionist in the small-budget film. Other nominees in the best actress category include Charlize Theron for Monster, Ziyi Zhang for House of Flying Daggers and UK star Kate Winslet, who has two nods for her roles in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and Finding Neverland.
DiCaprio faces competition from Bernal, Jamie Foxx, Jim Carrey and Johnny Depp in the best actor category. And British actor Clive Owen is hoping to repeat his Golden Globe success with a best supporting actor award for his role in Closer. His co-star Natalie Portman is up against Blanchett, Heather Craney, Julie Cristie and Meryl Streep in the best supporting actress category. Mike Leigh is up for the best director award for Vera Drake, alongside Martin Scorsese for The Aviator, Michael Mann for Collateral, Michel Gondry for Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and Marc Forster for Finding Neverland.

Arnold congratulated on Oscar win
Oscar-winner Andrea Arnold has been congratulated by the UK Film Council, the organisation which partly funded her project.
Arnold's film Wasp won the best live action short film award on Sunday. "The UK Film Council spends millions of pounds of lottery investment on short filmmaking in Britain every year," said chief executive officer John Woodward. "It certainly pays off when you see new film-makers winning such prestigious awards," he added.
Wasp, which was commissioned by the Film Council and Channel 4, beat films by fellow UK nominees Gary McKendry and Ashvin Kumar to the prize. It stars actress Nathalie Press, who appeared in the Bafta-winning drama My Summer Of Love, as a single mother who is forced to take drastic action when she is invited on a date and is unable to find a babysitter to look after her four daughters. The film has already won over 30 other international awards including the Sundance Short Film Prize. Arnold, from Dartford in Kent, described her victory as "truly overwhelming. I'm really not used to this kind of thing," she said, after receiving her Oscar from actor Jeremy Irons. "Thanks to everyone who worked on this - the beers are on me when we get home." The director was one of only two British winners on the night, the other being Sandy Powell, who won the costume design Oscar for her work on The Aviator.

Eastwood's Baby scoops top Oscars
Clint Eastwood's Million Dollar Baby beat Martin Scorsese's The Aviator to the top awards at the Oscars on Sunday.
The boxing drama was named best picture and Eastwood pipped Scorsese to best director, while its stars Hilary Swank and Morgan Freeman won acting awards. The Aviator took five prizes including best supporting actress for Cate Blanchett. The biopic of Howard Hughes led the nominations with 11. Jamie Foxx picked up best actor for playing soul star Ray Charles in Ray. Many expected this to be Scorsese's year - but he was unsuccessful in the best director category for the fifth time in his career.
He has never won despite being nominated for such films as Raging Bull and Goodfellas. Instead, Eastwood took his second Oscar for best director after winning for Unforgiven in 1993. "It was a wonderful adventure," Eastwood said. "To make a picture in 37 days, it takes a well oiled machine. I am lucky to be here and lucky to be still working. I've got a lot of stuff to do yet." Hilary Swank picked up her second best actress Oscar for playing a female boxer in Million Dollar Baby, beating stars including Annette Bening, Kate Winslet and Imelda Staunton. "I don't know what I did in this life to deserve this," she told the audience. "I'm just a girl from a trailer park who had a dream." Morgan Freeman beat actors including Clive Owen, Jamie Foxx and Alan Alda to the prize for best supporting actor. He thanked Eastwood and described the film as "a labour of love". This was the fourth nomination of his career but his first win. Backstage, he said: "A lot of people say you're due - maybe you are, maybe you aren't - it's an accolade." Million Dollar Baby's success was the night's biggest surprise after The Aviator seemed to have the advantage until the end of the ceremony.
Cate Blanchett, who won for playing late screen legend Katharine Hepburn in The Aviator, said her award was "an indescribable surprise and honour". Of Hepburn, she said: "The longevity of her career is inspiring to everyone." Blanchett also paid tribute to the film's director Martin Scorsese, telling him: "I hope my son will marry your daughter." The Aviator's other awards came for cinematography, film editing, art direction and costume design. And Jamie Foxx, who had two nominations this year, paid tribute to the "beautiful legacy" of soul legend Ray Charles, who died last year, and thanked director Taylor Hackford. "You took a chance, man," he said. "That love for Ray Charles was deep down in the earth somewhere and you opened it up. "Everybody's drowning in this love. Thank you for taking a chance and thank you for waiting 15 years to get me to do it."
He broke down in tears when speaking about being whipped by his grandmother, whom he described as his first acting teacher, when he was young. In other awards, cartoon hit The Incredibles won best animated feature and best sound editing. Bittersweet comedy Sideways won best adapted screenplay while the original screenplay prize went to Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind. Born into Brothels, about the children of prostitutes in Calcutta, was named best documentary, The Sea Inside was named best foreign language film and Finding Neverland got the accolade for best musical score. Spider-Man 2 triumphed in the visual effects category, Ray won best sound mixing and Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events picked up best make-up. Former British TV presenter Andrea Arnold, who hosted children's shows Motormouth and Number 73 in the 1980s, won best short film for Wasp. Comedian Chris Rock, who hosted the ceremony for the first time, received a standing ovation before getting the show under way.

British stars denied major Oscars
British hopes of winning major Oscars were dashed as UK stars failed to win acting and directing prizes.
Despite three nominations, Mike Leigh's Vera Drake failed to take the director or screenplay awards and there was no prize for star Imelda Staunton. Kate Winslet also lost to best actress Hilary Swank, while Clive Owen and Sophie Okonedo failed to win best supporting actor awards. The UK's Andrea Arnold won the short film award for her gritty drama Wasp.
Arnold, who presented children's television shows Number 73 and Motormouth in the 1980s, said it was "totally overwhelming" to win. Wasp tells the story of a single mother living on the breadline, beating films by fellow UK nominees Gary McKendry and Ashvin Kumar.
"Everyone worked extremely hard - they know who they are," Arnold said as she accepted the prize. "The beers are on me when we get home." Earlier British costume designer Sandy Powell won the Oscar for The Aviator, beating Finding Neverland's UK designer Alexandra Byrne in the process. "I'm very thrilled for the film and all the people who worked with me," said Ms Powell. "Hopefully I'll be staying up to celebrate - I've been sick for three days and want to make it through the night." The British visual effects team behind Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban were less fortunate, however, losing the Oscar in that category to Spider-Man 2. Before Sunday's ceremony Owen was bookmakers' favourite for his role in romantic drama Closer that had already clinched him a Golden Globe award. It was the first time actress Okonedo had been shortlisted, chosen for her performance in Hotel Rwanda about the 1994 Rwandan genocide. It was also a debut nomination for Staunton, 49, who played abortionist Vera Drake in Mike Leigh's film.
Leigh had previously received three Oscar nominations for Secrets and Lies and Topsy Turvy. Winslet said she was "ecstatic" about the fourth Oscar nomination of her career, this time for her lead role in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind. Among other British talent nominated for Oscars, composer Andrew Lloyd Webber and lyricist Charles Hart were nominated for best original song for Learn To Be Lonely, from The Phantom of the Opera movie. That award was won by Al Otro Lado Del Rio from The Motorcycle Diaries. Cinematographer John Mathieson, who was nominated for Gladiator in 2001, was also up for The Phantom of the Opera but lost to The Aviator. Finding Neverland garnered another nomination for British talent, with Gemma Jackson shortlisted for the art direction prize. She lost in that category to The Aviator. A spokesman for the UK Film Council said: "It is disappointing not to have more British winners." He added: "It was extraordinary to have 24 British nominees in the initial list of nominees."

Lee to create new film superhero
Comic book veteran Stan Lee is to team up with producer Robert Evans to create a movie featuring a new superhero.
Foreverman will focus on a character who has to face problems in everyday life as well as using his special powers to save the world. Paramount Pictures, the studio behind the film, have revealed few details about the project but say it has the potential to spawn a series of films. Lee is best known for his work on Spider-Man and The Incredible Hulk.
He is collaborating on the script with screenwriter Peter Briggs, who penned the recent comic book adaptation Hellboy. "We believe it to be truly a whole new franchise," said Gill Champion, president and chief executive of Lee's POW! Entertainment. "In this world where people are looking for something different, Stan's idea was to create a concept not seen before to become an evergreen franchise for Paramount." Many of Lee's other creations, including X-Men and Daredevil, have been turned into films in the past five years. However, the Spider-Man series has been the biggest box office hit, with the 2002 original and its 2004 sequel taking almost $1.6bn (£857m) worldwide. A third Spider-Man film is scheduled for release in 2007. Another Marvel Comics adaptation, The Fantastic Four, will be released in cinemas this summer.

A PR expert has told the Michael Jackson child abuse trial that the TV documentary at the heart of the case was an "absolute disaster".
Ann Kite told the court in the Californian town of Santa Maria she was hired to "crisis manage" the fallout after the programme had aired in 2003. Jurors saw the film, in which the pop star held hands with the alleged victim, on Tuesday. Mr Jackson denies 10 charges of child abuse and false imprisonment. If convicted, he could face up to 21 years in prison.
Ms Kite suggested Jackson's associates had been intent on launching a smear campaign against the accuser's family after the airing of Martin Bashir's film Living with Michael Jackson. She told the court that in the aftermath of the broadcast, a Jackson lawyer had told her the boy's mother would be made to look like a "crack whore". Jackson's defence questioned Ms Kite's credibility, pointing that she worked for the singer's team for less than a week before being fired, and had never met or spoken to the star.
Ms Kite said she received a phone call on 13 February 2003 from a Jackson associate, Marc Schaffel, who said the boy and his family had left the Neverland ranch where they had been staying.
Ms Kite told the court she had later asked Jackson's lawyer, David LeGrand, what had happened. "I said, `Don't make me believe that these people were hunted down like dogs and brought back to the ranch'," she said. Ms Kite began to work for Mr Jackson in February 2003, after the controversial film was televised in the US and Europe. The documentary sparked a media storm and the subsequent investigation into Mr Jackson's relationship with the boy. In the film, the singer said he did not see anything wrong with sharing a bed with a child.
Questioned by the prosecution, Ms Kite said her plan had been to move media coverage of the star away from a focus on his human frailties to concentrate more on his musical genius. Ms Kite said that an additional problem was the release of documents relating to a previous allegation of child abuse against Mr Jackson. The Smoking Gun website publication was "beyond disaster", Ms Kite said. Correspondents say the reference is important because it was unclear whether the prosecution would be able to bring up the previous case in front of the jury.
The judge is studying whether the prosecution's first witness, reporter Martin Bashir, is in contempt of court. The defence protested after Mr Bashir, who interviewed Jackson for the TV documentary, refused to answer nearly all their questions, citing a California "shield" law intended to allow journalists to protect their sources. In the prosecution's opening statement on Monday, Tom Sneddon told the court that Mr Jackson had shown the boy porn and plied him with wine, in order to molest him. He said the singer had visited sexually explicit websites and showed the boy - who was 13 at the time - and his younger brother pornography at his ranch.

France set for new Da Vinci novel
French booksellers are braced for a rush of interest after another book from the author of The Da Vinci Code is translated into French.
Angels and Demons, by US author Dan Brown, will go on sale on Wednesday. The Da Vinci Code is set in Paris - including the Louvre - and has sold around one million copies in France. The main character, Robert Langdon, also appears in Angels and Demons. The Da Vinci Code is being made into a film starring Tom Hanks. Angels and Demons was written before The Da Vinci Code, which has sold more than 20 million copies worldwide, and been translated into more than 40 languages, since it was released in 2003. Angels and Demons is set mainly in Rome as symbologist Robert Langdon follows a 400-year-old trail to try to uncover a plot by an ancient brotherhood, The Illuminati, to blow up the Vatican.
The novel deals with moral issues such as the debate between science and religion and also seeks to uncover some of the mysteries surrounding the Pope. On his website, Brown wrote: "I think the reason Angels and Demons is raising eyebrows right now is that it opens some Vatican closets most people don't even know exist. "But I think most people understand that an organisation as old and powerful as the Vatican could not possibly have risen to power without acquiring a few skeletons in their closets." Such is the success of The Da Vinci Code in France, special tours have been organised to trace Langdon's footsteps, including the the Louvre museum and the Saint Sulpice Church. The Louvre has also given permission for parts of the film version to be shot in the museum. The film, to be directed by A Beautiful Mind's Ron Howard, is due to start filming at the Paris museum in May and stars Hanks alongside French actress Audrey Tautou.

UK Directors Guild nominees named
Martin Scorsese and Clint Eastwood are among the nominees for the top prize at the Directors Guild of Great Britain awards, now in their second year.
The Oscar rivals will compete for the international film prize at the ceremony, to be held at the Curzon Mayfair cinema in London on 20 March. Other nominees include Bill Condon for Kinsey and Michel Gondry for Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind. Mike Leigh's Vera Drake is among the nominees for best British film. The awards will see Eastwood and Scorsese once again competing for the directing prize, following last weekend's Oscars. Clint Eastwood won best director for Million Dollar Baby, beating Scorsese who was nominated for a fifth time for the Howard Hughes biopic The Aviator. Mike Leigh will compete for the British film prize with Shane Meadows for Dead Man's Shoes, Roger Michell For Enduring Love and My Summer Of Love director Pawel Pawlikowski.
Nominees for best foreign film include Spain's Pedro Almodovar for Bad Education and Hong Kong director Wong Kar-Wai for 2046. In the TV categories, comedy series Early Doors and The Alan Clark Diaries will compete for the best directing award for a 30-minute television show, while the directors of Shameless, Hustle and Bodies are all nominated for the 60-minute television prize. The directors of Omagh and Sex Traffic are among the nominees for a television movie or mini-series. American Beauty's Sam Mendes will receive a lifetime achievement award for his work in film and theatre, while theatre director Simon McBurney will be given an award for outstanding directorial achievement.

Halloween writer Debra Hill dies
Screenwriter and producer Debra Hill, best known for her work on the 70s horror classic Halloween, has died in Los Angeles aged 54.
Hill, who had been suffering from cancer, co-wrote the 1978 film, which starred Jamie Lee Curtis as a babysitter terrorised by a psychopath. Directed by John Carpenter, it made over $60m (£31.3m) worldwide - a record for independent film at that time. Hill also worked with Carpenter on Escape From New York and The Fog. Born in New Jersey, Hill began her career as a production assistant and worked her way through the ranks, becoming an assistant director and second-unit director before she began collaborating with Carpenter.
She was regarded by many as a pioneering woman in film, taking on jobs in the 70s that were more commonly taken by men. "Back when I started in 1974, there were very few women in the industry," she said in 2003. "I was assumed to be the make-up and hair person, or the script person. I was never assumed to be the writer or producer." "I took a look around and realised there weren't that many women, so I had to carve a niche for myself." Carpenter said that working with Hill was "one of the greatest experiences of my life". "The ground that she trailblazed in the beginning can now be followed by anyone. She was incredibly capable and talented," he said. Carpenter and Hill collaborated on a number of Halloween sequels, including Halloween II, Halloween: Resurrection and Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers.
Later in her career, Hill formed a production company with her friend Lynda Obst, making a string of hit films including Oscar nominee The Fisher King and teen comedy Adventures In Babysitting. Other films included the Stephen King adaptation The Dead Zone in 1983 and 1985's Clue, a comedy based on the board game Cluedo. In the 90s she pursued work in TV, although she was reunited with Carpenter in 1996 for Escape From LA, the sequel to Escape From New York. At the time of her death she was working on a film about the last two men pulled from the rubble of the Twin Towers following the 11 September terror attacks in 2001. She was also co-producing the remake of The Fog, which is due for release early next year.

Tarantino 'to make Friday sequel'
Director Quentin Tarantino is in talks to write and direct a new instalment in the Friday the 13th horror franchise, according to the Hollywood Reporter.
The film-maker will reportedly meet executives from New Line Cinema this week to discuss the 12th film in the long-running 'stalk and slash' series. The original film, released in 1980, has spawned ten sequels based around mask-wearing murderer Jason Voorhees. The most recent, Freddy Vs Jason, was released in summer 2003. That film saw Jason battle Freddy Krueger, star of the Nightmare on Elm Street franchise. According to the industry newspaper, New Line had been trying to make another sequel involving Ash, the hero of the Evil Dead movies, but was unable to agree terms with director Sam Raimi. Tarantino is said to be intrigued by the prospect of building a new film around one of the horror genre's most recognised figures. First, however, he is scheduled to direct the season finale of US television series CSI: Crime Scene Investigation. Filming is due to start in early April. Tarantino's episode, for which he also wrote the original story, will be broadcast in the US on 19 May.

Boogeyman takes box office lead
The low-budget horror film Boogeyman has knocked Robert de Niro thriller Hide and Seek from the top spot at the UK box office.
The film, in which a young man is forced to revisit a traumatic childhood experience, took £788,439 in its first three days on release. Hide And Seek, which was knocked off the top of the US box office by Boogeyman last month, fell one place. Oscar nominee Hotel Rwanda was also a new entry in the chart, at number five. The film, which scored Oscar nominations for Don Cheadle and British actress Sophie Okonedo, made £507, 596 in its first week of nationwide release.
Comedy sequel Meet The Fockers and Shall We Dance?, starring Jennifer Lopez and Richard Gere, completed the top five. Clint Eastwood's Million Dollar Baby re-entered the charts at number eight, following its recent success at the Oscars. The boxing drama, which won four awards including best film and best director, has made £4.4m to date. Two other new entries, a remake of the 1965 film Flight of the Phoenix, and the teen comedy Harold and Kumar Get The Munchies, debuted outside the top 10.

Aviator 'creator' in Oscars snub
The man who said he got Oscar-nominated movie The Aviator off the ground and signed up Leonardo DiCaprio has been shut out of the Academy Awards race.
Charles Evans Jr battled over his role with the people who eventually made the film, and won a producer's credit. But he is not on the list of producers who can win a best film Oscar due to a limit on the number of nominees. The Oscars organisers have picked two of The Aviator's four producers to be nominated for best film.
Up to three producers can be named per film but the studios behind The Aviator and Million Dollar Baby failed to trim their credits - so the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences (Ampas) has done it for them. The Aviator's nominated producers are Michael Mann and Graham King - with Mr Evans and Sandy Climan, Mr Mann's former deputy, left off. Mr Evans sued Mr Mann in 2001, claiming he came up with the idea, spent years developing it and persuaded DiCaprio to play Hughes - but said he was later excluded from the project. The two sides settled out of court in a deal that has remained secret apart from the fact Mr Evans' name has appeared as a producer when the film's credits roll. At the Golden Globes, Mr Evans - who was named among the winners when the film won best drama film - evaded a security guard to have his photo taken with DiCaprio, director Martin Scorsese, Mr Mann and Mr King.
Ampas decided to limit the number of producers who could be nominated after Shakespeare in Love's victory in 1999 saw five producers collect awards. The eligible names for The Aviator and Million Dollar Baby were decided by Ampas' producers branch executive committee on Wednesday. The decision also saw Clint Eastwood get his third personal nomination for Million Dollar Baby. He is now named in the best film category as well as being nominated for best director and best lead actor. The Academy Awards ceremony will be held in Hollywood on 27 February. Chinese actress Ziyi Zhang, star of Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, Hero and House of Flying Daggers, is the latest name to be added to the list of presenters on the night.

Lost Doors frontman movie found
Historians in Florida have discovered a 40-year-old clip of a clean-cut Jim Morrison appearing in a promotional film for his university.
The 1964 film shows the Doors frontman, who died aged 27 in 1971, playing the part of a young man who had been rejected by Florida State University. Morrison is seen quizzing a college administrator on why he was refused. "But what happened? How come my parents and the state and the university didn't look ahead?" he is seen asking.
"It's incredible. He's so clean cut and soft-spoken," said Florida state archivist Jody Norman. "We know he was at Florida State University for a period of time and he did some acting when he was there," Norman added. The Doors were one of the most influential bands of the 1960s, with hits including Light My Fire and Riders On The Storm. Morrison was notorious for his wild lifestyle - and was accused of exposing himself and simulating a sex act at a Miami concert in 1969. He was found dead in the bath of his Paris apartment and died from heart problems, aggravated by alcohol. A coroner recorded a verdict of death by natural causes and his grave at the city's Pere Lachaise ceremony has become a shrine for fans.

Last Star Wars 'not for children'
The sixth and final Star Wars movie may not be suitable for young children, film-maker George Lucas has said.
He told US TV show 60 Minutes that Revenge of the Sith would be the darkest and most violent of the series. "I don't think I would take a five or six-year-old to this," he told the CBS programme, to be aired on Sunday. Lucas predicted the film would get a US rating advising parents some scenes may be unsuitable for under-13s. It opens in the UK and US on 19 May. He said he expected the film would be classified PG-13 - roughly equivalent to a British 12A rating.
The five previous Star Wars films have all carried less restrictive PG - parental guidance - ratings in the US. In the UK, they have all been passed U - suitable for all - with the exception of Attack of The Clones, which got a PG rating in 2002. Revenge of the Sith - the third prequel to the original 1977 Star Wars film - chronicles the transformation of the heroic Anakin Skywalker into the evil Darth Vader as he travels to a Hell-like planet composed of erupting volcanoes and molten lava. "We're going to watch him make a pact with the devil," Lucas said. "The film is much more dark, more emotional. It's much more of a tragedy."

French honour for director Parker
British film director Sir Alan Parker has been made an officer in the Order of Arts and Letters, one of France's highest cultural honours.
Sir Alan received his decoration in Paris on Wednesday from French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres. "You have explored the possibilities of film with an immense talent," Mr de Vabres said as he presented the award. Parker praised French films, saying: "Hollywood, which created modern cinema, uses it only as a commodity." He told the minister: "I am honoured to be thus distinguished by France, the flag carrier of cinema throughout the world." Sir Alan's films include Oscar-winning Fame plus Midnight Express and The Commitments.
A founding member of the Director's Guild of Great Britain, he is a former chairman of the UK Film Council and on the board of the British Film Institute. "Through your work and your campaigns, you have shown us how the artist occupies an essential place in our contemporary society," Mr de Vabres said. "Through your dreams which you show us, through the links that you weave, you question the world through the mirror of your work." He also cited the director's 2003 film The Life of David Gale, in which Kevin Spacey played a man on Death Row, as proof of his "veritable artistic commitment against the death sentence".

Robots march to US cinema summit
Animated movie Robots has opened at the top of the US and Canada box office chart, taking $36.5m (£19m) on its first weekend on release.
Featuring the voices of Ewan McGregor, Halle Berry, Robin Williams and Mel Brooks, Robots follows a robot inventor who moves to a big city. Vin Diesel's family comedy The Pacifier fell to the number two spot, taking $18.1m (£9.4m). New Bruce Willis movie Hostage opened at number four with $9.8m (£5.1m).
However, a recut version of Mel Gibson's The Passion of the Christ, which featured less violence than last year's original movie, took just $239,850 (£125,000), despite opening in 957 cinemas. The new version of the film received little publicity and the original version is available across the US on DVD. "We certainly had higher expectations than what we got," said Rob Schwartz, head of distribution for Newmarket Films, which released The Passion of the Christ. "We were trying to get the film out there, hoping it would reach an audience that it didn't quite reach the first time around. It doesn't seem to have worked out quite as well as we had hoped." Meanwhile, Will Smith comedy Hitch has become the top film at the global box office after taking an estimated $30.1m (£15.6m) over the weekend at cinemas outside North America, according to industry website Screen Daily. It has taken $65.5m (£34.1m) so far, buoyed by opening at number one in the UK last weekend and a successful run in Germany. The movie, which cost a reported $70m (£36.4m) to make, has taken $138m (£72m) in the US so far.

Hobbit picture 'four years away'
Lord of the Rings director Peter Jackson has said that it will be up to four years before he starts work on a film version of The Hobbit.
The Oscar winner said on a visit to Sydney there was a "desire" to make it, but not before lengthy negotiations. "I think it's gonna be a lot of lawyers sitting in a room trying to thrash out a deal before it will ever happen," said the New Zealander. The rights to JRR Tolkien's book are split between two major film studios. Jackson, who is currently filming a remake of Hollywood classic King Kong, said he thought that the sale of MGM studios to the Sony Corporation would cast further uncertainty on the project. The 43-year-old was in the Australian city to visit a Lord of the Rings exhibition, which has attracted 140,000 visitors since it opened in December.
The film-maker recently sued film company New Line Cinema for undisclosed damages over alleged withheld profits and lost revenue from the first part of the Middle Earth trilogy. The Fellowship of The Ring from 2001 went on to make worldwide profits of $291 million (£152 million). Jackson is thought to have secured the most lucrative film directing deal in history to remake King Kong, which is currently in production in Wellington. The picture, which stars Naomi Watts and Oscar winner Adrien Brody, is due to be released in December. Jackson has also committed to making a film version of Lovely Bones, based on the best-selling book by Alice Sebold.

Buffy creator joins Wonder Woman
The creator of Buffy the Vampire Slayer is to take on a new female superhero after signing up to write and direct the Wonder Woman movie.
Joss Whedon described the DC Comics character as "the most iconic female heroine of our time". "In a way, no one has met her yet," he said. "What I love most about icons is finding out what's behind them, exploring the price of their power." Linda Carter played the character in the 1970s TV series. The character of Wonder Woman, famed for her red and gold costume, was born on Paradise Island, and was blessed with the powers of strength and flight. The film is being produced by Joel Silver, producer of the Matrix trilogy.
"There's no one better than Joss to adapt the legendary Wonder Woman comic book character created in the 1940s into a dynamic feature film for 21st Century audiences," said Silver. "Wonder Woman was the first great female superhero to emerge from comic books and later inspire millions of fans in her television incarnation... but this groundbreaking heroine has yet to be reinvented for the feature film arena." Whedon created the character of Buffy in the screenplay for the 1992 film. He distanced himself from the movie because of the direction it eventually took, and the film bombed. But he did not give up on the Slayer and went on to write and executive produce seven seasons of the cult TV series. He also produced the spin-off Angel series. He is currently directing the film Serenity, based on his short-lived sci-fi series Firefly.

The British Army says it is investigating after its Twitter and YouTube accounts were hacked.
Videos on cryptocurrency using images of billionaire businessman Elon Musk appeared on the YouTube channel.
The Twitter feed appeared to retweet several posts related to NFTs - a type of electronic artwork for investment.
The Army confirmed the "breach", saying it took information security "extremely seriously" and was resolving the issue. Both accounts have now been restored.
An Army spokesperson added: "Whilst we have now resolved the issue an investigation is ongoing and it would be inappropriate to comment further."
It is not clear who is behind the hacking incidents, which also saw the accounts renamed.
At one stage, the Twitter account name was changed to Bapesclan, accompanied by a profile picture featuring an ape-like cartoon figure with make-up mimicking a clown.
By Sunday evening, the account had been restored to normal.
The Army later tweeted: "Apologies for the temporary interruption to our feed. We will conduct a full investigation and learn from this incident. Thanks for following us and normal service will now resume."
Conservative MP Tobias Ellwood, chair of the Commons defence select committee, said what had happened "looks serious".
"I hope the results of the investigation and actions taken will be shared appropriately," he added in a tweet.
It is not the first time that a high-profile account has been targeted on Twitter.
In July 2020 major US accounts were taken over by hackers in an apparent Bitcoin scam.
Those accounts affected included Musk, Jeff Bezos, Bill Gates, Barack Obama, Joe Biden and Kanye West.
What are NFTs and why are some worth millions?
Gove tells Johnson to go as resignations pile on pressure
I'm going to keep going, vows embattled Johnson
Suspect charged with murder over 4 July shooting
How might Boris Johnson be removed as PM?
'Let's make history' - Euro 2022 to break records
Arabs believe economy is weak under democracy
The Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site. VideoThe Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site
âWe need an international shelter for trans peopleâ
Sydney floods aftermath: 'Everybody is traumatised'
The man who came back from the dead
The biggest ships on the ocean
Murdered Indian rapper's 'protest music' lives on
The case for turning off your Zoom camera
Workers may have a strong argument against appearing on screen
America's first interracial love song
How a taboo-busting duet became a hit and broke new ground
A breakfast staple created by accident
More than a century ago, a glut of oranges kick-started a craze
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

In the new rom-com Fire Island, written by comedian Joel Kim Booster and now streaming on Disney Plus and Hulu, the eponymous island is shown in all its summer glory. Located just a train (and ferry) ride away from New York City, this barrier island off the Long Island coast has been an iconic destination for the queer community since the early 20th Century.
–      The hidden gay lives being uncovered
–      The cartoon hunks that defined gay culture
–      The ultimate island hideaways
A summer season on Fire Island, bookended by Memorial Day (at the end of May) and Labor Day (at the beginning of September), is often eventful. Expect thrills, spills and plenty of parties, followed by excursions to the beach to watch the sun rise above the Atlantic. Loosely modelled on Pride and Prejudice, Kim Booster's film shows Fire Island as a place of contradictions; a space where you can be your authentic self, and let it all hang out among friends, but also an intensely theatrical space, where roles are performed, looks (judgmental, flirtatious) are exchanged, and six-packs are honed.
New rom-com Fire Island paints a nuanced picture of its freedoms and hierarchies (Credit: Disney+)
While reading Jane Austen one summer on Fire Island, Kim Booster "couldn’t help", he wrote in a recent essay for Penguin, but "map" the experiences of her characters "navigating the limiting social conventions of her time" onto "the similarly tortured social conventions of gay male spaces". In this vein, the film joins a long tradition of artworks about the simultaneously loose and restrictive mores of Fire Island, a world associated with both sexual freedoms and social hierarchies. Edmund White, who wrote about a fictionalised version of Fire Island in his 1973 debut novel Forgetting Elena, notes in his memoir City Boy how the rituals of gay social life there "rhymed in my imagination with the rituals of medieval Japan or Versailles".
Still, it is not hard to see why Fire Island's allure has endured across time, and why queer people have ventured there in search of freedom and pleasure. A thin spit of land running approximately 32 miles long and half a mile wide, the island's landscape is visually and ecologically particular, marked with lush vegetation and protected from erosion by sand dunes. Since the 1930s, when artists such as Paul Cadmus and Jared and Margaret French rented a house in the small community of Saltaire and captured stylish, playful images under their photographic moniker PaJaMa, the beauty of the island’s landscape has offered solace and inspiration. Around the same time, queer and artsy folk from the city were first discovering holiday rentals in the small, rustic community of Cherry Grove, catalysing a process that would come to create what anthropologist Esther Newton calls "America's first gay and lesbian town". After a 1938 hurricane destroyed many of the houses in Cherry Grove, Newton observes in her history of the community, gay men and lesbians bought up much of the lots, then going cheap, from the Long Island families who previously owned them.
Matthew Leifheit’s series To Die Alive captures both the eroticism and haunted quality of the island's atmosphere (Credit: Matthew Leifheit)
Going into the post-war period, Cherry Grove became increasingly well-known as an eccentric, outrageous spot, its small-town atmosphere enriched with a vibrant theatrical and drag culture, and ample venues for drinking, dancing and public sex. The Grove's more upmarket neighbour, Fire Island Pines, was developed later, in the 1950s, as a "family-friendly" community, although this label didn't last for very long, despite the fact that numerous gay homeowners had moved there from the Grove in the hopes that it would act as a more discreet enclave. By the 1970s, with the flourishing of an increasingly public queer culture in the years following the Stonewall riots, Cherry Grove and the Pines were both highly desirable locations, frequented by writers and, including Truman Capote, James Baldwin, Patricia Highsmith, Carson McCullers, as well as numerous stars of stage and screen. That the supposed golden age of Fire Island's loose and liberated culture was so short-lived, before the HIV/Aids epidemic began decimating its community in the early 1980s, only further informs its mythology as a fragile, sacred place, lingering defiantly on the fringes of the Atlantic.
A place of "death and desire"
Because here's the other thing about Fire Island; it is a haunted place. It is, as WH Auden writes in his 1948 poem about the place, Pleasure Island, as if the "lenient amusing shore / Knows in fact about all the dyings". As much as a summer on Fire Island is about immersion in the present moment (this weekend) or the near future (this season), the past is never far away. Scratch beneath the glamorous, hedonistic sheen of its popular image and a rich cultural lineage comes into view, along with the ghosts of the various figures who have graced its shores. Before I began research on my book Fire Island: Love, Loss and Liberation in An American Paradise, which examines the queer cultural history of Cherry Grove and the Pines, while interweaving aspects of personal memoir, I went there in the spirit of pilgrimage, seeking to retrace the footsteps of poet Frank O'Hara, who was killed on the beach near the Pines in a dune buggy accident in the summer of 1966. Standing by the ocean in the early hours of the morning, incanting lines from one of O'Hara's poems, the deathliness of the place became vividly apparent; the sense that it is teeming with the life (or lives) of its past. As the narrator of Andrew Holleran's classic 1978 novel Dancer from the Dance notes, this is a place of "death and desire".
Drag has always been at the heart of the island's culture, as with the annual Independence Day event Invasion of the Pines (Credit: Getty Images)
The photographer Matthew Leifheit's series To Die Alive (recently published by Damiani Books), named after a lyric from Ariana Grande's song Break Free, attests to this curious quality in the island's atmosphere. Leifheit captures not only the death site of O'Hara (see image), and of Margaret Fuller, the 19th-Century writer and advocate, whose ship crashed and sunk off the island's shore in 1855, but also the more populated settings of the island's erotic culture. These include the Ice Palace bar in Cherry Grove, originally named after an F Scott Fitzgerald story and home to the weekly Underwear Party, and the Meat Rack, a storied cruising area in the woods between the Grove and the Pines (also known on local maps as the Judy Garland Memorial Pathway.)
If the island's artistic and literary history paints a complicated picture of the place, at once romantic and real, today it remains a contested and continually evolving space. The emergence, over the last 10 years, of artist residency programmes in Cherry Grove and the Pines has helped to revive the island's creative culture and include a more diverse array of queer artists, in an effort to resist its reputation as a majority white space. Recent initiatives have been established in both Cherry Grove and the Pines to address structural inequities in both communities. In the summer of 2021, the photographer Lola Flash presented a series of Fire Island portraits titled We are Here: The Unsung Fire Island, as part of a residency with the arts organisation BOFFO, featuring portraits of queer black and brown residents and visitors. The release of Kim Booster's film, which is seen by many as a landmark in representation, with a central plot revolving around the romantic lives of two queer Asian American characters, further revises the island's dominant narrative.
Cherry Grove, as captured here by Leifheit, was the original hub for queer and artsy folk on the island (Credit: Matthew Leifheit)
Fire Island's freedoms have been hard-won, just as its restrictions and stratifications have been embedded over time, reproducing some of the hierarchies of the mainland world that it seeks to offer an escape from. But in an increasingly fractious era, with LGBTQ+ rights under attack in the US and around the world, locations like Fire Island are vital for retaining and rethinking utopian ideals, just as its imperfections are a reminder of the importance of inclusion when constructing queer spaces. Because it was never just about the sand, or the sea, or the sex, but about finding – and fighting for – a place of our own.
Fire Island is available to stream on Disney+ in the UK and Hulu in the US.
Fire Island: Love, Loss and Liberation in an American Paradise by Jack Parlett is published by Granta Books in the UK and Hanover Square Press in the US
Love film and TV? Join BBC Culture Film and TV Club on Facebook, a community for cinephiles all over the world.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

A selection of the week's best photos from across the continent and beyond:
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

Some cinemas have banned young people wearing suits from screenings of Minions: The Rise of Gru over rowdy behaviour fuelled by a TikTok trend.
Teenagers following the #gentleminions trend have been accused of making noise and throwing things during screenings.
A staff member at one venue told the BBC they wanted to ensure the experience was not spoiled for younger children on their first cinema trip.
Some cinemas said they have had to give huge numbers of refunds.
Videos showing young people dressing up in suits to watch the movie in large groups and cheering loudly during the screening have gone viral on TikTok, racking up millions of views in some cases.
The teenagers filmed themselves copying the characteristic steepled fingers of the movie's supervillain Felonious Gru and celebrated that "the five year wait is over" - referring to the time since the franchise's last instalment, Despicable Me 3.
Movie studio Universal Pictures endorsed the trend, saying on Twitter: "to everyone showing up to @Minions in suits: we see you and we love you".
Why Minions is crushing the box office. pic.twitter.com/IsFSW7Tkrf
But cinemas have been less appreciative, with several complaining about the behaviour of the young fans drawn to the movie by TikTok.
Guernsey's only cinema had to cancel further screenings of the movie, blaming "stunningly bad behaviour", including vandalism, throwing objects and abusing staff.
Mallard Cinema manager Daniel Phillips-Smith said: "It's been absolutely heartbreaking. We've had families who won't even go back into the screen when we've tried to sort it out, families leaving before the film has even started, and of course the children have been in tears."
The cinema had suffered a "massive" financial impact from all the refunds for customers' whose viewing of the film had been disturbed, he said.
The Regal Cinema in Wadebridge, Cornwall, posted a notice saying it would no longer admit "unaccompanied children wearing suits" to screenings of the movie.
Box office staff told the BBC young people in suits had been "cheering, clapping, whooping" and rising to their feet throughout the film.
I love being gen z. We have so much powerð­ððð¤ð¼ #tiktok #MinionsTheRiseOfGru #Minions #gentleminions pic.twitter.com/2OUarPhubj
"We were trying to talk to people on the way in after a while, but that wasn't really getting anywhere.
"So we had to just decide to put a stop to it and say thanks very much, but we're not doing the whole TikTok trend thing," a staff member said.
"We had people coming in with children for their first cinema trip ever and we wanted to protect that, really."
Images on social media showed several Odeon cinemas displaying signs warning customers: "Due to recent disturbances following the #GentleMinions trend, any group of guests in formal attire will be refused entry for showings of Minions: The Rise of Gru."
The Gentleminions TikTok trend is insane pic.twitter.com/68xpeeorB6
But some cinemagoers praised the behaviour of the #gentleminions at their screenings.
Stace Woods, a teaching assistant from Surrey, said on social media that a group in suits when she saw the film were "so much fun" and "so well-behaved", adding they politely stopped bowing down and worshipping a giant poster of Gru so her children could pose for a photo with it.
One parent told the Mansfield Chad the ban on young people in suits had extended to two boys in his 13-year-old son's group, who were merely wearing white shirts with collars.
They were reportedly turned away from their pre-booked screening until parents could drive down with a couple of jumpers to cover the offending items of smart clothing.
A spokesperson for the Odeon said: "Due to a small number of incidents in our cinemas over the weekend we have had to restrict access in some circumstances."
The Vue cinema chain said it was still welcoming all customers to see the film, which had been "incredibly popular" over the opening weekend.
The Minions movie franchise, which began with 2010's Despicable Me, follows reformed supervillain Gru and his army of small, yellow henchmen, who quickly became the subject of endless online memes.
The latest film tells Gru's origin story as an 11-year-old, struggling to break into the supervillain business.
Have you and your family taken part in this trend? Upload pictures or video
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also get in touch in the following ways:
If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or comment or you can email us at HaveYourSay@bbc.co.uk. Please include your name, age and location with any submission.
Cinema vandalised by TikTok Minions trend groups
Zahawi among cabinet ministers about to tell PM to resign
PM vows to keep going amid pressure from ministers
Chicago gunman confessed to shooting, court hears
How might Boris Johnson be removed as PM?
'Let's make history' - Euro 2022 to break records
Arabs believe economy is weak under democracy
The Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site. VideoThe Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site
âWe need an international shelter for trans peopleâ
Sydney floods aftermath: 'Everybody is traumatised'
The man who came back from the dead
The biggest ships on the ocean
Murdered Indian rapper's 'protest music' lives on
The case for turning off your Zoom camera
Workers may have a strong argument against appearing on screen
America's first interracial love song
How a taboo-busting duet became a hit and broke new ground
A breakfast staple created by accident
More than a century ago, a glut of oranges kick-started a craze
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

Wine comedy up for six film gongs
Sideways, a wine-tasting comedy starring Paul Giamatti, is up for six Independent Spirit Awards, the art-house version of the Oscars.
The awards are held on 26 February, the day before the Oscars. Spanish drama Maria Full of Grace, about a Colombian woman who becomes a drug courier, got five nominations. Controversial biopic Kinsey, starring Liam Neeson as sex researcher Alfred Kinsey, was one of four films to get four nominations. The awards, now in their 20th year, honour quirky low-budget films, all of which must have a degree of independent financing. Sideways is written and directed by Alexander Payne, who directed the 2002 hit About Schmidt, winning Jack Nicholson his 12th Academy Award nomination.
"These awards, for better or worse, mean everything," said Sideways producer Michael London, adding they were a "huge first step" toward getting recognition from other awards. Among the other films receiving four nominations apiece were Brother to Brother, a drama about a young gay black man forced to live on the streets, Robbing Peter and Primer. Primer, a $7,000 (£3,650) tale of discovery, won top prize at the Sundance film festival earlier this year. Walter Salles critically acclaimed The Motorcycle Diaries and the forthcoming thriller The Woodsman, starring Kevin Bacon, received three nominations each. Also in the running, with two nominations, are high school comedy Napoleon Dynamite, The Door in the Floor and Garden State - written, directed and starring Scrubs star Zach Braff alongside Natalie Portman. The awards were announced by actors Selma Blair and Dennis Quaid in Los Angeles on Tuesday.

A child of the Victorian age, Alfred Hitchcock was always fascinated by stories of the elusive Jack the Ripper and other supposedly "gentlemanly" murderers who lived in plain sight but stalked their victims from the shadows.
– A horrifying true-crime classic– The troubling legacy of Lolita – How 'nice guys' became the villains
His third feature, 1927's silent thriller The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog, brought this macabre fixation to the screen and set the tone for much of the director's lauded career. In 1972, 51 films and almost as many years on from The Lodger, Hitchcock returned to London for what was to be his penultimate film, and final great work, Frenzy.
The plot centres on a classic Hitchcockian 'wrong man', played by John Finch, suspected of killings he didn't commit (Credit: Alamy)
On the surface, this project bore everything that audiences could expect from the ageing auteur – a murdered blonde and an innocent man clearing his name, served with lashings of suspense – but with the greater permissiveness of early 1970s cinema came a much nastier tone than Hitchcock had ever attempted before. Without fear of censorship and facing competition from a new wave of exploitation cinema, from US splatter horror to the Italian giallo, Hitchcock unleashed all his voyeuristic impulses on this shockingly brutal film. The result is, perhaps, just the sort of horribly graphic murder story that he’d always wanted to make, if only he'd been allowed.
Hitchcock had entered the 1960s at the peak of his powers, with the tremendous success of Psycho (1960) followed closely by The Birds (1963). However, three subsequent critical and commercial misfires – Marnie (1964), Torn Curtain (1966), and Topaz (1969) – appeared to suggest that the master of suspense was falling out of step with modern moviegoers. European influences and the collapse of Hollywood's censorious "Hays Code" had ushered in an edgier, more graphic, and more cynical US cinema.
"In the 1930s and '40s Hitchcock often said that women were his main audience as they were the ones who chose what to see when on a date, but by the '60s and '70s that demographic had changed – the key audiences were young and male, and they wanted to see on screen what couldn't be shown on television, and this meant violence and nudity," Caroline Young, author of Hitchcock's Heroines, tells BBC Culture.
In need of another hit and keen to return to a more modest style in the vein of Psycho, Hitchcock recruited the successful English playwright Anthony Shaffer to adapt Arthur La Bern's 1966 novel Goodbye Piccadilly, Farewell Leicester Square. "It is obvious upon reflection what must have attracted Hitchcock to it," writes Raymond Foery in his book Alfred Hitchcock's Frenzy: The Last Masterpiece. "The 'wrong man' motif, the gruesome murders, the interplay between the police and the real criminal; all of these elements must have seemed quite familiar to Hitchcock."
Frenzy was Hitchcock's first British film since 1950's Stage Fright, and the opening titles emphasise the director's homecoming with a grand aerial shot of the Thames, accompanied by Ron Goodwin's bombastic score. The rest of the film, however, adopts a more naturalistic aesthetic, a marked shift for Hitchcock. "It has the cinematic look of the more documentary-like 1970s; cinematographer Gil Taylor (and the uncredited Len South) created a palette that looks a lot more like The French Connection than, say, North by Northwest," Foery tells BBC Culture.
A blackly comic tone is swiftly established when a political rally outside London County Hall is interrupted by a nude female cadaver washing up on the riverbank. As Patrick McGilligan notes grimly in his Hitchcock biography A Life in Darkness and Light, this was "the buttocks shot Hitchcock had pursued since Psycho" – such nudity having been entirely obscured during the latter's famous shower scene.
The deceased is the latest victim of the so-called "necktie murderer", a serial rapist-killer whose identity is eventually revealed to the audience as Bob Rusk, a psychotic Covent Garden greengrocer brilliantly played by Barry Foster. Rusk seems a prototype of the "nice guy" villain trope. His suave, affable, and stylish exterior merely conceals a violent misogyny beneath. "I think villains should be very attractive men. Otherwise they’d never get near their victims," Hitchcock told an audience at the University of Columbia Film School in June 1972. "If you look at most of your cultural murderers, they're rather gentlemanly sort of fellows."
Barry Foster is chilling as the actual 'necktie murderer', whose suave appearance belies his psychotic nature (Credit: Alamy)
Due to Rusk's conniving, his friend Richard Blaney (John Finch), a down-on-his-luck barman and former RAF pilot, is wrongly suspected of the killings and forced to go on the run with his girlfriend Babs (Anna Massey). Blaney is surely one of the most unlikeable heroes in cinema. Unlike the charismatic "wrong men" played by Jimmy Stewart and Cary Grant in Hitchcock's earlier thrillers, Blaney is scruffy, aggressive, and mean, and so it is little surprise how quickly he is condemned when circumstantial evidence gathers against him. "Blaney is an angry, violent young man: we need time to sympathise with him," remarked Hitchcock in a 1972 interview with Ecran magazine. "Life has been very hard on him."
Hitchcock had struggled with the new wave of 1960s films stars; of his experience working with Paul Newman on Torn Curtain, Foery quotes Hitchcock complaining to François Truffaut, "As you know, he’s a 'method' actor." Filming Frenzy in London allowed Hitchcock to cast lesser-known faces from the West End, which worked towards the film's grittier approach. "It has no Hollywood walk of fame stars. No Cary Grant, no Jimmy Stewart, no Grace Kelly," says Foery. "Instead, Hitchcock was able to work with theatrically-trained actors who easily responded to his direction.  No 'method' actors, no prima donnas, no celebrities… The result was a film populated by believable characters, 'ordinary' individuals rather than movie stars pretending to be ordinary."
Hitchcock's characteristically artful depictions of murder and violence are some of the most celebrated in his career, but the first on-screen killing in Frenzy is undoubtedly the director's most shocking and notorious. Blaney's ex-wife Brenda (Barbara Leigh-Hunt) falls victim to Rusk in a sequence that Donald Spoto describes in his Hitchcock biography The Dark Side of Genius as "one of the most repellent examples of a detailed murder in the history of film." Rusk's rape and strangulation of Brenda unfolds in sickening detail – even from half a century's distance, it remains an excruciating watch.
As a work of montage, the scene is a triumph on a par with the Psycho’s shower stabbing, but the gratuity of the violence and nudity is unlike anything else in Hitchcock's oeuvre. "In contrast to Psycho, which in promotions and in the film itself had titillated spectators with hopes of seeing Janet Leigh's breasts but which had withheld the full sight of the desired objects, Frenzy shows an extreme closeup of the woman's breast as she struggles to pull her bra back over it, all the while murmuring the words of the psalm. It is anything but lovely; it is infinitely sad, pathetic, among the most disturbing scenes cinema has to offer," notes Tania Modleski in her excellent book The Women Who Knew Too Much, which considers Hitchcock via feminist theory.
Hitchcock was not the only mainstream filmmaker of the period to present sexual violence with shocking verisimilitude. The previous year had seen the release of Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange and Sam Peckinpah's Straw Dogs, while 1972 also brought Wes Craven's Last House on the Left and John Boorman’s Deliverance. "The film allowed the famously repressed Hitchcock to explore the darker sides of sexuality and violence that had always fascinated him," says Foery. "The zeitgeist of the era inhabits Frenzy and freed Hitchcock to bluntly reveal the depravity that harks back to the Jack the Ripper era that fascinated him as a child."
Hitchcock shot Frenzy in London, making it his first British film for over 20 years (Credit: Alamy)
While promoting Frenzy, Hitchcock denied that was merely indulging a fad for increased nudity, lamenting that he had not been granted such a free hand with his earlier films. Speaking at the Columbia Film School, he regretted the presence of Janet Leigh's bra in Psycho, "She should have been stripped, but then we weren’t allowed. There wasn't that 'permissiveness'."
The film's treatment of women was vehemently criticised at the time. A July 1972 article in the New York Times by Professor Victoria Sullivan asked "Does Frenzy Degrade Women?" Sullivan’s assessment was emphatic: "I suspect that films like Frenzy may be sicker and more pernicious than your cheapie humdrum porno flick, because they are slicker, more artistically compelling versions of sado-masochistic fantasies." Meanwhile, America's National Organisation for Women gave the film one of their annual "Keep Her in Her Place" awards for male chauvinism.
In The Women Who Knew Too Much, Modleski stops short of calling Hitchcock a misogynist, taking a more ambivalent view on Hitchcock's attitudes to women: "It seems to me more useful, however, to consider Frenzy not simply as the reflection of the dirty mind of a frustrated old man nor even of a new 'freedom' in sexual mores, but rather as a cultural response to women's demands for sexual and social liberation, demands that were, after all, at their height in 1972 when Frenzy was made," she argues. "...Hitchcock's fear and loathing of women is accompanied by a lucid understanding of – and even sympathy for – women’s problems in patriarchy."
It's true that while Hitchcock was happy to indulge gruesome images of women being murdered and mutilated, his female characters were never underwritten, and in the case of Frenzy they are certainly the warmest and most sympathetic parts the script has to offer. "Hitchcock's later films were marked by misogyny and fetishised violence, from the torture of Tippi Hedren and the rape scene in Marnie, to the brutal murders of women in Frenzy," Caroline Young tells BBC Culture. "I think it wasn't just a Hitchcock problem, but a problem with cinema at that time. Violence was being meted out to women on screen; they were being punished for their increasing sense of agency and this was being reflected back to audiences. In Frenzy, Barbara Leigh-Hunt and Anna Massey's characters are both independent women with careers, and they are punished for that independence. But rather than showing two-dimensional characters, Hitchcock painted these women with complexity so that the audience can identify with them. It's as if he's trying to arouse, and then shock and shame the audience for their enjoyment of violence."
Frenzy may be more explicit than Hitchcock's previous work, but he had explored male violence, and suggestions of sexual violence, throughout his career. "I don't think of Frenzy as notably nastier than some of his other works – Shadow of a Doubt (1943) goes farther and deeper than Frenzy in this way," Sidney Gottlieb, editor of Hitchcock on Hitchcock and Hitchcock Annual, tells BBC Culture. "And I don't think that Frenzy shows Hitchcock unleashed in a way that establishes a model different from his lifelong practice of using the 'graphic' not as the essence but as one element of a much more complex 'pure cinema' of stylisation, subtlety, and suggestion. Even the quite brutal – and yes, graphic – murder of Brenda is highly stylised, and the nudity, as shocking and attention-getting as it is, is far from the main element in the sequence."
Indeed, there is nothing else in the film as brutal as Brenda's murder – in fact, the later murder of Babs is a quite ingenious exercise in restraint. As Rusk escorts her into his flat with the chilling invitation, "you're my type of woman," the door is closed on the audience and the camera slowly backs away from the scene into the busy street outside, a complex feat of camerawork which Hitchcock executes in one nauseating movement. The horribly inevitable crime has been set in motion, and this time Hitchcock refuses to indulge his audience with another exhibition of horror.
The brutal murder of Brenda (Barbara Leigh Hunt) remains one of the most disturbing death scenes in cinema history (Credit: Alamy)
"I tend always to revert to the idea that Hitchcock was the supremely calculating exploiter of the full range of the medium's possibilities. Mainstream and avant-garde, Hollywood and non-Hollywood, montage and long-take, silent and sound, male focus and female focus, and so much more," Charles Barr, author of English Hitchcock, tells BBC Culture. "The freedoms of post-1960 allowed him to widen his canvas, as it were, but without renouncing the eloquently allusive methods that he had been using and refining throughout his career."
Frenzy premiered as the closing film at the 1972 Cannes Film Festival and received a broadly rapturous critical response. Many of the contemporary reviews betrayed a sense of relief that the great Hitchcock had not produced another dud. Gene Siskel wrote in the Chicago Tribune, "Hitchcock, after a string of four indifferent films, is back providing grand entertainment," while the headline of Jay Cocks' review in Time Magazine declared the director was "still the master". The film would go on to outperform Psycho at the box office and become Hitchcock's most financially successful work for Universal.
Fifty years on, Frenzy remains a chillingly effective thriller and a curious bookend to the murderous saga which commenced with The Lodger. It is drenched in Hitchcockian verve, and, paradoxically, unlike anything he had made before. "Frenzy is steeped in the (English) past, yet contemporary in some of its ambitions, a testament to a director less encumbered by codes (of all sorts), but with complicated results that leave us wondering how well we ever really knew Hitchcock himself," Christine Sprengler, author of Hitchcock and Contemporary Art, tells BBC Culture. Hitchcock had always been celebrated for his visions of male violence within aggressively patriarchal worlds, but with Frenzy he chose not to sugar the pill. Perhaps the film's savagery suggests how its director might always have operated in a less censorious industry – but then his final film, 1976's caper Family Plot, contains little of the nastiness which characterises Frenzy. It's more likely that Hitchcock was reluctant to age into the role of an antiquated heritage act, and even in the abrasive era of the New Hollywood, giallo, and exploitation cinema, the septuagenarian genius was still probing new ways of horrifying his audience.
Love film and TV? Join BBC Culture Film and TV Club on Facebook, a community for cinephiles all over the world.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

By Tiffanie TurnbullBBC News, Sydney
Twelve members of a religious group have been arrested over the death of an eight-year-old girl in Australia.
Elizabeth Struhs died on 7 January at a home south of Brisbane, after the type one diabetic was allegedly denied insulin for almost a week.
Earlier this year, her parents were charged with murder, torture and failing to provide necessities of life.
Police now say they will charge another 12 people - aged between 19 and 64 - over the girl's death.
The group had been aware of Elizabeth's deteriorating medical condition, but did not seek help, Queensland Police said in a statement.
Her parents - Jason and Kerrie Struhs - are members of a small, tight-knit religious group in the city of Toowoomba that is not associated with any mainstream church, according to local media.
Police allege the pair and others prayed for Elizabeth's recovery as she became gravely ill, the news outlets said.
Authorities weren't called until a day after the child died.
Detective Acting Superintendent Garry Watts said police had been surprised by what they found, calling the investigation unprecedented.
"In my 40 years of policing, I've never faced a matter like this," he said.
"And I'm not aware of a similar event in Queensland, let alone Australia."
In a fundraiser set up to support Elizabeth's siblings, her oldest sister Jayde Struhs said her extended family had been left "completely shattered and heartbroken".
"We have faced the brutal reality that the people who should have protected her did not, and we may never know the full extent of what took place," she wrote.
She said her estranged parents were part of a "fear-driven and controlling" cult that took religion to its extremes.
The 12 people arrested on Tuesday are expected to appear in court on Wednesday. Jason and Kerrie Struhs will return to court later in July.
Zahawi among cabinet ministers about to tell PM to resign
PM vows to keep going amid pressure from ministers
Chicago gunman confessed to shooting, court hears
How might Boris Johnson be removed as PM?
'Let's make history' - Euro 2022 to break records
Arabs believe economy is weak under democracy
The Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site. VideoThe Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site
âWe need an international shelter for trans peopleâ
Sydney floods aftermath: 'Everybody is traumatised'
The man who came back from the dead
The biggest ships on the ocean
Murdered Indian rapper's 'protest music' lives on
The case for turning off your Zoom camera
Workers may have a strong argument against appearing on screen
America's first interracial love song
How a taboo-busting duet became a hit and broke new ground
A breakfast staple created by accident
More than a century ago, a glut of oranges kick-started a craze
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

Мы освещаем события войны России с Украиной день за днем, час за часом, публикуя информацию наших корреспондентов, анализ экспертов и комментарии политиков и специалистов.
And we'll keep you signed in.
You need one to watch live TV on any channel or device, and BBC programmes on iPlayer. It’s the law.
пересекло границу с Украиной после вторжения России 24 февраля, сообщило в среду агентство ООН по делам беженцев.
Вернулось в Украину за это время 3,3 млн человек.
На своем веб-сайте агентство сообщает, что с 24 февраля количество украинских беженцев составило 5,640,475 человек.
3,610,805 украинских беженцев зарегистрировано в Европе в рамках программы временного убежища и других подобных программ.
"Я должна позаботиться о будущем". Истории беженцев, которые не вернутся в Украину
В оккупированном Херсоне произошел пожар, уничтоживший российские склады, сообщает в "твиттере" советник главы Херсонской ОВА Сергей Хлань.
Факт пожара подтверждают корреспонденты украинского "Общественного телевидения", он есть на видео. Но от чего он возник, пока неясно. Также неизвестно, что хранилось на сгоревших складах.
Российская сторона пожар пока не комментировала.
Назначенный Россией глава оккупационной администрации Херсонской области Владимир Сальдо сегодня в эфире российского ТВ говорил об обстрелах города и области со стороны ВСУ.
"Каждый день какие-то обстрелы происходят, но хочу сообщить, что  практически не попадают", - сказал он.
В условиях боевых действий Би-би-си не может независимо подтвердить сообщения воюющих сторон.
Россия достигла одной из своих самых желанных целей – пустила воду в аннексированный Крым. Но спешка, с которой это было сделано, угрожает самому полуострову и оккупированной Херсонской области.
Вертолет и самолет, принадлежавшие семье кума Владимира Путина и депутату от ОПЗЖ Виктору Медведчуку, передали для нужд Вооруженных сил Украины, сообщил представитель украинской полиции.
Медведчука подозревают в злоупотреблении властью, государственной измене, а также присвоении и растрате имущества.
Бывший президент Украины Виктор Янукович, бежавший в Россию в феврале 2014 года, опубликовал на странице своего пресс-секретаря Юрия Кирасира обращение. Российские и мировые СМИ заметили его только сегодня.
В нем четвертый и один из самых пророссийских президентов Украины критикует нынешние власти за их политику в военное время.
Янукович пишет, что информационная политика украинских властей перенасыщена "победными реляциями" и "пропагандой". Особенно его возмущает национальный телемарафон.
Также бывший президент обвиняет нынешние власти в подавлении инакомыслия.
"Руководство Украины должно, пока не поздно, прекратить делить украинцев на правильных и неправильных, найти в себе силы протянуть руку тем, кто оценивает ситуацию иначе. Сейчас пришло время объединиться не ради войны, на которой ежедневно гибнут сотни украинцев, а вокруг совместного поиска решений", - пишет бывший президент.
В конце обращения Янукович высказывается в пользу того, чтобы "добиться мира путем взаимных уступок".
Янукович, по информации СМИ, сейчас находится в России.
обороны Литвы Арвидас Анушаускас опубликовал фото беспилотника "Байрактар",
который уже в скором времени будет передан Украине.
конце мая жители Литвы за три дня собрали более 5 млн евро на покупку
турецкая компания-производитель Baykar заявила, что предоставит беспилотник
бесплатно, а собранные средства можно будет направить на другие нужды Украины.
Жест народа Литвы в Baykar назвали благородным поступком.
что в сборе средств участвовали даже дома престарелых.
конце июня благотворительный фонд украинского общественного деятеля Сергея
Притулы объявил сбор 500 млн гривен на покупку трех беспилотников. По некоторым
сообщениям, турецкий производитель также готов предоставить часть аппаратов в
Главнокомандующий ВСУ Валерий Залужный отменил и отправил на доработку документ, предусматривающий предоставление разрешения находящимся на военном учете гражданам Украины на выезд за пределы места жительства в военное время.
Он сообщил об этом в телеграм-канале.
Залужный подчеркнул, что документ изначально касался исключительно внутренней работы центров комплектования и не создавал обязательств, ограничений прав и свобод граждан Украины.
"Несмотря на это, его появление в сети повлекло многочисленные манипуляции, разночтения и даже незаконные действия по препятствованию перемещению граждан, что стало основанием для дискредитации вооруженных сил Украины и военно-политического руководства государства", - написал он.
В связи с этим, по его словам, принято решение об отмене действия порядка с отправкой на доработку.
Для восстановления Мариуполя понадобится 7-10 лет и более 14 миллиардов долларов, заявил мэр города Вадим Бойченко.
По его словам, из-за войны в городе уничтожено или повреждено 1356 многоэтажных домов и разбомблено 40% частных домов. Большинство из них не подлежит реконструкции.
Но окончательную сумму ущерба, по его словам, можно будет назвать только после деоккупации.
Городские власти уже сотрудничают с Европейским банком реконструкции и развития, Всемирным банком и международными компаниями, которые будут помогать в восстановлении Мариуполя.
Города-партнеры, разрушенные во время Второй мировой войны, такие как Гданьск, Варшава, Дрезден и Роттердам, также приобщаются к работам по восстановлению, добавил Бойченко.
При попадании ракеты в здание харьковского
Национального педагогического университета погиб сторож, сообщила областная
"По данным следствия, 6 июля около часа
ночи военные страны-агрессора обстреляли Киевский район г. Харькова. В
результате обстрела значительное разрушение потерпело здание заведения высшего
образования. Погиб 40-летний сторож", - говорится в сообщении ведомства.
дело по факту нарушения законов и обычаев войны и умышленного убийства. Следствие
надеется установить причастных к осуществлению ракетного удара.
"Россияне уничтожили здание вуза в
Харькове. Очередной "военный объект". Страна - спонсор терроризма,
которая ежедневно это доказывает", - отреагировал в своем "Твиттере" руководитель
Офиса президента Украины Андрей Ермак.
Также во вторник российские войска обстреляли
Торецк в Донецкой области, в результате чего под завалами в частном секторе оказались
три человека, сообщил глава областной военной администрации Павел Кириленко.
"Ракеты попали в два дома частного
сектора. Точно известно об одном раненом. Также, по предварительной информации,
три человека находятся под завалами - продолжается спасательная операция. Еще
одна ракета упала рядом с гражданским объектом, но не разорвалась", -
Кириленко призывает мирных жителей эвакуироваться
В условиях войны Би-би-си не может оперативно проверить информацию от официальных лиц воюющих сторон.
Минобороны России в среду сообщило об уничтожении российскими войсками двух пусковых установок американских РСЗО HIMARS в Донбассе.
Официальный представитель минобороны России генерал-лейтенант Игорь Конашенков заявил, что две пусковые установки залпового огня HIMARS производства США и два склада боеприпасов к ним уничтожены российскими "высокоточными ракетами воздушного базирования" в районе населенного пункта Малотарановка в самопровозглашенной ДНР.
Однако советник министра внутренних дел Украины Антон Геращенко отвергает заявления российских военных о якобы уничтожении установок HIMARS, полученных Украиной от США.
Данные российских военных также отвергает украинский депутат, член фракции "Европейская Солидарность" Алексей Гончаренко.
В этой статье можно почитать поподробнее про то, что собой представляют системы HIMARS.
Как первые четыре установки HIMARS помогут Украине в противостоянии с Россией?
В условиях войны Би-би-си не может оперативно проверить заявления официальных лиц воюющих сторон.
Банк "Тинькофф" перестал отправлять SWIFT-переводы во всех валютах. Там говорят, что это временная мера - до 1 октября. Банк не под санкциями, но по части SWIFT оказался в положении подсанкционного банка.
Глава Национального банка Украины Кирилл Шевченко
выступил против продолжения эмиссии гривны, которая, по его мнению, приведет к
еще большему росту инфляции в стране и подорвет доверие к гривне и действующей власти.
Он отметил, что денежная эмиссия – самый быстрый и эффективный
способ ослабить финансовое напряжение для бизнеса и населения в краткосрочной
перспективе, но она не сможет обеспечить долгосрочную устойчивость экономики.
"Для снижения негативных экономических и социальных
последствий войны следует использовать методы оптимизации государственных
финансов", - считает глава Нацбанка Украины.
По словам Шевченко, в настоящий момент Украина остро
ощущает спад налоговых отчислений в казну, вызванный остановкой работы многих
предприятий, и эмиссия стала основным способом покрытия бюджетного дефицита.
В марте в оборот было выпущено 20 млрд гривен, а в июне - уже 105 млрд. Это, по словам Шевченко, неизбежно ведет к ослаблению гривны, росту спроса на иностранную валюту и инфляции.
"В итоге проиграют все, потому что у экономики без
надежной денежной единицы нет шансов на рост или восстановление", - уверен
"Около миллиона украинцев получают боевой и военный опыт. "План Путина" идет по графику? Украинское качество обязательно перевесит рашистское количество", - написал секретарь СНБО Украины Алексей Данилов в "Твиттере", поблагодарив партнеров за поддержку.
По его словам, вместо демилитаризации, объявленной 4 месяца назад президентом Путиным среди целей "специальной военной операции", произошла максимальная милитаризация Украины.
"Украина ударными темпами осуществляет перевооружение по стандартам НАТО. Происходит постоянное накопление и насыщение сил обороны западным оружием и технологиями", - написал Данилов.
В Великобританию для участия в специальной
военной подготовке прибыла первая группа украинских военных, сообщил британский
По его словам, в рамках предоставления
Украине военной помощи объемом 2,3 млрд фунтов учебную программу должны пройти
до 10 тысяч украинских военных.
Учения будут проходить сразу на нескольких
военных полигонах под руководством 11 бригад инструкторов.
"Эти украинские военные пройдут курсы,
основанные на базовой военной подготовке, принятой в Великобритании. Она включает
в себя владение оружием, оказание первой медицинской помощи на поле боя, управление
полевой техникой, тактику патрулирования и обучение законам вооруженных
конфликтов. Каждый курс продлится несколько недель", - сообщил Уоллес,
выступая накануне в британском парламенте.
Он заявил, что правительство намерено расширить
масштабы программы за счет привлечения к участию в ней инструкторов и технологий
других стран. Частота курсов будет определяться в соответствии с потребностями
Следует отметить, что подготовка отдельных частей
украинских войск ведется давно. Британия уже обучила несколько групп обращению
с оружием, которое она поставляет Украине.
К примеру, на базе в графстве Уилтшир на
юго-западе Англии украинские бойцы учатся применять британские реактивные
системы залпового огня с дальностью стрельбы более 80 км.
На данный момент Великобритания намерена поставить
Украине три таких комплекса РЗСО.
Российские военные продолжают обстреливать приграничные районы Сумской и Черниговской областей, сообщила Государственная пограничная служба Украины.
Обстрелы ведутся с применением РСЗО, САУ, минометов и стрелкового оружия, для ведения разведки используются дроны со сбросом неизвестных боеприпасов, говорится в сообщении ГПСУ.
Обстрелам подверглись Краснопольская, Белопольская, Новослободская, Шалыгинская и Середино-Будская общины в Сумской области и Новгород-Северская, Семеновская и Сновская общины в Черниговской области.
В условиях войны Би-би-си не может оперативно подтвердить информацию, поступающую от официальных лиц воюющих сторон.
Ранее Шойгу доложил Путину о полном контроле над городом и "освобождении" территории самопровозглашенной ЛНР.
Глава Луганской областной военной администрации Сергей Гайдай сообщил в среду утром, что ВСУ сдерживают российскую армию на границе
Луганской и Донецкой областей, и российским войскам не удалось перерезать
По мнению украинских властей, контроль над этой трассой
является одной из главных задач российских сил после взятия ими Лисичанска.
Однако, по словам Гайдая, российская армия на этом
направлении начинает испытывать перебои с подвозом боеприпасов.
За последние две недели на оккупированных территориях силами
ВСУ было уничтожено несколько оружейных складов, сказал он.
В условиях войны Би-би-си не может
оперативно проверить информацию, поступающую от официальных лиц воюющих сторон.
В ночь на среду Харьков вновь подвергся
российским обстрелам, сообщают в областной военной администрации.
Одна из ракет попала в здание Национального педагогического
По области обстреливались также Изюмский, Чугуевский и Богодуховский
районы. Сообщается, что в некоторых местах горели жилые дома, но информации о пострадавших пока нет.
В условиях войны Би-би-си не может оперативно подтвердить информацию от официальных лиц воюющих сторон.
По последним данным украинской генпрокуратуры, жертвами
российской агрессии в Украине в общей сложности стал 991 ребенок.
345 детей погибли, 645 ранены.
"Эти цифры не окончательны, работа по уточнению
данных продолжается в местах ведения активных боевых действий, на временно
оккупированных и освобожденных территориях", - говорится в заявлении офиса украинского генпрокурора.
На сегодняшний день наибольшее число жертв среди
детей (убитых и раненых) выявлено в Донецкой области – 346, Харьковской – 186 и Киевской – 116.
Последней жертвой российской армии стала 4-летняя
девочка, скончавшаяся от тяжелых ранений, полученных в результате обстрела Бахмута
В условиях войны Би-би-си не может оперативно проверить информацию, поступающую от официальных лиц воюющих сторон.
Минобороны Великобритании выпустило свежий ежедневный доклад разведки. В нем говорится, что:

50 Reasons to Love the World
Laverton is the kind of outback town you might expect at the end of an epic desert road trip, not at the start of one. Marooned on the edge of Australia's two largest deserts – the Victoria and the Great Sandy – Laverton felt like the last outpost of frontier civilisation, a 12-hour drive from Perth, five hours from already-remote Kalgoorlie.
Whenever a road train rumbled through town, Laverton rouses into life. Otherwise, it is eerily, gloriously quiet. Tarmac roads disappear beneath the red sand long before they reach the town's outskirts. When the wind picks up, the sand turns to dust and blankets the town with a fine, coppery sheen. After the dust settles, when darkness falls, the stars come out, more stars than seem possible.
Laverton, founded on the traditional lands of the Wongutha and Tjalkanti people, marks the starting point of the Outback Way, also known in Western Australia as the Great Central Road. One of the world's great transcontinental traverses, it was laid out by Len Beadell in the 1950s in what was surely one of the road-building achievements of the time; from 1947 until 1963, Beadell forged more than 6,000km of outback tracks for the Australian government. The marks his bulldozers left behind in the desert sands terrified desert peoples who wondered what great animal had passed this way.
Laverton is located on the edge of Australia's two largest deserts – the Victoria and the Great Sandy (Credit: Zuma Press/Alamy)
Standing here nearly 70 years later, there were signs to what lay ahead: the Great Beyond Visitor Centre; the Explorers Hall of Fame; the big-sky views of an endless desert landscape from Windarra Lookout. And before setting out, it was difficult not to contemplate the enormity of the undertaking.
Tracking north-west, connecting one side of Australia to the other, the Outback Way is the most direct route through the heart of the country. Along the 2,700km from Laverton in Western Australia to Winton in far-off Queensland, the Outback Way passes through countless indigenous homelands, skirts isolated national parks and stops in at life-saving outback roadhouses. It ultimately connects Perth with Cairns in a great diagonal shortcut that cuts thousands of kilometres (and weeks of travel) from the paved route that follows the coast for part of the way. As a road trip, it captures the essence of outback travel as it once was.
But, perhaps, all of that may soon be about to change.
At first after I left Laverton, it was difficult to understand why the Outback Way is considered such an epic crossing: the road was paved; the going was easy; and the thrill of departure kept at bay any awareness that ahead lay one of the longest and emptiest roads on the planet.
Where the tarmac ended, the jarring presence of road crews, graders and towering eddies of red dust offered a vision of the road's future: one day, perhaps soon, the Outback Way will be sealed along its entire length. Already, only 1,200km remain unsealed and best driven in a 4WD. What it gains in speed and ease of access – after rains, unsealed sections of the road can become impassable – it will surely lose in romance. Here was a road, perhaps even a desert, on the cusp of great and irreversible change.
The Lasseter Highway, named after gold prospector Lewis Harold Bell Lasseter, runs through the Northern Territory's Red Centre (Credit: gionnixxx/Getty Images)
"Can't hold back progress," said Bev Carmichael, with her nearly superfluous "Stop" sign, as a truck with wheels the size of a small family car blocked the way and the smell of hot asphalt caught in my nostrils. "When all this is finished, it'll cut days off the journey. It can't come soon enough for remote indigenous communities out there."
Just who might be making such a journey was a mystery – no other vehicles had passed through Carmichael's checkpoint all day.
Beyond the Tjukayirla Roadhouse 305km after leaving Laverton, the road skirted another of Australia's great deserts, the Gibson. In such lonely surrounds, it was easy to fall prey to the fears of another era, to imagine what it might mean to leave the road behind and strike out into the desert that lay beyond. The desert's name provided a clue. In 1874, a young man named Alfred Gibson was sent to get help by explorer Ernest Giles on the expedition's last remaining camel. Giles survived, but Gibson was never seen again.
Warburton, the first settlement of any size in the 550km from Laverton, felt like a metropolis, and its Tjulyuru Art Centre was filled with canvases of rare beauty by artists from the Ngaanyatjarra people. In town, daytime ennui evaporated with the heat and locals came out to reclaim their streets at dusk. At the Eider Creek Crossing 3km from town, river red gum trees formed what seemed like an honour guard to the deep desert that lay beyond.
Over the days that followed, the road unfurled into the heart of the desert: past the ochre-tinted Rawlinson Range to the north then through the Aboriginal settlement of Warakurna; past Kaltukatjara (Docker River) then through the Petermann Range to the south. This red-rock massif was the final resting place of Harold Lasseter; he died in a cave in the Petermanns in 1931, and with him went any hope of finding the reef of gold he claimed to have found near here.
The route passes near Kata Tjuta, formerly known as The Olgas (Credit: ImageBroker/Alamy)
The country through which I was driving was beyond remote.
That changed as Kata Tjuta, formerly known as The Olgas, loomed on the eastern horizon. These soulful, domed monoliths at the heart of Anangu country rose hundreds of metres into the air and had the appearance of a giant desert cathedral, nowhere more so than in the haunting Valley of the Winds, an immersive 7.4km loop walk into the heart of the range. Nearby, Uluru was a place of gravitas, spirituality and texture.
Beyond Yulara, the service town for Uluru and Kata Tjuta, the tarmac of the Lasseter Highway was at once a blessing and curse: the desert miles sped past, but with speed came an awareness of what might be missed in the rush of forward momentum. Mt Connor rose from the sands to the south. At the roadside lookout, travellers coming from the east who were yet to see the real Uluru on the horizon, gasped in awe, mistaking it for the more famous landmark. Aboriginal legends say that Ice Men inhabit Mt Connor, emerging on winter nights to sprinkle frost upon the Earth as a symbol of their passing.
The Lasseter Highway ended at the crossroads town of Erldunda, where it met the north-south, Darwin-to-Adelaide Stuart Highway, a prototype, perhaps, for paved transcontinental highways in Australia.
Many empty desert miles north, beyond a rocky defile in the MacDonnell Ranges with its dragons-back ridges and water-filled gorges, lay the large town of Alice Springs, or Mparntwe to its Arrernte traditional owners. Art galleries and bookshops, supermarkets and restaurants, desert wildlife parks and fine sunsets – Alice Springs combined convenience with a true desert sensibility.
Vivid sunsets, wide horizons and remote windmills are all iconic symbols of the Australian outback (Credit: Anthony Ham)
But the call of the road was even more powerful, and the journey continued. Some 80km north of Alice Springs, the Plenty Highway – the long, final leg of the Outback Way – veered away to the east. Past the Gemtree, where travellers can fossick for gemstones, along a paved road that continued as far as Atitjere (Harts Range), the sensation of deep-desert immersion returned. Along the roadside, signs showed examples of indigenous artworks, which travellers can buy by scanning a QR code.
For traditional owner Anthony Patrick, a better road through Atitjere would mean cheaper supplies, fewer vehicle accidents and better hospital access for members of his community, and, yes, more tourists able to visit his people's traditional lands.
"When tourists come through, we would like them to come, be welcomed, and have two-way respect of culture," he said.
Dry river crossings, giant termite mounds, horizons flecked with ghost gums and bloodwoods – QR codes aside, so much of this stretch was classic outback travel. Out past the remote roadhouse of Jervois, the Outback Way carried echoes of its lonely beginnings far across the continent: hours passed without my seeing another vehicle.
Not far beyond the Northern Territory-Queensland border, 2,100km and more than a week into my journey, the road again was paved and inching further west with each passing year.
The Boulia-Winton road that emerges from the desert marks the end of the Outback Way (Credit: Anthony Ham)
Paved roads are more welcome at the end of a long desert journey than they are at the beginning, and the thrill of having crossed a continent carried all the way into the town of Boulia. With its pubs and provisions, where glorious sunsets were a backdrop to creaking windmills, Boulia was a true outback town. Along its broad main street, locals stopped their vehicles in the middle of the road to chat.
The Boulia-Winton road hadn't left the desert behind, merely tamed a path through it. Desert country here consisted of spinifex and the flat-topped mesas of the Cawnpore Range. More big skies were to follow, and the Middleton Hotel felt like a film set, so closely did it resemble the stereotype of an isolated outback pub.
And then my final destination of Winton, as first one, then a line of buildings filled the horizon. It was a sign of the busier world that lay ahead. It took every ounce of willpower not to turn around and return back down the road.
The Open Road is a celebration of the world's most remarkable highways and byways, and a reminder that some of the greatest travel adventures happen via wheels.
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Simply uttered on its own, the word Lolita conjures up a certain collective image: an "underage" girl who is aware of – and deliberately overt with – her own sexual attractiveness, developed beyond her years. This troubling pop culture legacy, that propagates throughout music, fashion, photography and beyond, feels worlds away from the tomboyish, unselfconscious girl described in Vladimir Nabokov's 1955 novel of the same name. On the infamous poster for Stanley Kubrick's adaptation, a 1962 "black slapstick" comedy, as critic Pauline Kael called it, a young girl peeks at us over a pair of heart-shaped sunglasses, sucking on a lollipop, accompanied by the sentence: "How did they ever make a movie of Lolita?" The photograph, taken by Bert Stern, is hazy and soft-focus. Memorable for its "come-hither" quality and flippantly daring tagline – that overlaid the film with a smug defiance in the face of strict censorship laws – it's this image that has come to define the long-debated film which turns 60 this month. Is this where the misunderstanding of Lolita can be traced back to?
-       The grossest film of 2022?
-       Why 1971 was a great year in film
-       Stories that reflect our oldest fear
The film Lolita (1962) has long been accused of adopting too breezy a tone in its depiction of a story that involves a middle-aged professor grooming and raping his pre-teen stepdaughter. It was adapted from Nabokov's novel by the author himself. But it later emerged that his draft was considered overlong and unfilmable by the director and by producer James B Harris. Twenty years after the film was released, Nabokov recalled "an amiable battle of suggestion and countersuggestion on how to cinemise the novel," and that the final script was heavily edited by Kubrick, heavy on wink-wink, nudge-nudge double entendres, exonerating plot tweaks and a perplexing moral stance. Made with Kubrickian flair, the adaptation is also laden with pratfalls and wordplay – and appears to be more concerned with sending up the idea of sexual repression than critiquing the real sexual crimes of the protagonist. While this is understandable due to aforementioned censorship laws that banned, loosely, "obscenity", many questioned why the director bothered to adapt the book in the first place, given the restrictions; writing in Esquire in 1963, Dwight MacDonald noted that Kubrick had been "evidently scared stiff of the Legion of Decency and such self-appointed guardians of our morals". According to an anonymous Motion Picture Association of America spokesman at the time of release, the script had "turned an important literary achievement into the worst sort of botched-up pastiche that could be imagined".
The poster for Kubrick's 1962 film Lolita featured a photo that has since become familiar and iconic (Credit: Getty Images)
But who is to blame for the historic misjudgement of the Lolita story? The book was variously debated as comedy ("wildly funny," according to TIME magazine), tragedy ("Humbert is the hero with the tragic flaw," mused the New York Times), and a paedophilia enabler ("Anyone who published it or sold it here [the UK] would certainly go to prison," according to Sunday Express editor John Gordon). So is it fair to blame the film for the role of Lolita in the cultural conversation? Whether the web was spun by Kubrick and Harris, or by Nabokov himself in writing the book in the first place, is open to argument. What can be examined is how the film has prevailed in pop culture, with bubblegum-chewing pop stars adopting the film's aesthetic, and how one salient voice – that of Sue Lyon, the film's co-lead – has been left out of the discussion of it, while people busy themselves debating the "genius" or not of the men involved in its creation.
Lolita was already much talked about in cultural circles by the time it was optioned for the screen. Published in Paris to both fanaticism and furore, before finally finding a home three years later in the US in 1958, contemporary reviews were split down the middle about this lyrical tale of a tortured paedophile. New York Times critic Orville Prescott dismissed the novel as "florid and archly fatuous" surmising: "Perhaps [Nabokov] thinks of his book as a satirical comedy and as an exploration of abnormal psychology. Nevertheless, Lolita is disgusting." Others were moved; even famously sharp-tongued Dorothy Parker described it as "the engrossing, anguished story of a man, a man of taste and culture, who can only love little girls".
Perhaps it is unfair to entirely blame Kubrick's film for adding comic levity to the story, when many argued it was in the book in the first place. Much of the moral outrage surrounding the novel focused on how the attempts at comedy were crude and ill-suited to the subject matter, noting a sour taste left by Humbert's swooning, sickly prose. This was a factor that hindered the book getting published in the United States for three years, forcing Nabokov to publish his work with Olympia Press, the Parisian publisher helmed by Maurice Girodias that specialised in books which could not be published (without legal action) in the English-speaking world. But certain contemporary reviews made note of the book's jocular tone: Charles J Rolo deemed it "one of the funniest serious novels I have ever read" that "parodies everything it touches" with its "charge of comic genius". Many couldn't get past what they saw as an excuse to detail child abuse; others found it impossible not to give in to a wry smile as the unreliable narrator performed Olympic-standard mental gymnastics in order to justify his actions.
It took Vladimir Nabokov several years to find a publisher for his novel Lolita (Credit: Getty Images)
Lolita would become Stanley Kubrick's first comedy, and after having just completed a for-hire job with the mammoth studio production Spartacus (1960), the director was determined to exact his now-infamous precision and control in shepherding the novel to the screen. Fifty-three-year-old British actor James Mason – who was known on both sides of the Atlantic for roles in Odd Man Out, A Star is Born and North by Northwest – was cast in the central role, playing the part with a sense of ruffled debonair charm that invited pity rather than disgust. Indeed, Mason's Humbert is not the man we are introduced to in the book's foreword, where the fictional John Ray Jr, describes Humbert as "horrible, he is abject, he is a shining example of moral leprosy". What's more, Kubrick and Nabokov's script entirely removes the "explanation" Humbert gives for his sexual obsession: that, one summer as a young boy, he was interrupted during a sexual encounter with his 14-year-old love, who then died. Instead his Lolita, real name Dolores, is depicted simply as a girl that has transfixed and enamoured him; there is no hint of prior paedophilia, or, as the book says, "diabolical cunning".
To make a releasable film, Kubrick and Harris were tasked with hiring an actress for the role of Dolores Haze who looked older than the girl Nabokov had described in the novel as a "monkeyish" 12-year-old who was "unconscious herself of her fantastic power". Of 800 auditionees, a model and TV actress from Davenport, Iowa was chosen: Sue Lyon. Sophisticated, sunny, and – crucially – appearing far older than her 14 years, she flew to the UK for the film's lengthy shoot. Some years later in 1969, Kubrick admitted to bowing to "the pressure over the Production Code and the Catholic Legion of Decency at the time," of which the casting of the older-looking Lyon was a significant part. Seemingly in agreement, Nabokov would say that Catherine Demongeot – the scrappy, tomboyish then-12 year old of Zazie in the Metro (1960) fame – "would have been the ideal Lolita" instead.
When watched today, the final film is a bag of contradictions. Lyon is made up with eyeliner, sooty lashes and permanently coiffed hair – and yet she sleeps in the nightdress of a Victorian doll, all ruffles, ribbons and bows. When we first meet her she's rigidly placed and posed, gazing at Humbert over the top of her sunglasses. She looks imperious, knowing, and appears to be at least 18; she is not, as Nabokov describes in the book, "standing four feet ten in one sock". In a 1974 foreword to Lolita: A Screenplay, Nabokov admitted that "the frills of Miss Lyon's elaborate nightgown were painful".
One of the most notable changes from page to screen was through the character of Clare Quilty, played in this film adaptation by British actor Peter Sellers. It is with Quilty that Dolores eventually decides to run away, orchestrating her escape from Humbert by having the other man pose as her uncle to discharge her from hospital where she is staying with a phony illness. Kubrick expanded significantly the role of Quilty, an avant-garde playwright who is directing a play at Dolores's school; the film opens with his murder, which occurs at the book's close, after Sellers has immediately set up the film's comic tone by popping out from behind a chair and declaring "no, I'm Spartacus!" in reference to Kubrick's last feature.
James Mason played middle-aged professor Humbert Humbert in Kubrick's film (Credit: Getty Images)
Instead of fulfilling the novel's expectation of his role as the manifestation of Humbert's guilt or his tragic foil, instead Sellers displays his comic timing and predilection for skits. Quilty disguises himself as characters including a policeman, a queer-coded lisping playwright, and a newly invented deadpan German psychologist named Dr Zempf, who phones Humbert and tells him that Dolores is sexually repressed and simply must be allowed to socialise by participating in the school play. And it isn't just with Sellers where the supposedly comic tone lies, but also in the film's frequent innuendo, for instance Humbert complementing Dolores' mother Charlotte's "cherry pies".
But just because the film is different to the book, does that automatically make it a failure? In one cutting contemporary review, New York Times movie critic Bosley Crowther recalled the poster tagline of "How did they ever make a movie of 'Lolita'?" before answering: "they didn't," pointing to the adaptation's "strange confusions of style and mood". Later, Adrian Lyne's 1997 version starring Jeremy Irons and Dominique Swain was considered far more loyal to the source text, yet was itself surrounded by controversy, and drew accusations of sentimentalism and unnecessary romanticisation. If Kubrick had made the film he really wanted to make, audiences may well have been too repulsed by the abuse unfurling on screen to differentiate between depiction and endorsement.
Determined to adapt the book in the face  of strict censors, Kubrick and Harris diverted focus away from Lyon's age. According to Harris: "We knew we must make her a sex object [...] where everyone in the audience could understand why everyone would want to jump on her." In a 2015 interview with Film Comment, the producer reaffirmed: "We made sure when we cast her that she was a definite sex object, not something that could be interpreted as being perverted." Then comes an admission that makes the entire film seem like a wilful misunderstanding of Nabokov's book: "we wanted it to come off as a love story and to feel very sympathetic with Humbert." Harris's gamble worked. "Though 14 during filming," wrote critic Daniel De Vries in 1974, "Lyon appears to be a well-developed 17, and Humbert's desire for her comes off as ordinary lust."
Sue Lyon became famously reticent about speaking to the press after she stopped acting, giving a rare statement in 1996 that lambasted the effect Lolita had had in her life. "My destruction as a person dates from that movie," she said. "I defy any pretty girl who is rocketed to stardom at 14 in a sex-nymphet role to stay on a level path thereafter." While there have been appraisals of Nabokov's novel and Kubrick's film, Lyon has been markedly absent from the cultural conversation. James Fenwick, senior lecturer in the Department of Media Arts and Communication at Sheffield Hallam University, says that "what is missing from these studies is the voice of Lyon and of the way in which she experienced the production of Lolita. She is absent, silent, and silenced". Obvious parallels to the source novel arise here: in an essay titled The Art of Persuasion in Nabokov's Lolita, Nomi Tamir-Ghez writes that "not only is Lolita's voice silenced, her point of view, the way she sees the situation and feels about it, is rarely mentioned."
Sue Lyon played the role of Lolita in the 1962 film, and was 14 years old at the time (Credit: Alamy)
Speaking to BBC Culture, Lyon's daughter Nona Harrison Gomez explains that the reputation thrust upon her mother negatively affected Lyon's career: "She was so much stronger than this twisted, complicated interpretation of what a girl or woman is." While Kubrick and Harris were determined to cultivate a star, this never truly came into fruition."[They] had her in a contract," Harrison Gomez continues. "She was supposed to do something like five to six movies after Lolita. And instead, she had to keep promoting Lolita for years afterwards [...] that movie pigeonholed her in ways that didn't allow her to move forward within her career."
While Lyon went on to act in films like The Night of the Iguana (1964) by John Huston and 7 Women (1966) by John Ford, her roles began to dwindle drastically, and she made her final film appearance in 1980, aged 34. "Being typecast wasn't a positive experience for her," Harrison Gomez acknowledges. "I think my mother was a very funny actress. She had the ability to do other things, not just the seductive thing she was associated with when she was 14."
"She was an activist. She was an amazing writer [...] she did really amazing work in New York, helping women prepare for jobs that didn't have the income for finer clothes." She elaborates: "Don't get me wrong. There was a lot of darkness in her life. But I think being young in Hollywood – we've seen it 1,000 times with young actresses – they'll pull you to the top, let you do whatever you want, until you do one thing that's too much, and then they'll just destroy you."
Today, the iconography associated with Lolita (1962) has been adopted in varying degrees of earnest by wider pop culture. Those heart-shaped sunglasses, symbolic of knowingly babyish kitsch, have become a stand in for "sex-kitten" tendencies – wilfully ignoring the dark elements of the story it cribs from.
By making his version of Dolores a wordly participant, Kubrick's adaptation set off a domino effect that continues to poison pop culture to this day. She appears in the lyrics of the song Don't Stand So Close to Me by The Police, that details a teacher's sexual attraction to one of his students, in which one lyric reads: "He sees her / He starts to shake and cough / Just like the old man in / That book by Nabokov". Or she rears her head as the sordid moniker used to describe disgraced sex offender Jeffrey Epstein's private jet: the "Lolita Express". In 1992, Ellen Von Unwerth shot Kate Moss for Glamour Italia, in a cover and spread titled "Charming Lolita". In the photos, 18-year-old Moss is styled with a red lollipop, a doll, ringlet curls – years earlier, John Galliano had selected the 15-year-old to open his show as his "Lolita", launching her career as a forever-young waif. This alone reflects how the word has become a stand-in for a young girl who is a willing participant in her own premature sexualisation. It’s fair to say that Lolita walked so that Alicia Silverstone's sexually aggressive 14-year-old Adrian in The Crush (1993) could run.
It's this lack of context in the imagery of Lolita that leads to a fundamental retrospective misunderstanding of the character and story, the name now a proxy term for a type of bratty coquettishness: see Katy Perry's 2014 Twitter selfie, complete with the caption "Feeling v Lolita rn". Pop contemporary Lana Del Rey's 2012 album Born to Die is stuffed full of references to Nabokov's novel, too. In Off to the Races, she begins: "My old man is a bad man, but / I can't deny the way he holds my hand", before warbling the very opening lines to the book in the chorus: "Light of my life, fire of my loins". On the same album, her song Lolita opens with the lines: "Would you be my baby tonight? Could be kissing my fruit punch lips in the bright sunshine". She is, ironically, doing exactly what Nabokov satirises through Humbert's voice – using cloying, poetic metaphors to dress up a hazy fantasy of concealed horror.
The character Dolores 'Lolita' Haze in the film is very different from her depiction in Nabokov's 1955 novel (Credit: Alamy)
In 2020, singer-songwriter Madison Beer was forced to apologise to her 3.2 million Twitter followers after she made a pithy comment on a TikTok livestream that she "definitely" romanticised the book. After the hashtag #madisonbeerisoverparty went viral soon after, she wrote to her Twitter followers: in a characteristically Gen-Z low-caps notes app apology: "i see now that the book is triggering for some people, evoking a very complicated emotional response". An even more infamous story came in 2013 when a then-38-year-old Bradley Cooper was photographed alongside his then-21-year-old girlfriend Suki Waterhouse as he read Lolita to her in a Parisian park. As the press at the time were constantly trailing the couple, many news outlets hinted that they believed this to be staged; like Kubrick's film, perhaps this was a participatory in-joke. Or it is entirely possible, too, that it was a stroke of serendipity that the couple – while in a legal relationship – were caught reading an infamous story of an age-gap liaison.
When it comes to Kubrick's version of Lolita, there may never be a cultural reckoning with the film when the jury is still out on what it is trying to achieve – or make us feel – in connection with its source novel. But with its leading actress as an unwilling, lash-batting icon for a culture that has long romanticised statutory rape, we can only think that Kubrick's film – divorcing itself from the careful context of Nabokov's satirical novel – has spawned a monster.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Baz Luhrmann's Elvis, which was released last week, is an immensely entertaining look at the life and times of Elvis Presley, made with all the razzmatazz and whiplash-inducing camera pans that one would expect from the acclaimed director of Romeo + Juliet and Moulin Rouge. The story is narrated from the perspective of Elvis's manager Colonel Tom Parker, played by Tom Hanks. Parker is portrayed as an unreliable narrator, who helped Elvis go from a poor background to become the "King of rock 'n' roll".
-          'A hyperactive sensory overload'
-          Inside Kate Bush's alternate world
-          The music embedded in our psyches
Hanks's Parker is a savvy businessman who, alongside Sam Phillips (Josh McConville) of Sun Records, sees in Elvis a musician who can bring rock 'n' roll, a sound developing in black underground clubs, to the mainstream US.
Warning: This article contains language some readers may find offensive
Luhrmann shows how Elvis turned songs – including Hound Dog, initially performed by Big Mama Thornton, and Arthur "Big Boy" Crudup's blues classic That's All Right – into Billboard chart hits. Elvis was renowned as a white singer who "sounded black". Commentators at the time said that he borrowed some of his infamous performance techniques from black musicians; his gyrating hips became the talk of the nation earning him the nickname Elvis the Pelvis.
In the film Elvis, Austin Butler stars as Presley and Tom Hanks plays his manager, Colonel Parker (Credit: Alamy)
Austin Butler uncannily emulates Presley in a performance likely to make the actor a household name. The film portrays the singer's meteoric rise, and shows Parker taking half of his earnings, and being prompt to head off any potential problems. When there is a furore about Presley's hip movements, he cajoles the musician into creating a more family-friendly performing style. When Elvis wants to go on an international tour, it's Parker who lines up the legendary Las Vegas residency. Presley's frustrations are sated by his bank balance, even as he famously puts on weight, and his star begins to wane.
The biopic veers away from delving into Elvis's relationship with Priscilla Presley, focussing on his career and, interestingly, his relationship with the black community. Elvis was born impoverished, and grew up in the mostly black neighbourhood of Tupelo, Mississippi. He grew up around black people, and by the time he moved to Memphis, Tennessee, he was such a big fan of black music that he covered the songs he heard. He was friends with the blues singer songwriter BB King, played in the film by Kelvin Harrison Jr.
Within this framework, the film claims that Elvis was instrumental in helping black people get equal rights in the US. It does this through Parker's narration, who acts as a mouthpiece for an idea formulated by Michael T Bertrand in his book Race, Rock and Elvis. Bertrand contends that by singing songs hitherto attributed to black musicians, Elvis helped white southerners rethink their attitude to race, leading to an unacknowledged (well, at least until Luhrmann's film) impetus for white people to support the civil rights movement.
"Elvis represented a generation that came up at a time when there was a lot of change going on in the South," Bertrand, who is also a professor of history at Tennessee State University, tells BBC Culture. "One of the changes was to do with the evolution of black radio programming, and in the late 1940s teenagers like Elvis were tuning in [which gave them] a different type of perspective concerning race within a segregated society. As Elvis gets older, he has an appreciation of African-American culture and was drawn to black music in a way his grandparents would not have been. As he became popular, Elvis showed that it was 'okay' [for white people] to appreciate black culture.
"Elvis and his peers in the South are the first white kids consuming rhythm and blues. That's a breakthrough, and there were huge ramifications in that," adds the author. In his view, rock 'n' roll and Elvis "introduced a larger audience and a larger group of people to a culture that had been behind the veil of segregation. It opened up society in a positive way".
Elvis's contribution was through his actions rather than any big public statement, Bertrand believes. "I don't think Elvis was political in the sense that he would go on marches and things like that. These musicians were worried about their careers first and did not make political statements. They made their statements with their choice of music. In the context of the segregation they lived under, that was a major statement. In the 50s, many rhythm and blues artists said they were happy Elvis opened doors because the music became accessible. The problem was that because he was white, he had accessibility to venues that some of his colleagues and contemporaries did not."
Presley's friendship with BB King, played by Kelvin Harrison, features in the film (Credit: Kane Skennar/ Warner Bros Entertainment Inc)
But equally, other commentators have seen Elvis as a problematic figure regarding race, with accusations that he has appropriated black music, and some even going so far to state that he's a racist. An infamous and damning comment about Elvis regarding race can be found in Public Enemy's Fight the Power, a song written for Spike Lee's seminal film, Do the Right Thing, in 1989. It contains the rap, "Elvis was a hero to most, but he never meant shit to me. Straight up racist that sucker was simple and plain."
It was a shocking statement for many. The legend is that Elvis invented rock 'n' roll, and changed the soul of modern music. But here was Public Enemy's Chuck D, a popular black musician and lyricist, coming out against Elvis. Chuck D has been asked since to justify the lyrics on many occasions, and he's dialled back from this position that Elvis is "straight-up racist".
However Chuck D has since put forward an argument that the exalted position of Elvis has come at the expense of black musicians, who have consequently not received their fair due. In Eugene Jarecki's 2017 documentary film The King , the Public Enemy lyricist argues, "Sam Philips was a businessman. He tried to sell those records with black folks and couldn't. He found someone to sell a black sound to white face, he knew what to sell to America. That isn't a problem. Culture is to be shared. What I took offence to was that Elvis was no more of a king than Little Richard, Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry. So who is anointing him king?"
For some, that makes Elvis the king of appropriation. Helen Kalowole's Guardian article He Wasn't my King, argues that Presley's whiteness enabled him to get famous and rich by singing songs that went unheard when emanating from the black people who originated them.
As Michael Bertrand puts it: "The appropriation thing will be an argument that follows [Elvis]. The music industry was extremely discriminatory. They understood that there were white and black teenagers listening to rhythm and blues, and they were looking for a white face to appeal to a wider audience and that was Presley. I think the industry is into appropriation and Elvis is into appreciation. When Elvis went into a recording studio, he didn’t write his own songs, he basically wanted to record everything on the radio that he liked."
"The problem was that the music industry made him out to be the only rock 'n' roll figure. Elvis didn't think that, he appreciated black musicians. I run into a lot of people who like Elvis but have issues with how he was singled out when musicians such as Fats Domino, Little Richard and Chuck Berry made huge contributions."
Elvis, pictured here with his parents in 1937, grew up in a majority black neighbourhood in Tupelo, Mississippi (Credit: Getty Images)
Chuck D suggests that the racism referenced in his rap lies elsewhere, in the systemic racism of the music industry, and that black culture is continually repackaged and sold to the public in a way that hides its black roots. "I was persuaded that Elvis was another exploiter of black culture for white commercial gain by Chuck D," musicologist Neil Kulkarni, author of The Periodic Table of Hip Hop, tells BBC Culture. "That line did make me think a lot about cultural appropriation. A lot of the history of pop is the history of black innovation being stolen by the white music business, cleaned out and packaged, and sold to white audiences. That's even true today. Whether Elvis was a racist or a civil rights hero, I think the truth is to be found in the middle."
Broadcaster and journalist Jonathan Wingate visited Tupelo – where Elvis spent the first years of his life – for a programme for BBC Radio 5 Live. "I spoke to a lot of people, one of whom was Sam Bell, his best friend until he left Tupelo, who told me that Elvis was not racist."
"White children could play with black children when they were small," music journalist Phil Sutcliffe tells BBC Culture. "But then by convention and parental enforcement, they hit an age where they wouldn't be allowed to mix. That is the point where Elvis became remarkable because at that point, he didn't put up the barrier as convention would have dictated."
Wingate tells BBC Culture, "I think everything is about perception, and the cultural perception now is very different to what it was when Elvis first burst on to the spotlight. His relationship with African-American music is a complicated one.
"When he first burst on to the airwaves, it was at the same time as all the campaigns against racial segregation in the American South were exploding everywhere. Elvis could not have existed without blues, rhythm and blues and gospel music. But whether you call that cultural appropriation – or just say it left an indelible influence on Elvis's style – is up for debate. I would just say he had impeccable taste."
In the film, Shonka Dukureh plays Big Mama Thornton, who first performed the song Hound Dog – later a hit for Presley (Credit: Kane Skennar/ Warner Bros Entertainment Inc)
Wingate can see how the film acclaims Elvis's role in the civil rights movement, even if he would not put it so boldly himself. "A lot of America was segregated at the time, and you wonder how much that music would have been palatable to mainstream America at that point. Elvis somehow made things OK. I would say Elvis opened the doors to a lot of those artists."
Wingate feels that Elvis did as much as was possible for him at the time. "I don't think it's a surprise he didn't speak out," he says. "My guess is that he wasn't politically aware… People like Tom Parker would not have let him do that as it would have been seen as too subversive."
"When I teach my students," says Kulkarni, "I show them two videos, Little Richard singing Tutti Frutti and Pat Boone singing the same song. Boone is your typical anodyne figure and that's the same old story of black innovation being marginalised and repackaged. Elvis is a somewhat more nuanced thing. The industry is always racist, but the artists themselves, that's more complex."
Le Gendre and Sutcliffe feel that having an impact is not enough to be exalted as a civil rights hero. "I don't buy that at all," says Le Gendre. "I think if you really want to contribute to civil rights, you should get on the front line and march. This is what was happening and needed at the time."
"He did some support anonymously," says Kulkarni, "that's great. It's a shame that such a huge figure couldn't be more supportive. I'm dubious about his role in the civil rights movement. The industry has a long history of finding white faces to repackage black faces for the mainstream, which still happens today. The use of black music with a white face is just how commerce works," argues Le Gendre. "It's designed for people to have a good time, spend money, dance. They then go home. They don't go on marches or try to change America."
Blues artist Brook Benton and Presley, backstage at the WDIA Goodwill Revue, 1957 (Credit: Getty Images)
That's not to say Presley didn't do anything – he did show support for black artists and causes. For instance, he attended the 1956 Goodwill Revue in Memphis, the WDIA radio station's annual benefit concert to help the city's deprived children. The all-black line-up featured the likes of BB King and other big stars of the era. Though Presley's record contract did not allow him to perform, he supported from the wings. And when invited on stage, he greeted the screaming crowds with a trademark rebellious twist of his hip. For BB King, Elvis's presence at the revue spoke volumes: "I believe he was showing his roots. And he seemed proud of those roots," he said.
Of course, there are always multiple perspectives on the life of a legendary figure, and Baz Luhrmann's film is just one interpretation. And each of us has our own perception of Elvis, the man, his music and what he did, or didn't, stand for.
Love film and TV? Join BBC Culture Film and TV Club on Facebook, a community for cinephiles all over the world.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

50 Reasons to Love the World
There are two immediate signs that Clovelly, located on the coast of Devon in South West England, isn't your usual seaside village. The first is that the only access is through the visitor centre, which charges £8.50 per adult for entrance (£4.95 for children). The second is the sledges. They stand at attention at the top of the cobbled walk that runs through the town's steep lanes of cottages and down to Clovelly's harbour, 120m below, ready for the next time a resident comes back from the shops and needs to lug their purchases home.
They might seem out of place to a first-time visitor. But both the visitor centre, opened in 1988, and the sledges, which largely replaced donkeys by the 1970s, are ways in which this 1,000-year-old community has adapted to modern times – while still preserving the rhythms of the past.
Even today, there are no cars in Clovelly. (It would be too steep for them to get access even if the town wanted them.) There are no chain stores, no traffic noises, no light pollution. Instead, there are cobbled lanes, whitewashed cottages, small boats bobbing in the 14th-Century stone quay, fat bees and butterflies feeding on flowers, and, almost everywhere, the sound, smells and sight of the Atlantic.
"Moving to a teeny tiny cottage on the edge of a cliff was something I never imagined," said Ellie Jarvis, who came from London to Clovelly for six months in 2007 to help run her family's silk workshop and never left. "But what is so beautiful and unique about Clovelly is not only the cobbles and all the obvious things that you see as a tourist. It's the fact that you're living with the past."
And that past extends a long way.
Instead of cars, chain stores or light pollution, Clovelly has centuries-old cottages and ocean views (Credit: Amanda Ruggeri/BBC)
In the 11th Century, when it was listed in the Domesday Book, England's earliest public record, Clovelly was owned by William the Conqueror himself. The king later gave the village to his wife Matilda of Flanders, England's first crowned queen. It still retains a quaint, yesteryear feel – a big part of why it was a main location for the films Sense & Sensibility (2008) and The Guernsey Literary and Potato Peel Pie Society (2018); and why, over the centuries, the village has inspired artists and writers from JMW Turner to Charles Dickens.
Few have seen Clovelly as more of a muse than the 19th-Century novelist and poet Charles Kingsley, however, who lived here as a child. "Now that you have seen the dear old Paradise you know what was the inspiration of my life before I met you," he wrote to his wife after her first visit in 1854.
Clovelly's stone quay dates back to the 14th Century (Credit: Amanda Ruggeri/BBC)
It's true that there are, of course, other picturesque, historical fishing villages in the area without entrance fees. But what appears authentic on first sight can collapse at a closer look. Many idyllic spots have been hollowed out by holiday lets, leaving them bursting with tourists in summer and emptied out in the off season.
At Clovelly, where some 300 people live in the village's 83 cottages, the experience is the reverse. Get past the visitor centre and its souvenir shop, and there is a real – and vibrant – group of residents behind it all.
"There is an actual community that lives here," said Cass Mcfarlane, who moved here in autumn 2021 from London and runs a sweet shop in Kingsley Cottage, a small museum devoted to the writer. "And it's an active, bubbly community, from all ages and walks of life. There's always someone to see and talk to."
Cass Mcfarlane moved to Clovelly in autumn 2021 (Credit: Amanda Ruggeri/BBC)
Although I'd been to the village before, I first saw this for myself in the run up to Christmas. Everyone in my own town, 15 miles south of Clovelly, had been asking if we were going to see Clovelly's Christmas lights. When we arrived, the lanes were even more packed than they had been at the height of the summer tourist season. A band of local schoolchildren played Christmas carols; people greeted one another on the cobbled streets.
"Very often a visitor would possibly make, I think, the mistake of thinking that it was a sleepy village. And it really isn't," said Jarvis. "There's a lot going on." Festivals, events, theatre. At the same time, she added, "There's a more gentle way of life here. I'm forever telling my children that there's always someone watching them. They cannot misbehave – there's always an audience."
Clovelly may seem sleepy to outsiders, but residents say that's far from the case (Credit: Amanda Ruggeri/BBC)
That tight-knit, dynamic aspect of Clovelly's community has been nurtured by design, according to the owner of Clovelly, Hon. John Rous. "It was always important to me that Clovelly should remain a living village," he said when we met at his estate office, a jumble of pleasant stone buildings in the shadow of Clovelly's 12th-Century All Saints church. "I didn't want to go down the holiday lets line. I didn't want to go down even a timeshare basis."
Now 71, Rous inherited the village from his mother, a countess, in 1983. This is the other reason Clovelly is unusual: it is one of the UK's only privately owned villages. Not only that, but the Rous family is only the third family to own it since the 1200s.
The Hon. John Rous, shown here in Clovelly Court Gardens, has owned Clovelly since 1983 (Credit: Amanda Ruggeri/BBC)
In the heyday of aristocracy, this was common. A landowning family would not only employ people to work their farms, but lease them homes and shops, too. But in the same way that so many of the grand houses of yesteryear had to be given up, so too did the villages. It was no different at Clovelly, where, by the 1980s, Rous' family had been selling off parts of the estate – which spreads over 2,000 acres of North Devon – to be able to finance the rest.
"It was a very difficult time. There was not much income being generated from the estate – a little bit of tourism income," Rous said. "I thought, I don't really want to get involved in a sort of managed decline. We've got to try and stop the rot and be self-financing. And so, I realised that we needed to make some major investment in tourism."
This meant building the visitor centre and, for the first time, charging an entrance fee to the village, rather than a car park charge. To his surprise, visitor numbers went up, not down. (Today, there are about 150,000 a year.) Still, the move was viewed with scepticism. Even now, more than 30 years later, a quick look on Tripadvisor shows that plenty of visitors remain irritated about having to pay.
But that income has kept Clovelly intact, Rous said. And it has allowed for a programme of renovation of the cottages, some of which date to at least the 15th Century – and all of which are subject to the wet, wild, windy weather that this part of the English coastline is known for, with all of its upkeep challenges, from mould to damaged roofs.
Some of Clovelly's cottages are more than 600 years old (Credit: Amanda Ruggeri/BBC)
The tourism income has also allowed Clovelly to maintain an unusual policy for this part of the world: there are no second homes or absentee landlords allowed. (Rous, the only landlord, lives on the estate himself, in Clovelly Manor; while the original manor burned down in 1943 in World War Two, its walled gardens, Clovelly Court Gardens, survived intact and are included in the visitor fee.) As a condition of their tenancy, residents are required to live here full-time.
For longer-term residents like Jarvis, that meant having to change houses several times as her family expanded. Her two boys, aged nine and 13, have grown up here. There are certain days of the year where multiple households move at once in a kind of game of musical chairs, but with sledges instead of moving vans.
Speaking of the sledges, residents say that these are not just quirks. They are an integral part of Clovelly life. Everybody has their own, which they keep at the top of the village. When locals order groceries, the delivery vans know, on seeing "Clovelly" on the address, to give a 15-minute heads up before they arrive so the customer has time to trudge to the top of the village and get their sledge.
"There is no secret way of getting things down," said Mcfarlane. "This morning, I saw a gentleman with a new washing machine and a new cooker. Last year, a grand piano came down."
Almost anything cumbersome gets sledged into Clovelly – even pets (Credit: Amanda Ruggeri/BBC)
Many residents see it as a small price to pay for the privilege of living in such an idyllic spot. At high tide, Jarvis' boys can jump from their kitchen door straight into the sea. Other residents agree that the inconveniences are worth it.
"Once you've made your mind up, the transition from gas and central heating to putting logs and coal on your sledge and letting gravity bring it down, and chopping wood and making the Raven [wood stove], it just feels right," said Dave Francis, who moved to Clovelly in 2020 and runs the Donkey Shoe Shop with his wife, Jakki.
While it's easy for visitors to forget, the Clovelly estate is far more than the village. It includes 700 acres of woodland, three large farms, the working harbour, gardens and even a sawmill. Some 80 employees keep it all going. That all brings challenges – from dieback in the woodlands to garden upgrades to the unending upkeep of the cottages. ("The nasty thing about that is that you could spend loads and loads of money and hardly notice a difference," Rous remarked, especially since the restorations are done with historical sensitivity, such as reroofing in stone or slate instead of cheaper materials.)
Clovelly's maritime past remains important, and fishing takes place here still today (Credit: Amanda Ruggeri/BBC)
Despite the challenges, Rous, who speaks with passion about every aspect of running the estate, continues to look forwards. He wants to encourage Clovelly's burgeoning crafting industry (together with silk-maker Jarvis, a soap-maker and potter also have workshops here), as well as the village's historical links to fishing and the sea. He's even thinking about introducing small-scale oyster farming in the bay. "We've got to continually evolve and adapt to changing circumstances," he said, even while preserving the past.
For Jarvis and others, when it comes to finding this balance, Clovelly succeeds.
"It isn't an easy way of life; it isn't straightforward. You can't compare living here to anywhere else," Jarvis said. "But you just fall in love.
"I think you live here with all of your heart."
Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter and Instagram.
If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "The Essential List". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

In the 1990 classic Pretty Woman, when Edward Lewis (Richard Gere) first picks up Vivian Ward (Julia Roberts) in the luxury silver sportscar he borrowed from his lawyer, there is an implication he is somewhat oblivious to the fact that the woman is a sex worker. The businessman, a New Yorker lost amid the vast highways of Los Angeles, is initially only interested in directions. In Sophie Hyde's Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, which is released this week, there is no such confusion. When the doorbell of her hotel suite rings, Nancy Stokes (Emma Thompson) knows who's at the other side of the door: Leo Grande (Daryl McCormack), a sex worker she hired online.
-       How Pretty Woman erased sex from its story
-       Why Hollywood is shunning sex
-       The 12 best films of 2022 so far
A retired teacher and widow with two grown kids, Nancy finds herself with time to reflect on the years that are now behind her. Out of this process of contemplation, one thing in particular bothers the woman: she has never reached an orgasm. Sex, throughout her life, has been akin to a chore – in, out, done. Frustrated, she takes the plunge and books Leo Grande for the night, hoping to explore all the desires she was never allowed to act on with her one and only partner.
From this seemingly simple premise, Good Luck to You, Leo Grande presents a shift in the portrayal of sex work on film, with the most obvious change being that it is an older woman hiring a younger man, a reversal of the usual pattern of age and gender. In addition, the woman here is solely concerned with her own pleasure. She has no expectations of having an orgasm this late in life, but she wants to be touched, to touch, to experience pleasure by allowing herself to openly admit that’s what she desires.
In Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, Daryl McCormack plays a sex worker hired online by widow Nancy Stokes (Emma Thompson) (Credit: Searchlight Pictures)
Leo, too, represents a diversion from the way sex workers have generally been depicted on screen. Yes, he is young, tall and handsome, but he is also void of the stereotypical masculinity that typically comes along with such attributes, as when the protagonist of Paul Schrader's American Gigolo (1980), high-end escort Julian (Richard Gere, once again), repeatedly reinforces his virility by employing mockery and unwarranted outrage to negate any suggestion of queerness or femininity. Leo showers Nancy with tenderness, even when she offers him the opposite in return. The former teacher pokes and prods at the dynamics of his job, enquiring if he ever feels degraded or what could have gone so terribly wrong for him to choose that specific career. In response to this line of questioning, Leo offers nothing but patient kindness, firmly rooted in the understanding that animosity often comes from a place of insecurity.
The stereotypes Nancy frames Leo with are the result of long-perpetuated stigma, and they have been reinforced by cinematic portrayals of sex work. "We're either villainised or sensationalised, and we are rarely allowed to exist in this space of being someone who is just working to make money to survive," sex worker Parker Westwood tells BBC Culture. In 2021, Westwood launched the podcast A Sex Worker's Guide to the Galaxy, with the aim to "destigmatise and humanise sex workers".
Destigmatising is key when it comes to what sex workers expect from depictions of their practice. For a long time, film has done the very opposite, feeding into patterns of preconceptions that are not only inaccurate, but arguably dangerous. Most popular accounts of sex work fall under two contrasting detrimental categories: "the disposable sex worker" or "the hooker with a heart of gold". The first encompasses the films in which sex workers are ruthlessly (and often brutally) murdered, their death handled as nothing more than a work hazard. Think Stanley Kubrick's Eyes Wide Shut (1999), where high-end escort Mandy (Julienne Davis) is introduced mid-overdose, briefly seen again masked and half-naked, then – finally – at the morgue.
Thrillers notoriously foster this trope, with films such as David Fincher's Se7en (1995) and Nicolas Winding Refn's Only God Forgives (2013) both featuring shockingly vicious murders of sex workers. True crime adaptations are another fruitful genre for the perpetuation of this violent pattern, with titles such as The Frozen Ground (2013), Lost Girls (2020) and Green River Killer (2005) dwelling – often with gratuitous violence – on the killing of sex workers and the disregard commonly shown by authorities in solving such cases.
Even the most celebrated film about a "hooker with a heart of gold" begins by reinforcing the notion of the disposable sex worker. The aforementioned Pretty Woman features a dead street worker in one of its very first scenes. "She be out on these streets day in, day out, trading her sorry self for some crack", says a man to the journalists gathering nearby, implying the young woman was to blame for her own death. As the dead body lays in a skip, tourists snap pictures, desensitised to this very specific type of violence.
Starring Julia Roberts and Richard Gere, Pretty Woman brought conversations about sex work to the mainstream, but has been widely criticised (Credit: Warner Bros)
Pretty Woman helped bring conversations about sex work to the mainstream, but has been widely criticised in its approach to the subject. Vivian's trajectory is constructed with the single goal of having the audience root for her to ultimately abandon sex work – any other outcome would be deemed tragic. The way out, of course, is presented in the form of Edward, a rich, white, older man who is unable to resist the urge to rescue her. "You could be so much more," he tells Vivian as the two lay in bed, the faint lights failing to obscure the fact he perceives her as “lesser than”.
The film also fosters the idea that this transactional relationship is a romantic one, which, in turn, romanticises the idea of sex work itself. Edward showers Vivian with gifts, hands her a limitless credit card and arranges a personal shopper to carefully curate her new image. This fairytale-esque approach to their dynamic reinforces the notion that all sex workers are patiently awaiting a knight in shining armour to whisk them away from such a sorrowful predicament. If Edward was ever truly in love, it was with his own creation.
Comedy is yet another outlet for poor sex work representation, as producer, screenwriter and former sex worker Isa Mazzei tells BBC Culture: "There are a lot of comedies out there where the plot is 'oops, we killed a sex worker' and those types of narratives are degrading and perpetuate harm. The fact they're often played off as a joke is the most insidious part of it all, it implies killing a sex worker is somehow less than killing someone with another profession."
Entire comedies are centred on the murder of sex workers, such as Peter Berg's Very Bad Things (1998) and Lucia Aniello's Rough Night (2017), while many others employ the demeaning narrative device as a passing joke, as is the case with Dirty Work (1998), where a car salesman is caught live with several dead sex workers in the trunk of the cars on display. Some films take it up a notch by adopting these harmful stereotypes in their titles, such as Dead Hooker in a Trunk (2019) and Death of a Hooker (1971), also known as Who Killed Mary What's 'Er Name?
Many recent films, however, are actively challenging these stereotypes, with one example being 2018's CAM, written and produced by Mazzei. The story, which employs horror to explore the loss of agency frequently experienced by sex workers who perform online, debates important matters such as consent and the separation between person and persona. "It was absolutely mandatory for us to include sex workers in every step of the filmmaking process. I can't speak for all sex workers, I'm just one. So it was important to include other voices and make sure that we had arrangements about how things were portrayed," says Mazzei, who is also the author of Camgirl, a candid memoir about her days of live-stream camming.
Although Mazzei emphasises the importance of employing sex workers in all steps of the creative process, she admits it is still far from easy for current or former sex workers to be open about their past within the industry. "It was a terrifying experience coming out as a sex worker in Hollywood and taking meetings with people who didn't always respect me as a writer and people who just wanted to ask salacious questions about camming", Mazzei says.
This sentiment is shared by Numa Perrier, whose directorial debut Jezebel (2019) is adapted from her time as a camgirl in the late 1990s. "There is a long-lasting stigma around any type of sex work, and that was a big part of why I was afraid to talk about my personal story at first. I have, however, quickly realised through workshopping the script that it was a bigger creative challenge to hide behind a story that was mine. From that point onwards I became bolder and bolder in expressing that part of me and the film is much better for it."
CAM (2018) uses horror to explore the loss of agency experienced by online sex workers (Credit: Netflix)
CAM and Jezebel greatly benefit from having sex workers reframe their own stories on screen, and prove that faithful portrayals of the subject require insight from people with lived experience. In Sean Baker's ground-breaking Tangerine (2015), former sex workers Kitana Kiki Rodriguez and Mya Taylor imbue their nuanced performances with lived knowledge, giving the film authenticity. French director Camille Vidal-Naquet spent years listening to the stories of young men working in the Bois de Boulogne – a public park in Paris notoriously known as a sex work spot – to create Sauvage (2018), a blistering tale of a young hustler determined to trail his own imperfect path.
Ninja Thyberg's recently released Pleasure, a gruelling look into the world of pornography, is yet another example of how having sex workers involved in the creative process can aid honest representation. Speaking to The New York Times, the director said she "wanted to look at porn from a perspective that doesn't see women as victims," and credits the industry professionals who worked with her on the project for the authentic feel of the film. The result is a hyper-realistic drama that employs the journey of Swedish newcomer Bella Cherry (Sofia Kappel) to scrutinise the ins and outs of the porn industry, from the predatorial behaviour of producers to the fierce competition between performers.
Thyberg's feature debut may be called Pleasure, but it is all about business. At times crushingly credible, the film places the porn industry under surgical lights, and is an uncomfortable watch. The director lingers on the little-known behind-the-scenes minutiae general audiences are likely to be unfamiliar with, but it is its approach to wider, more complex topics such as sexism, consent and sexual trauma that sets this particular story apart from its predecessors. Thyberg's sensitive eye bypasses the dangerous threat of gratuitous fetishism to build a poignant study of ambition.
Both Pleasure and Good Luck to You, Leo Grande offer fresh, rarely-seen-before perspectives on the portrayal of sex work on screen. While the former approaches the topic through the visual shock of the ultra-explicit, the latter does so through carefully crafted dialogue. In fact, there were no sex scenes on the first draft of the film. "I just enjoyed the verbal side of it," writer Katy Brand tells BBC Culture. And conversation is central to the film's positive portrayal of sex work, exploring the notion of consent through verbalisation. Before every touch, every advance, the man lays out the terms of what is about to happen, harnessing eroticism out of safety.
Ninja Thyberg's Pleasure (2022) is a gruelling exploration into the world of pornography (Credit: Mubi UK)
"I wanted it to be positive because there are positive stories out there. And they are real and they are true. And just because they make some people feel a bit uncomfortable, it doesn't mean they don't get to be represented," says Brand. Here, this element of discomfort is introduced through Nancy's insecurities, which lead the retired teacher to a place of toxic bias. In Leo's gentle handling of his client's vitriol, there is a clear demonstration of vocational tact, something actor Daryl McCormack was keen to explore through his performance.
"When I was speaking with sex workers, they had this ability to consistently find a balance with another person, and to me, that's a real gift. That's an intuitive thing and maybe where the vocation comes in. It's something that can’t be taught," he tells BBC Culture. For a film to depict sex work as a true vocation is already a real change, but to do so through a male sex worker adds yet another layer of progressiveness.
"The world of sex work is dominated by women, queer folks, trans folks and people of colour. The power structure in place means the people with extra income available to spend on sex workers are cis white men, or seemingly cis white men, so that's where the demand is", says Westwood.
Would the film have worked so well if the genders were reversed? It is questionable whether the film could preserve its essence without its very specific, subversive gender dynamic, a fact director Sophie Hyde was acutely aware of: "A lot of the time when we see a younger man with an older woman it's through this idea of a cougar, which I don't subscribe to. One of the things I loved about making [the film] was that there were so many power dynamics at play. Somebody's paying, so there's power in this; someone is young and beautiful, so the other person feels powerless in that situation. Daryl and I have even talked about a mixed-race person coming into the room as a sex worker and the power dynamic there. These things were not necessarily the plot of the movie but they are there all the time for the characters."
It is clear that, as cinema slowly progresses towards a more faithful portrayal, there is a need for these more diverse stories, crafted with the help of sex workers. "I would like to see not only inclusion of sex workers, but also deferring to sex workers," says Mazzei, on the commitment required of the entertainment industry to achieve meaningful change. "And there's a big difference there because a lot of people will hire someone to consult on their film but then not listen to that. And that's not doing the work. Doing the work is willing to step aside and listen to what someone is telling you about their lived experience and understand that they know it better than you."
Good Luck to You, Leo Grande is released in the UK and US on 17 June.
Love film and TV? Join BBC Culture Film and TV Club on Facebook, a community for cinephiles all over the world.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Tens of thousands of people are expected in the coastal city of Durban this weekend for the annual Durban July, billed as Africa's biggest horse-racing event.
But many are really there for the fashion and the glamour.
Saturday featured a fashion contest to show off the latest creations by local designers.
This year's event was keenly anticipated because it had been held behind closed doors for the past two years due to the Covid pandemic.
Among the local celebrities attending was actress Jessica Nkosi.
Of course, some people were also there for the racing.
The event is also a chance to stimulate the local economy, which took a huge hit from both the devastating floods around Durban in April, and from the riots last year following the jailing of former President Jacob Zuma. Many punters were hoping to strike it rich with their bets at the Greyville Racecourse.
But for many, it is all about the fashion.
All photos subject to copyright
V&A celebrates Africa's cutting-edge fashion
Africa's top shots: Tasting, dancing and baking
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

This video can not be played
US police have arrested a suspect after six people were killed in a shooting attack on an Independence Day parade in Highland Park, Illinois.
Robert E Crimo III, 22, was detained after a brief chase, police said.
The gunman climbed on to a roof, shooting randomly at spectators using a high-powered rifle.
It is the latest mass shooting to hit the US - there has been one in every week of 2022. President Joe Biden said he was "shocked" by the violence.
Mr Crimo was detained after a manhunt. He was referred to as a "person of interest" in Monday's shooting, but after his arrest police said they believed he was responsible.
The gunman began firing at members of the public from the rooftop of a shop at around 10:15 local time (15:15 GMT), just a few minutes after the parade began.
What should have been a day of celebration quickly turned to panic, with pushchairs, purses and lawn chairs abandoned as crowds fled from the scene. Some witnesses said they thought the sound of gunfire was fireworks or a car backfiring.
One man, who was having breakfast at a nearby Starbucks when the shooting happened, told the BBC that 30 people came running into the coffee shop looking for cover. But they all had to be evacuated because they thought the gunman was trying to get in through the back door.
Five adults were killed at the scene and one died later in hospital. At least two dozen others were injured.
One of those who died has been named as Nicolas Toledo, a man in his late 70s, who was only there because he requires full-time care and his family did not want to miss the event.
"What was supposed to be a fun family day turned into a horrific nightmare for us all," his granddaughter Xochil Toledo wrote on GoFundMe.
"As a family we are broken, and numb. Our condolences go out to all the other families who lost a love one today."
Another victim of the shooting has been named as Jacki Sundheim, who was described by her local synagogue as a "beloved" member who taught and worshipped there.
"There are no words sufficient to express the depth of our grief for Jacki's death and sympathy for her family and loved ones," a statement by North Shore Congregation Israel synagogue said.
No charges have been filed against Mr Crimo and there is no indication of any motive.
Social media firms suspended accounts apparently belonging to Mr Crimo, who posted rap videos under an alias as well as videos depicting shootings, gun violence and other violent themes.
He also posted pictures of himself draped in a Donald Trump flag and a video of him greeting Mr Trump's motorcade at an airport.
The attack in Highland Park comes just a month after deadly shootings in Uvalde, Texas and Buffalo, New York.
The the Gun Violence Archive, a group tracking gun violence incidents across the US, says there have been almost 250 mass shootings in 2022 alone - defining these as incidents where at least four people are shot.
Illinois Governor Jay Robert Pritzker warned that mass shootings were becoming an "American tradition".
"There are going to be people who are going to say that today is not the day, that now is not the time to talk about guns. I'm telling you there is no better day and no better time then right here and right now," the Democratic governor said.
President Biden vowed to keep fighting "the epidemic of gun violence" in the country.
"I'm not going to give up," he said, speaking outside the White House in Washington.
Last week, the president signed the first significant federal bill on gun safety in nearly 30 years.
It imposes tougher checks on young buyers and encourages states to remove guns from people considered a threat - but critics say the measures don't go far enough.
Were you at the parade? If so share your experiences by emailing  haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk.
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also get in touch in the following ways:
If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or comment or you can email us at HaveYourSay@bbc.co.uk. Please include your name, age and location with any submission.
New York overhauls gun laws after court ruling
Zahawi among cabinet ministers about to tell PM to resign
PM vows to keep going amid pressure from ministers
Chicago gunman confessed to shooting, court hears
How might Boris Johnson be removed as PM?
'Let's make history' - Euro 2022 to break records
Arabs believe economy is weak under democracy
The Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site. VideoThe Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site
âWe need an international shelter for trans peopleâ
Sydney floods aftermath: 'Everybody is traumatised'
The man who came back from the dead
The biggest ships on the ocean
Murdered Indian rapper's 'protest music' lives on
The case for turning off your Zoom camera
Workers may have a strong argument against appearing on screen
America's first interracial love song
How a taboo-busting duet became a hit and broke new ground
A breakfast staple created by accident
More than a century ago, a glut of oranges kick-started a craze
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

Poppins musical gets flying start
The stage adaptation of children's film Mary Poppins has had its opening night in London's West End.
Sir Cameron Mackintosh's lavish production, which has cost £9m to bring to the stage, was given a 10-minute standing ovation. Lead actress Laura Michelle Kelly soared over the heads of the audience holding the nanny's trademark umbrella. Technical hitches had prevented Mary Poppins' flight into the auditorium during preview performances. A number of celebrities turned out for the musical's premiere, including actress Barbara Windsor, comic Graham Norton and Sir Richard Attenborough.
The show's director Richard Eyre issued a warning earlier in the week that the show was unsuitable for children under seven, while under-threes are barred. Mary Poppins was originally created by author Pamela Travers, who is said to have cried when she saw Disney's 1964 film starring Julie Andrews. Travers had intended the story to be a lot darker than the perennial family favourite. Theatre impresario Sir Cameron Mackintosh has said he hopes the musical is a blend of the sweet-natured film and the original book.

No ads for Passion Oscar campaign
Producer Mel Gibson will not be using paid advertisements to promote The Passion of the Christ to voters in next year's Academy Awards.
Gibson and his Icon Productions partner Bruce Davey said they would not be campaigning in print, radio or TV for success at the Oscars in February. "This film should be judged on its artistic merit, not who spends more money on advertising," Davey said. But DVDs will be sent to Oscar voters, who will be invited to screenings. Icon spent very little on advertising the film, which deals with the last hours of Jesus Christ's life, when it was released earlier this year - instead, it made the film available for special screenings at churches. It went on to gross over $600m (£322m) in ticket sales worldwide. Over recent years, marketing films to the members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has become a multi-million dollar industry. Last year, the academy formed a committee to tighten the rules after the campaigns spilled over into personal attacks between studios. Academy president Frank Pierson praised Gibson's move for working to restore the Oscars as a "celebration and appreciation of excellence," and resisting the "crass commercialisation that was threatening the integrity of the award".

When the British artist Cornelia Parker was a little girl, one of three daughters of a physically abusive father on a smallholding in Cheshire in the 1960s, she used to place coins on nearby railway tracks to watch them violently transformed – crushed from mundane usefulness into something mangled and more precious: works of art. For a child forced to swap playtime for mucking out stables and milking cows, the seemingly innocuous act was exhilaratingly destructive. By exploiting the menacing power of a passing train in order to stamp fresh values on to ordinary objects, Parker did not simply squash a penny. She minted an imagination.
- How fear shaped ancient mythology - The women who redefined colour - How dystopias can save the world
Since the late 1980s, Parker has produced some of the most arresting works in contemporary art by harnessing – as outrageous agents of creative change – everything from plastic explosives to steamrollers, snake venom to the very blade of the guillotine that lopped off the head of Marie Antoinette. For the first major survey of her work ever staged in London, Tate Britain has assembled nearly 100 of Parker's sculptures, installations, drawings, films and photographs, chronicling more than three decades of her determination to wring from the bruised, broken and battered fragments of life an indestructible beauty. It's all here: from small drawings made by sewing through paper a fine wire fashioned from melted bullets, to the explosive large-scale works that shot Parker to prominence 30 years ago, including the suspended remnants of a garden shed that she persuaded the British Army to help her blow to smithereens in 1991.
To create The Distance (A Kiss with String Attached), Parker wrapped Rodin's sculpture with a mile of string (Credit: Cornelia Parker/Tate Photography)
"Everything just sort of weaves together," Parker tells BBC Culture, reflecting on the sight of so much of her life's creative effort gathered in one place. "The Tate owns all my major works, so they just had to get them out of the old archive. I've got a piece where I wrap Rodin's The Kiss up in string. They own The Kiss, and they'll allow me to re-enact my work." Re-enactment is a crucial aspect of Parker's imagination and art, which often ropes our eyes into seeing familiar objects as if for the first time. In 2003 she intervened in French sculptor Auguste Rodin's iconic marble depiction of adulterous lovers from Dante's Inferno – among the Tate's many treasures – by wrapping the famous marble canoodle in a mile of string, and wryly rechristening it The Distance (A Kiss with String Attached).
As with all of Parker's work, there is something much more at play than meets the eye in her ephemeral defacement of Rodin's masterpiece. Her carefully calibrated choice of a "mile of string" is an allusion to a famous prank played by the pioneering French avant-garde artist Marcel Duchamp, who in 1942 used the same length of string to web the inside of a museum displaying works by his fellow surrealists, making it extremely awkward to walk around and see the show. But Parker isn't merely rehearsing an impish prank that made engaging with works almost impossible. By cocooning the cold and chiselled clinch of Dante's lovers, Paolo Malatesta and Francesca da Rimini, Parker reinvents Rodin's sculpture. Simultaneously obscuring and accentuating the contours of Rodin's work, the alternating slackness and tautness of the spooling string forces our eyes to unravel the profundity of a cultural touchstone that we have looked at so many times we no longer really see it.
Like Marcel Duchamp before her, who notoriously tipped an unused urinal on its side in 1917, signed the ceramic with the nom de plume "R. Mutt", and dared us to accept it as a sculpture, Parker is a relentless resurrector of found objects. But there's a difference. A big one. Where Duchamp's seminal notion of the "readymade" depends on minimal intercession by the artist, Parker's art invariably manifests the effects of extreme and strenuous disruption. Far from purely conceptual, her work is devastatingly physical – a physicality she leverages through formidable force into something more deeply psychological and emotional. In that sense, Parker's approach is far more traditional than it might at first seem.
The story of art is, after all, the story of destruction – of pummelling things into unexpected expressiveness. Were it not for the crushing of countless crimson cochineal beetles and the violent wrenching of purple mucus glands from millions of living sea snails, the rich reds and vivid violets that vibrate from some of the most memorable paintings in art history, from Rubens to Rembrandt, would be dimmed to dullness. From its very inception, art is wreckage resurrected. We know now that the earliest Stone Age artists incinerated shattered animal skeletons and pulverised the carbonised fragments to produce a radiant black pigment that they used to sketch the static stampede of bison on cave walls. A quick flip through the influential Il libro dell'arte (or The Book of Art") – a handbook written at the turn of the 15th Century by the Italian painter Cennino Cennini – and one's eyes are hammered by more than 200 references to the "crushing", "boiling", "grinding", "pounding", "beating", and "squeezing" of ingredients necessary to make art – to magick beauty from a blizzard of brokenness. Ruination and imagination more than merely rhyme; they go hand in hand when hands make art.
For Thirty Pieces of Silver, Parker drove a steam roller over a collection of secondhand silver objects (Credit: Cornelia Parker)
Parker's instinct to squeeze startling music from familiar things is evident in the earliest work on show, her breakout installation Thirty Pieces of Silver (1988-89), which she made in her early 30s by driving a steamroller over more than 1,000 silver and silver-plated objects. The flattened teapots and trombones, baby spoons and cigarette cases had been gathered from car boot sales, markets, and the second-hand stall that she helped run at Portobello market in London. Freed from their former shapes and utilitarian functions, the rumpled tableware, trophies and instruments were divided into 30 separate pools, or "discs", of polished rubble that Parker then dangled poetically from long wires a few inches from the floor.
The floating wreckage is at once rough and irregular in its dishevelled design, and carefully measured and mathematical, forming a minimalist grid that is five rows wide and six rows long – a precision that connects her work to the soulful meditations of geometric abstractionists like Piet Mondrian and Agnes Martin. "In the gallery," Parker explained at the time the work was first exhibited at the Hayward Gallery in London in 1990, "the ruined objects are ghostly, levitating just above the floor, waiting to be reassessed in the light of their transformation. The title, because of its biblical references, alludes to money, to betrayal, to death and resurrection: more simply it is a literal description of the piece."
The tension between, on the one hand, the muscularity of destructive force (let alone violence of vision) necessary to crush the horde of commemorative keepsakes, and on the other the levitating lyricism of the debris' dazzling display, casting shifting shadowscapes on the floor, is what stops you in your tracks. That fortuitous friction between weighty disfigurement of "ruined objects" and the weightless ballet of shadows, serendipitously cast, is something Parker would endeavour to control more concertedly in subsequent works. "I like shadows and things that are shiny, the opposite of shadows," she tells BBC Culture. "I've always liked nocturnes. The first time I really used lights was my exploded shed. I wanted to make a work with a light source. It's linked to explosion – the flash – so that's where the light first appeared."
Parker has said that we're constantly bombarded with the imagery of the explosion, "from the violence of the comic strip [to] action films" (Credit: Cornelia Parker)
She's talking of course about her best-known work, Cold Dark Matter: An Exploded View, created two years after Thirty Pieces of Silver. The installation, which suspends by invisible filaments the shattered contents of a garden shed that Parker had detonated in a field in 1991, is dazzlingly illuminated by a blaring lightbulb positioned at the centre of the twisted and twisting fragments of bikes, garden tools, paint pots and toys, whose silhouettes are projected on to the outer walls of the gallery. Though the work may reference in its title a theoretical concept seemingly at far remove from the urgencies of everyday life ("cold dark matter" is a type of dark matter hypothesised by physicists), there is nothing aloof or remote about the impact of Parker's installation. Observers of the piece find themselves suddenly entangled in the energy of the endlessly suspended explosion, as their own silhouettes are also thrown into the delicate lantern dance of shadows on the outer walls.
We know that the artist's penchant for squashing can be traced back to leaving coins on railroad tracks as a child, but from where does this fascination with silhouettes stem? "Oh, that's from my cave-dwelling days, my Plato's Cave days," the artist answers with a laugh, reminding me that for all their physical and psychological heft and ingenious crafting, there is an inescapable humour at the heart of a career-full of works made from incorrigibly smashing and detonating stuff. It's difficult not to detect a grim smirk behind her slashed torso of a doll of Oliver Twist that she sliced in two with the blade that once slipped through the guillotine that cut things short for Marie Antoinette in 1793 – a prop Parker borrowed from Madame Tussauds. And the notion of using complementary splotches of snake venom and anti-venom to create ambiguous Rorschach-like blots that have the interpretative potential to reveal what's slithering around inside our subconscious is funny. It just is.
That Parker's mercurial mind can range across so many types of media and modes of expression – now framing rumpled handkerchiefs smudged with the tarnish of silverware owned by everyone from Guy Fawkes to Charles Dickens (Stolen Thunder, 1996-7), now using a hot poker to singe folded paper to create a pattern of seared holes (Hot Poker Drawings, 2009-2013) – one may reasonably wonder whether a retrospective of her work can reveal any discernible sense of evolution in style or vision. To survey her oeuvre is to witness a careful accumulation of aesthetic technique and refinement of approach.
Parker extended Thirty Pieces of Silver with Perpetual Canon, crushing 60 brass-band instruments (Credit: Cornelia Parker)
One of the most enthralling works in the show, Perpetual Canon (2004), is a melding of tropes first experimented with in Thirty Pieces of Silver and Cold Dark Matter. Summoning the force of an industrial press 25 times stronger than the steamroller she'd used 15 years earlier, and a forklift truck, Parker crushed 60 tubas, trumpets, coronets and a hulking sousaphone into breathless skins that she arranged like flattened asteroids orbiting around a dangling lamp. "The squashed instruments," Parker tells BBC Culture, "were hung in a ring, in a circle like a marching band. I quite liked the instruments becoming shadows because it means the audience is between the shadows and the objects. You can't tell the objects are squished in the shadows. It's like a ghost band, as it were. The idea of a Perpetual Canon that just keeps going on forever. It's like these wind instruments have inhaled and never exhaled. Like they've just taken a breath and are in an arrested space."
She is drawn to the interplay of light and dark. "I like the imaginativeness of shadows. You become a shadow. The light amplifies all the instruments, they become more cacophonous through that, so it's almost like you're getting visual amplification rather than audial. It's like magnifying everything."
"Magnifying everything" is what Parker does best. Her robust interventions into the lives of objects and her determination to squeeze meaning from the props of existence, never results in a diminishment of an object's power, only an intensification. By pounding the wind out of things, she manages paradoxically to essentialise its breath. And it's a trick she continues to pull off with fresh flair to this day, creating a new installation for the exhibition, Island (2022), that's the final work in Tate's show.
The curiously eclectic piece, which occupies a gallery of its own, is comprised of a greenhouse whose windows have been smudged with strokes of chalk from the White Cliffs of Dover (a recurring material in her work). Strobing in time to the rhythm of one's lungs, a light inside the greenhouse gives intermittent glimpses of the structure's floor, made from discarded tiles designed by Augustus Pugin for the Houses of Parliament in the 19th Century. "It looks a bit like a floating carpet," says Parker. "All the most powerful people in the world have strode across them – Gladstone, everyone. It's been worn thin by politicians. It looks like the greenhouse is afloat on top of this thing." According to Parker, the light pulsates "very slowly, almost like breathing, so shadows fill the walls – a bit like the shed, or Perpetual Canon".
The work is a fitting final note for a show that Parker says "is cementing something". Less overtly aggressive than her crushed and exploded works, Island nevertheless packs a poetic punch, conjuring as it does themes of climate change in the disused greenhouse and fears of cultural isolation in its white-washed windows and wistful floor. Make what you will of the breathing light.
Cornelia Parker is at Tate Britain, London until 16 October 2022.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Scientists hope patchworks of multi-coloured crops will help hide them "in plain sight" from pests as a natural alternative to pesticides.
Using dyes, the so-called "camo-cropping" trial has been started by the Norwich-based British Beet Research Organisation (BBRO).
It has been introduced at Morley Farms, near Wymondham, Norfolk, in an attempt to protect sugar beet from aphids.
Farmer David Jones said pests can "reduce yield by 50% in a bad year".
Fields of sugar beet have been dyed different colours using food dye at the farm.
Scientists hope to find out if the camo-crops deter aphids from landing on the sugar beet and, if they do, which colours prove most effective.
Mr Jones, from the Morley Agricultural Foundation, said growing sugar beet was a "a challenge".
He said the farm has to cope with "lots of things all of the time, principally the weather, but also weeds, and particularly aphids come and attack the crops and transfer virus into the crop".
"We're always looking for new ways to control the problems we've got, if it's without pesticide [then] that can be beneficial to what we do," he said.
Dr Alistair Wright, from the BBRO, said had used "colour as a dye to reduce the contrast between the immature beet and the soil".
He said: "We're trying any approaches to deter the aphids from the crop and we know they use all sorts of senses when they are migrating in the spring.
"One of them is colour and the contrast between the plant and soil, so using the dye we are hoping to effectively hide the crops in plain sight form the aphids."
Dr Wright said there were "early positive signs" but added results would not be fully known until the harvest.
He said the organisation was also trialling other methods such as increasing ladybirds and planting a grass from New Zealand which releases chemicals that kill aphids.
"There's no silver bullet, no one thing we can rely on," Dr Wright added.
Find BBC News: East of England on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter. If you have a story suggestion email eastofenglandnews@bbc.co.uk
'The price of fertiliser is absolutely bonkers'
Farm pesticides killing more bees - study
British Beet Research Organisation (BBRO)
Lynn Parkrun founder a Batonbearer for Queenâs Baton Relay
Hospital's long-awaited maternity bereavement suite is open
Norwich named one of the most community-driven places in the UK Owen Sennitt
Father-of-four gets driving ban after night out in resort
'I'm proud of Boris' - Norfolk village gives its verdict on namesake PM George Thompson, Local Democracy Reporter
The days you can visit Wroxham Barns for a fiver this month
Zahawi among cabinet ministers about to tell PM to resign
PM vows to keep going amid pressure from ministers
Chicago gunman confessed to shooting, court hears
How might Boris Johnson be removed as PM?
'Let's make history' - Euro 2022 to break records
Arabs believe economy is weak under democracy
The Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site. VideoThe Russian woman rescued from a Kyiv bomb site
âWe need an international shelter for trans peopleâ
Sydney floods aftermath: 'Everybody is traumatised'
The man who came back from the dead
The biggest ships on the ocean
Murdered Indian rapper's 'protest music' lives on
The case for turning off your Zoom camera
Workers may have a strong argument against appearing on screen
America's first interracial love song
How a taboo-busting duet became a hit and broke new ground
A breakfast staple created by accident
More than a century ago, a glut of oranges kick-started a craze
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

The Faroe Islands is to provisionally limit its controversial dolphin hunt to 500 animals, after receiving widespread criticism over last year's cull, where more than 1,400 were killed.
A review was ordered in February, in response to the outcry.
Animal rights activists have long decried the hunt, deeming the slaughter cruel and unnecessary.
Faroe Islanders give the practice their broad support, arguing the dolphins have fed them for centuries.
Known as the grind (or Grindadrap in Faroese), the hunting of sea mammals - primarily whales - is a tradition that has been practised for hundreds of years on the remote islands, a Danish autonomous territory in the North Atlantic.
But the scale of the killing last year shocked many locals and even drew criticism from groups involved in the practice. Records showed that it was the largest number of dolphins ever killed on one day in the Faroe Islands.
A petition with almost 1.3 million signatures calling for a ban on the traditional hunt was submitted to the Faroese government.
Now the government has limited the annual catch of white-sided dolphins to 500 for the next two years. Only the dolphin hunt is currently being reviewed, not the entire grind tradition.
The quota was set after the "unusually large catch" of 1,423 white-sided dolphins in September, the government said in a statement.
"Aspects of that catch were not satisfactory, in particular the unusually large number of dolphins killed," it added.
However, the government stated that the hunt serves as an "important supplement to the livelihoods of Faroe Islanders".
Whale hunt turns sea red with blood
The islands that want tourists as well as fish
The islands that closed down for repairs
Leak reveals top politicians secretly helped Uber
Protesters 'will occupy palace until leaders go'
Fifteen shot dead in South Africa bar
Inside the presidential palace now full of Sri Lankans
'Protests have changed thinking for the better'
The race gap between black and white homeowners
The lingering scars of South Africa's deadly riots
Who could be the next UK prime minister?
Americans in the crosshairs of China's spy game
Why Euro 2022 stars in small stadiums is a good thing
The Indian man making art from sunlight. VideoThe Indian man making art from sunlight
A welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children. VideoA welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children
How a railway blurred the line between Belgium and Germany
11 films to watch this July
The monthâs most unmissable released include the return of Jordan Peele and Thor
Why modern dating is exhausting
Can online dating burnout be stopped?
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

South African-Australian documentary and portrait photographer, Chanel Irvine, first set out to document English summertime in 2019, a year after she moved to the UK.
Irvine captured moments of leisure in coastal towns and countryside villages from Kent to Devon, from Cornwall to Shropshire.
A small number of portraits have the subjects gazing directly into the camera, but the majority of the work is taken from a distance, documenting small summertime rituals and sweeping landscapes.
An English Summer by Chanel Irvine is published by Hoxton Mini Press.
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

A selection of the week's best photos from across the continent and beyond:
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

Мы освещаем события войны России с Украиной день за днем, час за часом, публикуя информацию наших корреспондентов, анализ экспертов и комментарии политиков и специалистов.
And we'll keep you signed in.
You need one to watch live TV on any channel or device, and BBC programmes on iPlayer. It’s the law.
Мы продолжаем онлайн-трансляцию на новой странице.
Русская служба Би-би-си продолжает круглосуточно следить за развитием событий.
Спасибо, что вы с нами!
Более 323 млн человек по всему миру оказались на грани голода в результате глобального продовольственного кризиса, в значительной степени спровоцированного российским вторжением в Украину.
Такое заявление верховный представитель ЕС по международным отношениям и политике безопасности Жозеп Боррель сделал на встрече министров иностранных дел развитых стран, входящих в группу G20.
Ещё 1,2 млрд – то есть каждый шестой жителей планеты, – из-за резкого роста цен на продовольствия и коммунальные услуги, по словам Борреля, едва сводят концы с концами.
Агрессия против Украины серьёзно усугубила продовольственный кризис. Только за два последних года число людей, находящихся на грани голода, выросло вдвое
Президент Украины Владимир Зеленский поблагодарил американские власти за предоставление нового пакета военной помощи на 400 млн долларов.
благодарность президенту и народу США за продолжающуюся эффективную поддержку Украины в противостоянии агрессии России. Больше [РСЗО] HIMARS, 155-мм снарядов – это наша первоочередная потребность. Это то, что
помогает нам оказывать давление на врага. Мы ценим американскую поддержку! Идем
к победе вместе!" - написал Зеленский в "Твиттере".
Украинские силы специальных операций рассказали, как им удалось добраться до острова Змеиный в Черном море и установить там государственный флаг Украины.
США объявили об очередном пакете военной помощи Украине на 400 млн долларов, который предполагает поставку еще четырех ракетных систем залпового огня HIMARS и боеприпасов к ним.
Высокопоставленный представитель министерства обороны США сказал журналистам, что у Киева теперь будет 12 РСЗО HIMARS.
"Украина успешно наносит удары по российским объектам на территории Украины, глубже за линией фронта и нарушает способность России проводить артиллерийскую операцию", - цитирует представителя Пентагона Reuters.
Эксперты полагают, что поставка дополнительных систем существенно повысит способность ВСУ наносить удары по российским оружейным складам, а также цепочкам поставок на линию фронта провианта и комплектующих для ремонта боевой техники.
Financial Times сообщает со ссылкой на неназванного представителя Пентагона, что новые системы вооружений стреляют еще дальше и обладают большей точностью, чем переданные ранее образцы.
О получении первых HIMARS власти Украины заявили в конце июня.
В ходе очередных обстрелов Харькова российскими ВС есть жертвы среди мирного населения.
Премьер-министр Эстонии Кая Каллас опубликовала в своем "Твиттере" изображение памятной монеты, на оборотной стороне которой отчеканена надпись "Slava Ukraini".
Премьер уточнила, что эстонский Центробанк запустит "украинские евро" в свободное обращение, а дизайн монеты разработан Дарьей Титовой, бежавшей от войны в Эстонию из Харькова.
По последним данным ООН, с начала полномасштабного вторжения российской армии по меньшей мере 11,5 млн украинцев покинули свои дома, спасаясь от обстрелов.
Такую статистику привел верховный комиссар ООН по делам беженцев (УВДБ) Филиппо Гранди в интервью агентству Интерфакс-Украина.
Гранди уточнил, что около 60% от этого числа бежали из восточных областей Украины, примерно 15% - из северных районов страны, и по 11% - из южных и западных областей.
Многие бежали за границу, однако, согласно подсчетам ООН, порядка 6,3 млн вынужденых переселенцев остались на территории Украины - в основном, у друзей или родстевнников. Больше всего беженцев приняли Днепропетровская, Харьковская, Полтавская и Киевская области, а также  сама украинская столица.
По словам Гранди, на мирное уреулирование вооруженного конфликта в Донбассе в ближайшие несколько месяцев рассчитывать не приходится - а значит, беженцы вряд ли смогут вернуться в свои дома до наступления зимы, которая для многих из них станет суровым испытанием.
Зимы в Украине суровые, очень холодные. Мы должны сделать все возможное, чтобы людям, которые и так переживают такие лишения, не пришлось бы еще и мерзнуть от холода
В результате бомбардировок и артилеррийских обстрелов во многих населенных пунктах Украины нарушены коммуникации, нередки перебои с водоснабжением, подачей отопления и электроэнергии.
безопасности Украины сообщила об аресте активов российских госкомпаний в стране
на общую сумму 2,1 млрд гривен (71,1 млн долларов).
арест на корпоративные права и недвижимость 11 предприятий, конечными
бенефициарами которых являются российские государственные корпорации "Роснефть",
"Росатом" и "Газпром", - говорится в сообщении СБУ. - В
ходе оперативно-следственных действий установлено, что часть прибыли этих
предприятий шла на подготовку и ведение агрессивной войны России против
Украины, а также на финансирование деятельности диверсионно-разведывательных
арест на 46 объектов недвижимости, которая находилась в собственности российских
благодаря своевременному аресту активов "удалось заблокировать попытки
фактических владельцев переписать их на подставных лиц, чтобы сохранить
Большой друг Украины Борис Джонсон покидает пост лидера Консервативной партии и премьер-министра. Как это отразится на помощи Британии Украине и на широкой международной антипутинской коалиции? Об этом рассказывает Алена Гливко - украинский политолог и сотрудница британского аналитического Общества Генри Джексона.
Корреспондент Би-би-си по вопросам безопасности
Огромные потери в бронетехнике, которые понесла российская армия в Украине, заставляют задаться вопросом, есть ли вообще у танков будущее в современных конфликтах.
Президент Украины Владимир Зеленский в интервью Си-эн-эн
сказал, что при ряде условий украинцы смогут до конца года положить конец военной
фазе конфликта и вынудить Россию сесть за стол переговоров.
"Если наше государство будет объединенным, таким,
как сейчас, если мощное оружие будет прибывать от наших партнеров нам вовремя,
и если удача и Бог будут на нашей стороне, то мы сможем многое сделать до конца
этого года", - считает Зеленский
По его словам, оружие, которое Украина получила от
западных партнеров, уже приносит плоды по всей линии фронта. За короткий период
ВСУ нанесли ощутимые удары по системе снабжения российской армии и нарушили ее
Любые локальные победы крайне важны, сказал украинский
президент, и так же важно, чтобы Россия продолжала видеть, что мир
На защиту Украины призвано около 1 млн человек в различных структурах, заявил министр обороны страны Алексей Резников.
"Мобилизованные в ВСУ – до 700 тыс. человек, пограничники – до 60 тыс., Нацгвардия – до 90 тыс., Национальная полиция - до 100 тыс. У нас сегодня более миллиона человек в форме обеспечивают деятельность сектора безопасности и обороны", – сообщил Резников.
Резников заявил об этом на онлайн-конференции Forbes "Строим вместе", проходящей 8 июля и посвященной возможностям возобновления бизнеса в Украине.
"Новые власти" оккупированной российскими войсками Херсонской области перешли с существующих сайтов администраций на сайты в доменной зоне "ru" на русском языке.
Как утверждает глава оккупационной администрации Херсонской области Владимир Сальдо, это сделано "для достоверного информирования жителей о событиях в регионе, действиях и намерениях властей".
Орган, называющий себя парламентом самопровозглашенной
ДНР, в пятницу упразднил мораторий на смертную казнь.
Правда, трудно сказать, какой именно мораторий был отменен. Судя по всему, смертная казнь на территории ДНР была разрешена (но не применялась) все время с момента провозглашения этой территорией независимости.
Это следует по ряду признаков. Например, в середине июня этого года спикер Госдумы Вячеслав Володин выступил за сохранение смертной казни в ДНР, что, по его словам, особенно актуально в условиях военного времени.
Возможно, под мораторием имеется в виду установленный с 1 июля в ДНР новый Уголовно-исполнительный кодекс (УИК) с положениями о смертной казни.
Изначально в документе указано, что положения об исполнении наказания в виде смертной казни будут введены в действие с 1 января 2025 года. А сегодняшнее решение "парламента ДНР", судя по всему, означает, что расстреливать осужденных можно уже сейчас.
В начале июня власти непризнанного
образования приговорили к смертной казни двух британцев и марокканца, воевавших
на стороне ВСУ, по обвинению в "попытке захвата власти".
Отмена моратория, как это назвали в ДНР,  может рассматриваться
как первый шаг к исполнению приговора, считают эксперты.
Британия и Марокко ведут переговоры с
Россией о судьбе своих граждан (хотя пресс-секретарь Кремля Дмитрий Песков это
отрицает), но Москва пытается подтолкнуть их к прямому контакту с руководством
ДНР, что фактически означало бы признание Лондоном и Рабатом легитимности этой
Президент Украины Владимир Зеленский посетил передовые позиции Вооруженных сил во время поездки в Днепропетровскую область.
"Пообщался с нашими защитниками, вручил им награды. Настроение у них решительное, в глазах – уверенность в нашей победе. Спасибо, что боретесь за свободу Украины!" - написал Зеленский в "Телеграм"-канале.
Он напомнил, что посетил родной для него Криворожский район.
Глава МИД Украины Дмитрий Кулеба в
обращении к участникам саммита G20, который проходит в эти дни на индонезийском
острове Бали, заявил, что Россия играет со всем миром в "голодные игры".
Международное сообщество не должно было
допустить ситуации, при которой Россия
шантажирует весь мир ценами на энергоресурсы и продовольствие, а также угрозами
безопасности, сказал Кулеба по видеосвязи.
сути, Россия играет с миром в голодные игры, одной рукой удерживая морскую
блокаду украинских портов, а другой перекладывая вину за это на Украину. Россия
рассматривает зависимость других стран от любых видов ресурсов как слабость и
приглашение использовать эту зависимость в качестве рычага для получения выгоды
для России", - заявил глава украинского МИД.
Он напомнил, что Украина десятилетиями
играла важную роль в сфере глобальной продовольственной безопасности. А теперь,
сказал, он страна подвергается нападению, бомбардировкам и мародерству.
Советник главы офиса президента Михаил Подоляк
прокомментировал заявление Владимира Путина о том, что Россия еще даже не
По данным украинской стороны, сказал Подоляк, потери
России на поле боя к этому моменту составляют 37 тыс. погибшими и 98-117 тыс.
"Ликвидировано 10 генералов. Превращено в металлолом
1 605 танков, 405 самолетов/вертолетов. Россия еще не начинала воевать? Войной
в Кремле считают только сталинскую математику – 20 млн потерь?" – написал
По оценке разведки Великобритании, к середине июня Россия потеряла в Украине около 20 тысяч человек. По данным Генштаба Украины, число погибших российских военных перевалило за 36 тысяч.
Би-би-си на основании открытых источников удалось установить имена более 4500 российских военных, погибших на войне в Украине. Подробнее тут:Груз 200: что известно о потерях российской армии в Украине к началу июля
что сложил с себя полномочия главного раввина Москвы и покинул российскую столицу
в связи с войной, которую Россия ведет в Украине. По его словам, это было
сделано, чтобы не ставить под угрозу еврейскую общину Москвы. Гольдшмидт сказал в пятницу, что уехал из Москвы сразу после начала войны.
"По мере того, как в последние
месяцы разворачивалась ужасная война против Украины, я не мог молчать, видя столь
многие человеческие страдания, и начал оказывать помощь беженцам в Восточной
Европе и выступать против войны, - написал в "Твиттере" Пинхас Гольдшмидт,
который является также президентом Конференции
европейских раввинов (КЕР), объединяющей более
700 религиозных лидеров основных синагогальных сообществ Европы. – Со временем,
несмотря на то, что в прошлом месяце меня переизбрали на пост Главного раввина
Москвы, стало ясно, что если я останусь в этой роли, это поставит под угрозу
Цюриха, стал Главным раввином российской столицы 33 года назад. В своем заявлении
они вместе с женой выразили благодарность за то, что им выпала честь сыграть
возрождении российского еврейства” после распада Советского Союза.
“Мы сделали все, что было в наших силах, чтобы создать эту общину и провести ее
сквозь бурные 90-е и времена усиливающегося авторитаризма при нынешнем
президенте", - отметил раввин Гольдшмидт, подчеркнув, что продолжит работу в КЕР
и помощь еврейским общинам Европы, в том числе и московской общине.
Мещанский суд Москвы приговорил муниципального депутата Алексея Горинова к семи годам колонии по делу о распространении "фейков" о российской армии. Именно такое наказание запрашивала для него прокуратура за выступление на заседании совета депутатов, в котором он среди прочего назвал "войной" российское вторжение в Украину.
Мы освещаем события войны России с Украиной день за днем, час за часом, публикуя информацию наших корреспондентов, анализ экспертов и комментарии политиков и специалистов.

This video can not be played
A new species of giant water lily has been discovered by scientists - and itâs been hiding in plain sight for 177 years.
The huge plant had been in the archives of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew - and was growing in a number of aquatic collections - but it was mistakenly identified as another species.
It also holds the record as the largest water lily, with leaves growing more than 3m (10ft) wide.
Video filmed by Kevin Church and produced by Alison Francis
Worldâs biggest water lily species is discovered. Video, 00:01:43Worldâs biggest water lily species is discovered
Up Next. Pretty fields of purple have a purpose. Video, 00:00:51Pretty fields of purple have a purpose
New plant-grafting technique could save the banana. Video, 00:01:00New plant-grafting technique could save the banana
The plant with seeds that can grow meat. Video, 00:03:53The plant with seeds that can grow meat
'Everything started thundering and cracking' Video, 00:01:13'Everything started thundering and cracking'
Protesters storm Sri Lankan president's residence. Video, 00:01:15Protesters storm Sri Lankan president's residence
A welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children. Video, 00:01:59A welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children
Making art from sunlight. Video, 00:01:31Making art from sunlight
Can protest songs make a difference? Video, 00:01:52Can protest songs make a difference?
Flash of light as meteor spotted over Chile. Video, 00:00:09Flash of light as meteor spotted over Chile
One-minute World News. Video, 00:01:02One-minute World News
Naomi Campbell receives honorary doctorate. Video, 00:02:19Naomi Campbell receives honorary doctorate
The Aids activists who took on big pharma. Video, 00:04:20The Aids activists who took on big pharma
Biden signs executive order on abortion access. Video, 00:01:04Biden signs executive order on abortion access
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

At least 15 people have been shot dead in a bar in the South African township of Soweto, police say.
Police said gunmen entered the Orlando East tavern in the early hours of Sunday morning and started firing randomly at a group of young people.
They then fled the scene in a white minibus. No motive for the attack has been established, police said.
Several more people are in a critical condition in hospital, the BBC's Nomsa Maseko reports.
The victims are believed to be between 19 and 35 years old.
"Bodies were on top of each other with blood all over. We were looking for our loved ones, we had to jump over bodies looking for our brothers," said local resident Ntombikayise Meji.
Gauteng province's head of police, Lt-Gen Elias Mawela, told the BBC the shooting appears to have been "a cold-blooded attack on innocent tavern patrons".
A press statement released by his office said the gunmen had been armed with rifles and 9mm pistols when they entered the bar.
Police are searching for the suspects, whose identities remain unknown, it said.
Thaban Moloi, a community leader in Soweto, was angered by the amount of time it took police to arrive at the scene.
"It's terrible, I'm telling you. People don't know what to do. If you were there you could see women and children crying," he said.
Mr Moloi said the attack happened at 23:00 local time (21:00 GMT) on Saturday but police didn't arrive until 04:00 on Sunday.
"It took five hours for them to come, honestly," he said.
Four other people were killed in a separate tavern shooting in the south-eastern province of KwaZulu-Natal, police said on Sunday.
President Cyril Ramaphosa expressed his condolences to the relatives of victims of both shootings.
"As a nation, we cannot allow violent criminals to terrorise us in this way, regardless of where such incidents may occur," he added.
Shootings are not uncommon in South Africa. They are often linked to gangs or alcohol.
But this is an exceptionally high death toll and comes soon after the death of 21 teenagers thought to have been either gassed or poisoned at another bar in the city of East London.
By Ed Habershon, BBC News, Soweto
The crowds were gathered around Mdlalose's Tavern under a typically cloudless winter sky in Soweto - some here to mourn, others just to gawk. They were pinned back by yellow police tape, as forensics went about the grim business of retrieving evidence from inside the bar. Groups of women burst into song, dancing in the litter-strewn street.
South Africa is a very violent country at the best times, but this particular incident, coupled with another shooting in Pietermaritzburg, has shaken many here.
We spoke to one man who was inside the bar when the shooting happened. He described how a group of men burst in, opened fire, and how they didn't take anything from anyone, wallets, phones, nothing, leaving him and others baffled as to the motive. Halfway through the interview, a police officer intervened, and said we can't talk to him. The gunmen may be among the crowd, he said, and they may target this witness next.
Another woman who lived nearby told us she heard the gunshots and ran to the bar to find the horrific aftermath of the shooting. People in the community are afraid, she said, and she has no idea who might be behind it.
She, Soweto and the country, are all desperately seeking answers.
Were you in the area? Did you witness the incident? If it is save to do so, email: haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk.
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also get in touch in the following ways:
If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or comment or you can email us at HaveYourSay@bbc.co.uk. Please include your name, age and location with any submission.
The lingering scars of South Africa's deadly riots
Tears for tavern teenagers at mass SA funeral
Youngest South Africa tavern victim 13 - minister
Leak reveals top politicians secretly helped Uber
Protesters 'will occupy palace until leaders go'
Fifteen shot dead in South Africa bar
Inside the presidential palace now full of Sri Lankans
'Protests have changed thinking for the better'
The race gap between black and white homeowners
The lingering scars of South Africa's deadly riots
Who could be the next UK prime minister?
Americans in the crosshairs of China's spy game
Why Euro 2022 stars in small stadiums is a good thing
The Indian man making art from sunlight. VideoThe Indian man making art from sunlight
A welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children. VideoA welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children
How a railway blurred the line between Belgium and Germany
11 films to watch this July
The monthâs most unmissable released include the return of Jordan Peele and Thor
Why modern dating is exhausting
Can online dating burnout be stopped?
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

By Mark SavageBBC Music Correspondent
When Rae Morris was still a teenager, her off-kilter, magical take on pop music triggered a record label bidding war.
"A lot of it was quite funny," she recalls. "The situations you find yourself in when you're 19 and people are trying to sign you - all those fancy dinners and stuff.
"It's just surreal and ridiculous and wasteful."
Eventually, in 2011, Morris signed to Atlantic Records for a "weird" amount of money.
The label warned her she "had a lot of work to do" before she'd be ready to release a debut album - but when that album, Unguarded, arrived in 2015 it went straight into the Top 10, with critics praising its "experimental production" and "shiver-inducing vocals".
Her 2018 follow-up, Someone Out There, was even better.
Blending Bjorkian beats with soaring pop melodies, it shimmered with raw emotion. Morris captured the joy of falling in love with her producer Benjamin Garrett on Do It; and conveyed aching loss on Dancing With Character - a tear-jerker on par with the poignant opening sequence of Pixar's film Up.
Despite rave reviews, the album stalled at number 20 in the charts. Compared with label-mates like Anne-Marie and Ed Sheeran, Morris wasn't balancing the books. Eventually, she got the call she'd been dreading.
"I'm not afraid of the 'dropped' word," laughs the singer. "A lot of people avoid it and say things like, 'I was let go' or 'we parted ways'. I was definitely, fully dropped."
In truth, the relationship had been on the rocks for a while.
Morris winces at the memory of being told to wear crop tops and write "pop hits"; and of being "forced to dance" while promoting her second album.
Despite those strains, she felt "lost and stressed" when the connection was severed.
"For a while, I'd avoid listening to music because it made me feel too sad," she says. "I'd get jealous and that wasn't a positive feeling".
To pull her out of the funk, Garrett sat her down for an impromptu "job interview".
"He said: 'Let's just start from the beginning. Why do you do what you do? What do you want to get out of this?'
"And I had to be really honest. I'm a performer and I love being on stage. I love Calamity Jane and orchestral arrangements, but I also love Bjork's Hyperballad and Jon Brion's film music.
"All of this stuff came out and I was like, 'Okay, there it is.'"
Suddenly, Morris had a sonic palette for her new music - a sort of warped baroque pop, embellished with dreamy Doris Day stings and unexpected squiggles of electronica.
"Ordinarily, if I'd been signed to a label we would have had to go, 'Okay, but how do you make that commercial? How do you streamline that?'" she says. "But instead of doing that, Ben and I just started making music."
One of the first songs she wrote was the sweeping ballad No Woman Is An Island - inspired by the sexism she encountered in the music industry.
"Someone at my old label described me as 'an island', because I didn't give enough of myself to people at parties and events," she explains.
"He said 'You've got such a great smile, Rae. You need to go out more and let people experience that'.  I took that as a deep misunderstanding of who I was. It really bothered me for a long time.
"So when I wasn't with them anymore, I realised that was the conclusive feeling of that time - that I was being slightly misunderstood. And women have that all the time, in all walks of life."
In lesser hands, No Woman Is An Island could easily have been bitter. Morris gives it warmth and humour.
Society reduces women to stereotypes, she sings, when really they hold "universes inside their heads" - from anxieties and memories and hopes and fears to "Kardashians in swimming pools" and recipes for banana bread.
The lyrics were written as Morris became a mother for the first time, and found herself reflecting on her own strengths and capabilities.
"I'm good at stereotypically female roles like cleaning and laundry," she says, grinning that this also irritates her.
More significantly, motherhood banished a tendency to "stress out about things that didn't warrant it".
"If I look in the mirror and feel critical about the way I look, I immediately think, 'Imagine if she was doing that to herself?' I'd be really, deeply sad," Morris says.
"Already, that's quite a big thing in my day. So that's been an interesting change."
The family have settled in London's Primrose Hill - living in a townhouse they've given an 1970s LA makeover, which was longlisted for a design award.
It's a long way from Morris's perfectly ordinary upbringing in Blackpool, as the child of a firefighter and an NHS worker.
"I walk down the street in Primrose Hill sometimes, and I'm like, 'I don't think I belong here,'" she says.
That feeling of displacement inspired her new album, Rachel@Fairyland, a poetic look back at her childhood (the title is the MSN handle she used, aged 11, when she was obsessed with fairies).
Spitting From The Top is set at the peak of the Blackpool Tower, while Running Shoes is a dreamy Disney ballad about escaping to her family's house in the Lake District "where the blueberries glow and the internet's slow".
The nostalgia is punctuated by several songs about her love affair with Garrett. The gorgeous Morning Isn't Morning recalls the first flushes of their courtship, all "obsessive intimacy" and "dirty sheets"; while Skyscraper Love pokes affectionate fun at his height (he's 6ft6in) .
They even duet on the playful Go Dancing, in which Morris is fired up for a night on the tiles, and Garrett is determined to stay at home - a situation that will resonate with anyone in a long-term relationship.
The disagreement is illustrated in a priceless music video that, incredibly, was shot while the family was wracked with norovirus.
"It was awful, " she says. "There's a scene in the bathroom where I'm, like, drinking a shot of Sake but it was just water. And even that was enough to make me retch."
"If you watch, you'll see how ill I am. But again, it's the parent thing, you just get on with it."
The album's most affecting song is A Table For Two, in which Morris promises that, after death, she'll see Garrett in the afterlife.
"We don't talk about death often in our society - but I think it's a nice thing to tell someone you love, 'We'll meet again at our favourite crappy restaurant and have a really cheap bottle of wine'.
"I don't think it gets more simple and real than that."
The song has already become a fan favourite, after Morris sang it on tour with Tom Odell earlier this year.
The reaction has reassured her that, three years after getting dropped, she was right to keep going.
"The older I get, the more sure I am of what I should be doing," she says.
"It sounds really arrogant - but I've always had this deep ambition to be a national treasure.
"I'm embarrassed to even say that and I spend a lot of time trying to convince myself to be less ambitious, to soften the blow.
"But ultimately, I think that's unhealthy - because it doesn't matter if it doesn't happen, you should still be aiming for it."
Follow us on Facebook, or on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.
Rae Morris: The pop star who wanted to be a waitress
Leak reveals top politicians secretly helped Uber
Protesters 'will occupy palace until leaders go'
Fifteen shot dead in South Africa bar
Inside the presidential palace now full of Sri Lankans
'Protests have changed thinking for the better'
The race gap between black and white homeowners
The lingering scars of South Africa's deadly riots
Who could be the next UK prime minister?
Americans in the crosshairs of China's spy game
Why Euro 2022 stars in small stadiums is a good thing
The Indian man making art from sunlight. VideoThe Indian man making art from sunlight
A welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children. VideoA welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children
How a railway blurred the line between Belgium and Germany
11 films to watch this July
The monthâs most unmissable released include the return of Jordan Peele and Thor
Why modern dating is exhausting
Can online dating burnout be stopped?
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

This video can not be played
Storm Eunice has swept across the UK - with a provisional record gust of 122mph measured on the Isle of Wight.
Watch our video to see the impact of one of the worst storms to hit the UK in decades.
More on this story: Storm leaves 400,000 without power
Storm Eunice topples trees and rips roofs. Video, 00:01:41Storm Eunice topples trees and rips roofs
Up Next. 'Easy!': Livestream shows planes struggling to land. Video, 00:01:29'Easy!': Livestream shows planes struggling to land
Moment treehouse crashes to ground in storm winds. Video, 00:00:28Moment treehouse crashes to ground in storm winds
Storm Eunice threatens northern Europe. Video, 00:01:24Storm Eunice threatens northern Europe
Wales prepares for high winds as Storm Eunice hits. Video, 00:01:59Wales prepares for high winds as Storm Eunice hits
Two named winter storms to hit the UK this week. Video, 00:01:28Two named winter storms to hit the UK this week
'Everything started thundering and cracking' Video, 00:01:13'Everything started thundering and cracking'
Protesters storm Sri Lankan president's residence. Video, 00:01:15Protesters storm Sri Lankan president's residence
A welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children. Video, 00:01:59A welcome on two wheels for Ukrainian children
Making art from sunlight. Video, 00:01:31Making art from sunlight
Can protest songs make a difference? Video, 00:01:52Can protest songs make a difference?
Flash of light as meteor spotted over Chile. Video, 00:00:09Flash of light as meteor spotted over Chile
One-minute World News. Video, 00:01:02One-minute World News
Naomi Campbell receives honorary doctorate. Video, 00:02:19Naomi Campbell receives honorary doctorate
The Aids activists who took on big pharma. Video, 00:04:20The Aids activists who took on big pharma
Biden signs executive order on abortion access. Video, 00:01:04Biden signs executive order on abortion access
Â© 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

Berlin honours S Korean director
South Korean film director Im Kwon-Taek has received an honorary Golden Bear at the Berlin Film Festival.
Im, who has made more than 100 films in a 40-year career, was hailed for his "remarkable visual beauty, technical innovation, and intellectual depth". Twenty of his films are screening in a special retrospective during the festival, which runs until 20 February. The veteran film-maker, 68, won the best director prize at the Cannes Film Festival in 2002 for Chihwaseon. "Although his films vary in style, they all bear his unmistakable stamp: they are forceful and charged cinematographically, as well as reticent, stylised and musical," organisers said in a statement. Meanwhile, a film version of Bizet's opera Carmen - translated into the South African language Xhosa - has received a warm reception at the festival. U-Carmen eKhayelitsha (Carmen in Khayelitsha), which is one of 21 films up for Berlin's top prize, the Golden Bear, is British director Mark Dornford-May's first feature film. "It's the first time any opera has been translated into a black South African language. Xhosa works brilliantly, it's such a musical language," said music director Charles Hazlewood.

In the 1990 classic Pretty Woman, when Edward Lewis (Richard Gere) first picks up Vivian Ward (Julia Roberts) in the luxury silver sportscar he borrowed from his lawyer, there is an implication he is somewhat oblivious to the fact that the woman is a sex worker. The businessman, a New Yorker lost amid the vast highways of Los Angeles, is initially only interested in directions. In Sophie Hyde's Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, which is released this week, there is no such confusion. When the doorbell of her hotel suite rings, Nancy Stokes (Emma Thompson) knows who's at the other side of the door: Leo Grande (Daryl McCormack), a sex worker she hired online.
-       How Pretty Woman erased sex from its story
-       Why Hollywood is shunning sex
-       The 12 best films of 2022 so far
A retired teacher and widow with two grown kids, Nancy finds herself with time to reflect on the years that are now behind her. Out of this process of contemplation, one thing in particular bothers the woman: she has never reached an orgasm. Sex, throughout her life, has been akin to a chore – in, out, done. Frustrated, she takes the plunge and books Leo Grande for the night, hoping to explore all the desires she was never allowed to act on with her one and only partner.
From this seemingly simple premise, Good Luck to You, Leo Grande presents a shift in the portrayal of sex work on film, with the most obvious change being that it is an older woman hiring a younger man, a reversal of the usual pattern of age and gender. In addition, the woman here is solely concerned with her own pleasure. She has no expectations of having an orgasm this late in life, but she wants to be touched, to touch, to experience pleasure by allowing herself to openly admit that’s what she desires.
In Good Luck to You, Leo Grande, Daryl McCormack plays a sex worker hired online by widow Nancy Stokes (Emma Thompson) (Credit: Searchlight Pictures)
Leo, too, represents a diversion from the way sex workers have generally been depicted on screen. Yes, he is young, tall and handsome, but he is also void of the stereotypical masculinity that typically comes along with such attributes, as when the protagonist of Paul Schrader's American Gigolo (1980), high-end escort Julian (Richard Gere, once again), repeatedly reinforces his virility by employing mockery and unwarranted outrage to negate any suggestion of queerness or femininity. Leo showers Nancy with tenderness, even when she offers him the opposite in return. The former teacher pokes and prods at the dynamics of his job, enquiring if he ever feels degraded or what could have gone so terribly wrong for him to choose that specific career. In response to this line of questioning, Leo offers nothing but patient kindness, firmly rooted in the understanding that animosity often comes from a place of insecurity.
The stereotypes Nancy frames Leo with are the result of long-perpetuated stigma, and they have been reinforced by cinematic portrayals of sex work. "We're either villainised or sensationalised, and we are rarely allowed to exist in this space of being someone who is just working to make money to survive," sex worker Parker Westwood tells BBC Culture. In 2021, Westwood launched the podcast A Sex Worker's Guide to the Galaxy, with the aim to "destigmatise and humanise sex workers".
Destigmatising is key when it comes to what sex workers expect from depictions of their practice. For a long time, film has done the very opposite, feeding into patterns of preconceptions that are not only inaccurate, but arguably dangerous. Most popular accounts of sex work fall under two contrasting detrimental categories: "the disposable sex worker" or "the hooker with a heart of gold". The first encompasses the films in which sex workers are ruthlessly (and often brutally) murdered, their death handled as nothing more than a work hazard. Think Stanley Kubrick's Eyes Wide Shut (1999), where high-end escort Mandy (Julienne Davis) is introduced mid-overdose, briefly seen again masked and half-naked, then – finally – at the morgue.
Thrillers notoriously foster this trope, with films such as David Fincher's Se7en (1995) and Nicolas Winding Refn's Only God Forgives (2013) both featuring shockingly vicious murders of sex workers. True crime adaptations are another fruitful genre for the perpetuation of this violent pattern, with titles such as The Frozen Ground (2013), Lost Girls (2020) and Green River Killer (2005) dwelling – often with gratuitous violence – on the killing of sex workers and the disregard commonly shown by authorities in solving such cases.
Even the most celebrated film about a "hooker with a heart of gold" begins by reinforcing the notion of the disposable sex worker. The aforementioned Pretty Woman features a dead street worker in one of its very first scenes. "She be out on these streets day in, day out, trading her sorry self for some crack", says a man to the journalists gathering nearby, implying the young woman was to blame for her own death. As the dead body lays in a skip, tourists snap pictures, desensitised to this very specific type of violence.
Starring Julia Roberts and Richard Gere, Pretty Woman brought conversations about sex work to the mainstream, but has been widely criticised (Credit: Warner Bros)
Pretty Woman helped bring conversations about sex work to the mainstream, but has been widely criticised in its approach to the subject. Vivian's trajectory is constructed with the single goal of having the audience root for her to ultimately abandon sex work – any other outcome would be deemed tragic. The way out, of course, is presented in the form of Edward, a rich, white, older man who is unable to resist the urge to rescue her. "You could be so much more," he tells Vivian as the two lay in bed, the faint lights failing to obscure the fact he perceives her as “lesser than”.
The film also fosters the idea that this transactional relationship is a romantic one, which, in turn, romanticises the idea of sex work itself. Edward showers Vivian with gifts, hands her a limitless credit card and arranges a personal shopper to carefully curate her new image. This fairytale-esque approach to their dynamic reinforces the notion that all sex workers are patiently awaiting a knight in shining armour to whisk them away from such a sorrowful predicament. If Edward was ever truly in love, it was with his own creation.
Comedy is yet another outlet for poor sex work representation, as producer, screenwriter and former sex worker Isa Mazzei tells BBC Culture: "There are a lot of comedies out there where the plot is 'oops, we killed a sex worker' and those types of narratives are degrading and perpetuate harm. The fact they're often played off as a joke is the most insidious part of it all, it implies killing a sex worker is somehow less than killing someone with another profession."
Entire comedies are centred on the murder of sex workers, such as Peter Berg's Very Bad Things (1998) and Lucia Aniello's Rough Night (2017), while many others employ the demeaning narrative device as a passing joke, as is the case with Dirty Work (1998), where a car salesman is caught live with several dead sex workers in the trunk of the cars on display. Some films take it up a notch by adopting these harmful stereotypes in their titles, such as Dead Hooker in a Trunk (2019) and Death of a Hooker (1971), also known as Who Killed Mary What's 'Er Name?
Many recent films, however, are actively challenging these stereotypes, with one example being 2018's CAM, written and produced by Mazzei. The story, which employs horror to explore the loss of agency frequently experienced by sex workers who perform online, debates important matters such as consent and the separation between person and persona. "It was absolutely mandatory for us to include sex workers in every step of the filmmaking process. I can't speak for all sex workers, I'm just one. So it was important to include other voices and make sure that we had arrangements about how things were portrayed," says Mazzei, who is also the author of Camgirl, a candid memoir about her days of live-stream camming.
Although Mazzei emphasises the importance of employing sex workers in all steps of the creative process, she admits it is still far from easy for current or former sex workers to be open about their past within the industry. "It was a terrifying experience coming out as a sex worker in Hollywood and taking meetings with people who didn't always respect me as a writer and people who just wanted to ask salacious questions about camming", Mazzei says.
This sentiment is shared by Numa Perrier, whose directorial debut Jezebel (2019) is adapted from her time as a camgirl in the late 1990s. "There is a long-lasting stigma around any type of sex work, and that was a big part of why I was afraid to talk about my personal story at first. I have, however, quickly realised through workshopping the script that it was a bigger creative challenge to hide behind a story that was mine. From that point onwards I became bolder and bolder in expressing that part of me and the film is much better for it."
CAM (2018) uses horror to explore the loss of agency experienced by online sex workers (Credit: Netflix)
CAM and Jezebel greatly benefit from having sex workers reframe their own stories on screen, and prove that faithful portrayals of the subject require insight from people with lived experience. In Sean Baker's ground-breaking Tangerine (2015), former sex workers Kitana Kiki Rodriguez and Mya Taylor imbue their nuanced performances with lived knowledge, giving the film authenticity. French director Camille Vidal-Naquet spent years listening to the stories of young men working in the Bois de Boulogne – a public park in Paris notoriously known as a sex work spot – to create Sauvage (2018), a blistering tale of a young hustler determined to trail his own imperfect path.
Ninja Thyberg's recently released Pleasure, a gruelling look into the world of pornography, is yet another example of how having sex workers involved in the creative process can aid honest representation. Speaking to The New York Times, the director said she "wanted to look at porn from a perspective that doesn't see women as victims," and credits the industry professionals who worked with her on the project for the authentic feel of the film. The result is a hyper-realistic drama that employs the journey of Swedish newcomer Bella Cherry (Sofia Kappel) to scrutinise the ins and outs of the porn industry, from the predatorial behaviour of producers to the fierce competition between performers.
Thyberg's feature debut may be called Pleasure, but it is all about business. At times crushingly credible, the film places the porn industry under surgical lights, and is an uncomfortable watch. The director lingers on the little-known behind-the-scenes minutiae general audiences are likely to be unfamiliar with, but it is its approach to wider, more complex topics such as sexism, consent and sexual trauma that sets this particular story apart from its predecessors. Thyberg's sensitive eye bypasses the dangerous threat of gratuitous fetishism to build a poignant study of ambition.
Both Pleasure and Good Luck to You, Leo Grande offer fresh, rarely-seen-before perspectives on the portrayal of sex work on screen. While the former approaches the topic through the visual shock of the ultra-explicit, the latter does so through carefully crafted dialogue. In fact, there were no sex scenes on the first draft of the film. "I just enjoyed the verbal side of it," writer Katy Brand tells BBC Culture. And conversation is central to the film's positive portrayal of sex work, exploring the notion of consent through verbalisation. Before every touch, every advance, the man lays out the terms of what is about to happen, harnessing eroticism out of safety.
Ninja Thyberg's Pleasure (2022) is a gruelling exploration into the world of pornography (Credit: Mubi UK)
"I wanted it to be positive because there are positive stories out there. And they are real and they are true. And just because they make some people feel a bit uncomfortable, it doesn't mean they don't get to be represented," says Brand. Here, this element of discomfort is introduced through Nancy's insecurities, which lead the retired teacher to a place of toxic bias. In Leo's gentle handling of his client's vitriol, there is a clear demonstration of vocational tact, something actor Daryl McCormack was keen to explore through his performance.
"When I was speaking with sex workers, they had this ability to consistently find a balance with another person, and to me, that's a real gift. That's an intuitive thing and maybe where the vocation comes in. It's something that can’t be taught," he tells BBC Culture. For a film to depict sex work as a true vocation is already a real change, but to do so through a male sex worker adds yet another layer of progressiveness.
"The world of sex work is dominated by women, queer folks, trans folks and people of colour. The power structure in place means the people with extra income available to spend on sex workers are cis white men, or seemingly cis white men, so that's where the demand is", says Westwood.
Would the film have worked so well if the genders were reversed? It is questionable whether the film could preserve its essence without its very specific, subversive gender dynamic, a fact director Sophie Hyde was acutely aware of: "A lot of the time when we see a younger man with an older woman it's through this idea of a cougar, which I don't subscribe to. One of the things I loved about making [the film] was that there were so many power dynamics at play. Somebody's paying, so there's power in this; someone is young and beautiful, so the other person feels powerless in that situation. Daryl and I have even talked about a mixed-race person coming into the room as a sex worker and the power dynamic there. These things were not necessarily the plot of the movie but they are there all the time for the characters."
It is clear that, as cinema slowly progresses towards a more faithful portrayal, there is a need for these more diverse stories, crafted with the help of sex workers. "I would like to see not only inclusion of sex workers, but also deferring to sex workers," says Mazzei, on the commitment required of the entertainment industry to achieve meaningful change. "And there's a big difference there because a lot of people will hire someone to consult on their film but then not listen to that. And that's not doing the work. Doing the work is willing to step aside and listen to what someone is telling you about their lived experience and understand that they know it better than you."
Good Luck to You, Leo Grande is released in the UK and US on 17 June.
Love film and TV? Join BBC Culture Film and TV Club on Facebook, a community for cinephiles all over the world.
If you would like to comment on this story or anything else you have seen on BBC Culture, head over to our Facebook page or message us on Twitter.
And if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called The Essential List. A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Мы освещаем события войны России с Украиной день за днем, час за часом, публикуя информацию наших корреспондентов, анализ экспертов и комментарии политиков и специалистов.
And we'll keep you signed in.
You need one to watch live TV on any channel or device, and BBC programmes on iPlayer. It’s the law.
Глава минобороны Украины Алексей Резников в интервью британскому изданию Sunday Times рассказал о приказе украинского президента Владимира Зеленского проработать план освобождения занятых территорий на юге страны.
“Это моя работа, я пишу партнерам из других стран, объясняю, почему нам [для реализации этого плана] нужны конкретные виды вообружения”, – заявил Резников. О каких конкретно территориях идет речь, в интервью не уточняется.
Вечером в пятницу 8 июля украинские власти призвали жителей Запорожской и Херсонской областей покинуть их любыми путями. “Надо искать возможность уехать, потому что наши Вооруженные Силы будут деоккупировать. Это будут огромные бои. Я не хочу никого пугать, все и так все понимают”, – объясняла министр по реинтеграции временно оккупированных территорий Ирина Верещук.
О том, что жителям необходимо эвакуироваться из Херсонской области – пусть даже через Крым и Россию – Верещук говорила еще в конце июня.
Дважды был обстрелян Соледар, погиб один человек, трое ранены, пишет в своем Telegram глава Донецкой областной военной администрации Павел Кириленко. Сгорел дом культуры и административное здание. Под обстрел также попали Угледар и частный сектор в городе Северск, пишет Кириленко.
За прошедшие сутки были нанесены ракетные и артиллерийские удары еще по нескольким населенным пунктам Донецкой области. В частности, поздно вечером в субботу российские военные обстреляли город Часов Яр. Ракеты попали в жилой дом. Погибли 15 человек, десятки находятся под завалами, сообщают в украинской госслужбе по чрезвычайным ситуациям.
Бои идут и в Луганской области. В селе Белогоровка – находится примерно в 50 километров к востоку от Славянска, – собираются российские войска, сообщает глава военной администрации Луганской области Сергей Гайдай. – откуда ведут обстрел окрестных населенных пунктов. Об обстрелах в районе Славянска сообщает и британская разведка. По словам Гайдая, российские войска “застряли” и не могут продвинуться дальше. Именно в районе Белогоровки российская армия с огромными потерями пыталась переправиться через реку Северный Донец в мае.
Российское государственное агентство ТАСС со ссылкой на власти непризнанной ДНР, в свою очередь, сообщает об обстрелах нескольких населенных пунктов в Донецкой области – в частности, самого Донецка – украинскими военными. Информации о погибших в результате обстрелов на сайте ТАСС нет.
артиллерия продолжает обстрелы в районе Славянска – с севера из районов вокруг Изюма и с востока из района Лисичанска, сообщается 10 июля в оперативной сводке военной разведки британского министерства обороны.
по некоторым данным, смогли немного продвинуться в районе Попасной.
Изюма по-прежнему сосредоточен по целям вдоль трассы Е40.
соединяющей Харьков с Донецком, вероятно, является важной целью российских
войск, пытающихся вести наступление в Донецкой области.
Решение Канады несмотря на санкции вернуть "Газпрому" отремонтированную турбину для "Северного
потока" создает очень плохой прецедент, написал в "Фейсбуке" глава "Оператора газотранспортной системы
"К сожалению, Канада уступила давлению", —
что "Газпром" полностью возобновит транзит газа в Германию. Это позволило бы Европе
продолжить запасать газ на зиму и должно привести к снижению цен на газ,
которые уже достигли 1800-1900 долларов за 1000 кубометров.
"Однако я полагаю, что даже после возврата
турбины "Газпром" найдет повод для дальнейшего сокращения поставок в
ЕС, - заявил Макогон, - потому что и без турбины "Газпром" способен
значительно увеличить транзит: он не использует в полной мере маршрут через
Польшу, и использует только 40% забронированных и оплаченных мощностей через
Ранее правительство Канады заявило, что
сделает исключение из санкций против России и после ремонта вернет турбину в
Германию. Турбина, первоначально изготовленная компанией Siemens в Канаде, используется Газпромом в ЕС для
Поздно вечером в субботу российские военные обстреляли город Часов Яр Донецкой области. Ракеты попали в жилой пятиэтажный дом. Погибли 15 человек, под завалами могут находиться еще 24 человека, сообщили в украинской госслужбе по чрезвычайным ситуациям.
Автозаводский райсуд Нижнего Новгорода оштрафовал на 30 тыс. руб активиста Алексея Поднебесного за  на странице "ВКонтакте" о проблемах ЖКХ в городе.  В посте говорилось о том, что стоимости одного дня "спецоперации", по мнению автора, хватило бы на то, чтобы провести горячую воду в нижегородские общежития и коммуналки.
Решение судья Александр Ляпин вынес 23 июня, но мотивировочную часть опубликовал позже. Первым на нее обратил внимание телеграм-канал Sota.
Судья сослался на сведения справочника по правописанию и литературной правке Д.Е. Розенталя. Имя автора справочника в опубликованной версии решения удалено - видимо,  в целях защиты персональных данных источника знаний.
По версии судьи Ляпина, в справочнике разъясняется, что "кавычками выделяются слова, употребленные в ироническом значении".
В опубликованном тексте решения судьи при этом полно орфографических ошибок. "Судом учитывается, что слово "спецоперация" обособлена Поднебесным А.Н. в кавычки, что, согласно правилам русского языка и в контексте изложенного Поднебесным А.Н., безусловно свидетельствует об ироническом, противоположном? пренебрежительном значении вышеуказанного слова (спецоперация).  Данная словесная конструкция выражена в негативном ключе", - решил судья Ляпин (оригинальная орфография и пунктуация текста решения сохранены).
Судья признал "данные публичные действия" - написание слова в кавычках - дискредитацией вооруженных сил РФ и выполняемых ими задач "за пределами территории РФ на основе общепризнанных принципов и норма международного права".
В справочнике Розенталя говорится, что слова выделяются кавычками не только в ироническом, но еще как минимум в пяти вариантах "необычных и условных значений - в том числе "непривычные, малоупотребительные", а также "малоизвестные термины" и слова "совсем новые". Алексей Поднебесный писал, что судье на  признание его поста дискредитацией понадобилось 2 минуты.
Очевидцы сообщают о новых обстрелах в городе Соледар.
Ночью по городу уже наносились удары со стороны наступающих российских сил. Было повреждено и загорелось здание местного клуба и исполком.
Десятки украинских военных прибыли в Британию для прохождения специальной подготовки. В отличие от предыдущих программ, эта нацелена на то, чтобы дать необходимые навыки для успешных действий на передовой новобранцам - то есть людям с минимальным или нулевым опытом службы в армии.
По заявлениям украинских властей, Киев теряет до 200 солдат ежедневно. А значит, что подготовка подкрепления может иметь решающее значение для хода боевых действий в ближайшем будущем.
Британия предложила провести "курс молодого бойца" на своей территории, чтобы рекруты могли готовиться, не опасаясь обстрелов со стороны России. По задумке Лондона в ближайшее полгода через эту программу смогу пройти около 10 000 украинских военных.
Тренировки проходят на четырех базах минобороны Британии, их точное местоположение не разглашается.
С 2015 по 2022 годы обучение в Великобритании прошли около 22 000 украинских военнослужащих.
Специальные курсы для украинских военных также проводят в США. Группа старших офицеров армии и нацгвардии Украины обучались на базе Форт-Ливенворте в Канзасе. По мнению некоторых экспертов, полученные в США знания помогли украинским военачальникам организовать грамотную оборону своей страны на ряде направлений.
войны Би-би-си не может оперативно проверить информацию, поступающую от
Число погибших в результате ракетного удара  по жилой многоэтажке во Часовом Яру в Донецкой области возросло до 15 человек, сообщают в МЧС Донецкой области.
Разбор завалов жилого дома продолжается.
По данным Спецпредставителя ООН по вопросам сексуального насилия в условиях конфликтов Прамилы Паттен, после начала российского вторжения в Украину уже зафиксировано 124 случая сексуального насилия.
Паттен признает, что эти данные – лишь верхушка айсберга и явно не отражают масштабов сексуального насилия в условиях войны.
«Люди, которые выжили после сексуального насилия, считают это преступление стыдным и не рассказывают об этом. И это не уникальность украинского случая, а тенденция, которая наблюдается во время всех войн правозащитниками», - отмечает представитель «Центра гражданских свобод» Александра Матвийчук.
Вторая причина, по которой невозможно сейчас оценить масштабы совершаемых в Украине преступлений подобного характера – большое их количество, отмечают специалисты.
По данным Генпрокуратуры Украины сейчас зарегистрировано более 15 тысяч уголовных производств по таким эпизодам. В отдельных областях на каждого следователя приходится около 200 дел, связанных с изнасилованиями.
"Следователь должен одновременно расследовать такое количество уголовных дел – ни одна самая хорошая правовая система в мире не могла бы справиться эффективно с такой с задачей. При этом война продолжается и количество преступлений растет», - отмечает Матвийчук.
Российский регулятор Роскомнадзор начал блокировать доступ к сайту ежедневной немецкой газеты Die Welt.
Причины такого решения неизвестны. Все публикации на сайте газеты - на немецком языке, русскоязычного раздела нет.
Но именно на die Welt работала журналистка Марина Овсянникова, вышедшая с антивоенным плакатом в ходе прямого эфира новостной программы "Время" на "Первом канале".
Неделю назад Овсянникова сообщила, что ее трехмесячный контракт с Welt подошел к концу. Журналистка вернулась в Россию, чтобы, по ее словам, побороться в суде за право видеть и воспитывать своих детей.
Жители Херсона сообщают о грохоте разрывов. В небе видны белые следы, похожие на последствия работы ПВО.
Обстрел города начался примерно в 3.30 утра.
"Первая ракета попала на территорию учебного заведения, что привело к его разрушению. Другая ракета попала на территорию частного дома. Получил ранение 62-летний житель. Кроме того, частично повреждена территория детского санатория, расположенного рядом", — сообщает прокуратура Харьковской области.
Ежедневные обстрелы Харькова в ночное время не прекращаются уже больше месяца.
По данным Генпрокуратуры Украины на утро 10 июля 2022 года от боевых действий в Украине погибло 347 детей. Еще 648 детей было ранено.
“Больше всего пострадало детей в Донецкой области – 348, Харьковской – 187, Киевской – 116," – говорится в сообщении.
Эти цифры не окончательные, поскольку продолжается уточнение данных о погибших в местах ведения активных боевых действий, в том числе городе Часов Яр, по которому этим утром был нанесен ракетный удар.
В условиях войны Би-би-си не может оперативно проверить заявления официальных лиц Украины.
По данным ООН, на 4 июля от боевых действий на территории Украины погибло 335 детей. Эта цифра включает детей, погибших на территориях Донецкой и Луганской областей, находящихся под контролем пророссийских сил.
Военная разведка Британии опубликовала ежедневную аналитическую сводку по Украине. Главное:
Под Кривым Рогом тремя ракетами полностью уничтожено промышленное предприятие, утверждает глава военной администрации города Александр Вилкул.
"Заканчивается  ликвидация последствий вчерашних прилетов в Радушное. Прямое попадание трех ракет "Калибр". Предприятие промышленной инфраструктуры полностью уничтожено. Потери уточняются", - цитирует его издание "Политика Страны".
Би-би-си не может оперативно проверить заявления официальных украинских лиц, российская сторона об ударе по населенному пункту Радушное не сообщала.
под Бахмутом в Донецкой области более 30 человек оказались под руинами пятиэтажного
дома, попавшего в субботу вечером под ракетный удар, утверждает глава областной
поверхность на данный момент извлекли тела шести погибших и пяти раненых.
полностью уничтожены два подъезда. На месте работают спасатели - пытаются
спасти оказавшихся под завалами. По словам местных жителей, там, скорее всего,
по меньшей мере 34 человека, в том числе 9-летний ребенок", - написал
сумели установить контакт с двумя людьми, оказавшимися под руинами.
Кириленко утверждает, что в пятиэтажный жилой дом попали российские ракеты "Ураган".
Тем временем власти самопровозглашенной ДНР заявили о гибели трех мирных жителей и 11 пострадавших в результате обстрелов за прошлые сутки.
военного времени Би-би-си не может оперативно проверить заявления официальных
лиц. Российская сторона не сообщала об ударе.
сил Украины опубликовал утреннюю сводку о военной ситуации, вот некоторые ее
В условиях военного времени Би-би-си не может оперативно проверить заявления сторон. Глава Луганской областной военной администрации Сергей Гайдай при этом утверждает, что продвинуться со стороны Лисичанска на Северск российским силам не удается.
Мы освещаем события войны России с Украиной день за днем, час за часом, публикуя информацию наших корреспондентов, анализ экспертов и комментарии политиков и специалистов.

Stars pay tribute to actor Davis
Hollywood stars including Spike Lee, Burt Reynolds and Oscar nominee Alan Alda have paid tribute to actor Ossie Davis at a funeral in New York.
Veteran star Ossie Davis, a well-known civil rights activist, died in Miami at the age of 87 on 4 February 2005. Friends and family, including actress Ruby Dee his wife of 56 years, gathered at the Riverside Church on Saturday. Also present at the service was former US president Bill Clinton and singer Harry Belafonte, who gave the eulogy. "He would have been a very good president of the United States," said Mr Clinton. "Like most of you here, he gave more to me than I gave to him."
The 87-year-old was found dead last weekend in his hotel room in Florida, where he was making a film. Police said that he appeared to have died of natural causes. Davis made his acting debut in 1950 in No Way Out starring Sidney Poiter. He frequently collaborated with director Spike Lee, starring in seven Lee films including Jungle Fever, Do The Right Thing and Malcolm X. Attallah Shabazz, the daughter of activist Malcolm X, recalled the famous eulogy delivered by Davis at her father's funeral. "Harlem has come to bid farewell to one of its finest hopes," she said, quoting the man she knew as Uncle Ossie. "Ditto." "Ossie was my hero, and he still is," said Aviator star Alan Alda, a family friend for over forty years. "Ossie was a thing of beauty."
"I want so badly someday to have his dignity - a little of it anyway," added Burt Reynolds, Davis's co-star in the 90s TV comedy Evening Shade. Before the midday funeral, scores of Harlem residents formed a queue outside the church to pay their respects to Davis. "It is hard to fathom that we will no longer be able to call on his wisdom, his humour, his loyalty and his moral strength to guide us in the choices that are yet to be made and the battles that are yet to be fought," said Belafonte, himself an ardent civil rights activist who had been friends with Davis for over 60 years. "But how fortunate we were to have him as long as we did."

US actor Ossie Davis found dead
US actor Ossie Davis has been found dead at the age of 87.
Davis, who was married to actress Ruby Dee, was found dead on Friday in his hotel room in Miami Beach, Florida, where he was making a film. Davis, whose 65-year career included credits as a producer, director, actor and writer for stage and screen, was also a civil rights activist. Miami Beach police spokesman Bobby Hernandez said the cause of death appeared to be natural.
Davis's body was discovered by his grandson and paramedics at the Shore Club hotel in Miami Beach, where the actor had been shooting the film Retirement. Mr Hernandez said: "After gaining entry, they found Mr Davis had passed away. "The cause of death appears to be natural. According to his grandson he was suffering from heart disease." Some of Davis's best known roles included The Joe Louis Story and Gone Are the Days - a film he adapted from his own play, Purlie Victorious. He also appeared in 7 Spike Lee movies, including School Daze, Do the Right Thing and Jungle Fever.
His film debut, in 1950, was in the film No Way Out, starring Sydney Poitier and Ruby Dee. Davis and Dee were married for more than 56 years and together received Kennedy Center honours in 2004 for their body of work. The Actors' Equity Association issued a statement calling Davis "an icon in the American theatre" and he and Dee "American treasures". Davis was also a prominent figure in the civil rights movement and was a voice for racial equality. He was a featured speaker at the funerals of both Martin Luther King Jnr and Malcolm X. Besides Dee, Davis is survived by three children Nora, Hasna and Guy, a blues artist, and seven grandchildren.

Jugnot 'tops French actor league'
Actor Gerard Jugnot - star of the Oscar-nominated film The Chorus - has beaten Gerard Depardieu to become France's best-paid actor of 2004.
Jugnot made 5.45m Euros (£3.77m) last year, according to a table drawn up by France's Le Figaro newspaper. In The Chorus (Les Choristes), Jugnot plays an inspiring music teacher at a school for troubled boys in 1949. Despite starring in five films in 2004, Depardieu made 3.35m Euros (£2.31m) putting him third place in the chart. "His name [Depardieu] is no longer sufficient to guarantee the success of a film," said Le Figaro newspaper. The Chorus, which Jugnot also co-produced, has drawn an audience of nearly nine million people since its release last year.
Godzilla star Jean Reno was France's second best-paid actor in 2004, earning 3.55m Euros (£2.45m) . His roles include a recent uncredited cameo in the Oscar-nominated Hotel Rwanda. The highest-ranking woman on Le Figaro's list was Audrey Tautou in 10th place, earning 885,000 Euros (£611,000). She starred in Jean-Pierre Jeunet's A Very Long Engagement (Un Long Dimanche de Fiancailles) and is also lined up to co-star with Tom Hanks in Ron Howard's The Da Vinci Code. The Chorus is nominated for best foreign film at Sunday's Oscar ceremony. On Saturday, it will compete for the title of best film against fellow nominee A Very Long Engagement in France's Cesar film awards.

Howl helps boost Japan's cinemas
Japan's box office received a 3.8% boost last year, with ticket sales worth 211bn yen (£1.08bn).
The surge was led by animated movie Howl's Moving Castle, which took 20bn yen (£102m) to become the biggest film in Japan in 2004. It is expected to match the 30.7bn yen (£157m) record of Hayao Miyazaki's previous film Spirited Away. Japan Motion Picture Producers figures showed that 170 million cinema admissions were made in Japan in 2004. The Last Samurai, starring Tom Cruise, was the biggest foreign movie hit in Japan last year, taking 13.8bn yen (£70.7m).
It was followed by Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, Finding Nemo and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King. The second highest-grossing Japanese film was romantic drama Crying Out Love in the Centre of the World, followed by Be With You and Pocket Monsters Advanced Generation. Japanese films accounted for 37.5% of Japan's box office total last year, with foreign films taking the remaining 62.5%. This represented a 4.5% gain for the proportion of Japanese films in 2004 compared to 2003. The number of Japanese films released rose to 310 in 2004 from 287 the previous year. Sales of movies on DVD and video amounted to 497bn yen (£2.54bn) for the year.

Political thriller Hotel Rwanda was given a rousing reception by spectators at the Berlin Film Festival on Saturday.
The movie's star Don Cheadle also received a standing ovation when he stepped onto the stage after the show. The film is the true story of the hotel manager who saved 1,200 Tutsis from death during the Rwandan genocide. The film, showing out of competition in Berlin, is nominated for three Oscars, including best actor for Cheadle. Sophie Okonedo, who plays Cheadle's wife Tatiana, is nominated for best supporting actress. The film is also in the running for best original screenplay. Cheadle, was joined on stage at Berlin by Paul Rusesabagina, the hotel manager he plays in the film, Mr Rusesabagina's wife and his extended family, who fled Rwanda and now live in Belgium. Mr Rusesabagina used his influence as a prominent Hutu businessman to shelter potential victims of the Rwandan genocide, contacting dignitaries including Bill Clinton, the King of Belgium as well as the French foreign ministry. Hotel Rwanda is one of two films addressing the genocide at the 55th Berlin Film Festival, which runs until 20 February. Sometimes in April is a feature by Raoul Peck competing for the festival's coveted Golden and Silver Bear awards. The film was made exclusively in Rwanda whereas Hotel Rwanda was shot mostly in South Africa, with some scenes made in Kigali.

'Landmark movies' of 2004 hailed
US film professionals have declared Fahrenheit 9/11 and The Passion of the Christ as two of the most significant cultural milestones of 2004.
The American Film Institute (AFI) hailed Mel Gibson's biblical epic and Michael Moore's political documentary as inspiring national debate. It claimed both film-makers "tossed Hollywood convention out the window". The Institute also cited the death of actor Marlon Brando and the changing landscape of TV news in the US. In referring to Marlon Brando's death on 1 July at the age of 80, the 13-strong AFI jury concluded "the art of screen acting has two chapters - 'Before Brando' and 'After Brando'.
It credited the screen legend's "raw hypnotic energy" and his ability to create characters like Stanley Kowalski and Terry Malloy "that will live forever in the annals of film history". The list also acknowledges key influences and trends in the world of film and broadcasting. Among current trends, it highlighted the final broadcasts of veteran newscasters Tom Brokaw, Barbara Walters and the impending retirement of CBS news anchor Dan Rather. It its place, the AFI fears, is a news landscape where "newscasters are more personalities than journalists" and balance and integrity are increasingly ignored.
The AFI also questioned "the long-term viability of evening news broadcasts", in the light of 24-hour news channels and the internet. The list also draws attention to the growing influence of US broadcasting regulator, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
The institute concluded the threat of regulation, which went into freefall following Janet Jackson's 'wardrobe malfunction' during a live Super Bowl performance in February, "had a profound effect on television". "Unsure of how the FCC will rule on an issue, the creative community has begun to self-censor their shows, a disturbing trend in a country founded on free expression," the AFI jury declared. To illustrate their point, the AFI cited ABC affiliates refusal to air Steven Spielberg's film Saving Private Ryan in an unedited form over fears of possible fines.

De Niro film leads US box office
Film star Robert De Niro has returned to the top of the North American box office with his film Hide and Seek.
The thriller shot straight to the number one spot after taking $22m (£11.7m) at the box office. De Niro recently spent three weeks at the top with comedy Meet The Fockers, which was at number five this week. Oscar hopefuls The Aviator, Million Dollar Baby and Sideways all cashed in on their multiple nominations with stronger ticket sales.
In Hide and Seek, De Niro plays a widower whose daughter has a creepy imaginary friend. Despite lukewarm reviews from critics, the film took more than the expected $18m (£9.5m). "The element of a real actor in a psychological thriller certainly elevated it," said Bruce Snyder, president of domestic distribution at 20th Century Fox. Clint Eastwood's Million Dollar Baby led the Oscar hopefuls with $11.8m (£6.3m), coming in at number three during its first weekend of wide release. The Aviator, a film biography of Howard Hughes that leads the Oscar field with 11 nominations, was at number six for the weekend with $7.5m (£4m). Oscar best-picture nominee Sideways entered the top ten for the first time in its 15th week of release. It came in seventh $6.3 (£3.35m). Last week's top film, Ice Cube's road-trip comedy Are We There Yet?, slipped to second place with $17m (£9m), while Coach Carter fell two places to number four, taking $8m (£4.25m) in its third week. Rounding out the top ten were In Good Company - starring Dennis Quaid and Scarlett Johansson - Racing Stripes and Assault on Precinct 13.

Willis sues over movie 'injury'
Actor Bruce Willis is suing Revolution Studios over an injury he said he suffered while making Tears of the Sun.
Willis is seeking medical expenses after he said he was hit in the head by a firework during the filming of the 2002 movie, produced by the firm. The lawsuit said the star has endured mental and physical injuries as a result of the alleged incident. "We are not able to comment on pending litigation," Revolution Studios spokesman Sean Dudas said.
In Tears of the Sun Willis plays a US military commander who disobeys orders to try and help save a doctor and patients trapped in the Nigerian jungle. Directed by Antoine Fuqua, the film was poorly received by critics and did not perform strongly at the box office. According to the lawsuit, the injury was suffered during the firing of explosions as part of a special effect. The explosions, known as squibs, were intended to "simulate the appearance of bullets striking the ground". The lawsuit said Willis has endured "extreme mental, physical and emotional pain and suffering." There were no specific details on the injuries. While Willis does not seek specific monetary damages, the lawsuit noted that the star "was required to and did employ physicians and other medical personnel". It stated he will incur additional future medical expenses. The lawsuit said Revolution Studios and special effects foreman Joe Pancake "had a duty to Willis to ensure that the squibs were inspected, set up, placed and detonated in a safe manner, and to employ technicians who were trained and competent in their use".

Bennett play takes theatre prizes
The History Boys by Alan Bennett has been named best new play in the Critics' Circle Theatre Awards.
Set in a grammar school, the play also earned a best actor prize for star Richard Griffiths as teacher Hector. The Producers was named best musical, Victoria Hamilton was best actress for Suddenly Last Summer and Festen's Rufus Norris was named best director. The History Boys also won the best new comedy title at the Theatregoers' Choice Awards.
Partly based upon Alan Bennett's experience as a teacher, The History Boys has been at London's National Theatre since last May. The Critics' Circle named Rebecca Lenkiewicz its most promising playwright for The Night Season, and Eddie Redmayne most promising newcomer for The Goat or, Who is Sylvia?
Paul Rhys was its best Shakespearean performer for Measure for Measure at the National Theatre and Christopher Oram won the design award for Suddenly Last Summer. Both the Critics' Circle and Whatsonstage.com Theatregoers' Choice award winners were announced on Tuesday. Chosen by more than 11,000 theatre fans, the Theatregoers' Choice Awards named US actor Christian Slater best actor for One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. Diana Rigg was best actress for Suddenly Last Summer, Dame Judi Dench was best supporting actress for the RSC's All's Well That Ends Well and The History Boys' Samuel Barnett was best supporting actor.

Foxx and Swank win US awards
Jamie Foxx and Hilary Swank have won the Screen Actors Guild Awards for best male and female film actors, boosting their Oscars hopes this month.
Foxx's portrayal of late soul-singer Ray Charles in Ray had already earned him a prestigious Golden Globe award. Swank triumphed for playing a gutsy female boxer in Million Dollar Baby. Modest wine country comedy Sideways knocked out favourites Million Dollar Baby and The Aviator by taking the top prize for best cast performance.
The Screen Actors Guild (SAG) represents US film and TV actors. Its winners often go on to win Oscars. In other nominations, Cate Blanchett triumphed as the best supporting actress for her role as Katharine Hepburn in The Aviator. Veteran actor Morgan Freeman took the best supporting actor award for playing a prize-fighter turned gym manager in Million Dollar Baby.
"Thank you for Ray Charles for just living so complex and so interesting, and making us all just come together," said Foxx, accepting his award in Los Angeles on Saturday.
He also praised the film director: "Thank you for Taylor Hackford for taking a chance with an African-American film. Taylor, you're my director of the year." Swank, too, was full of praise for her director and co-star Clint Eastwood. "I bow down to you," Swank said to the 74-year-old Eastwood. "You are a talent beyond compare. If I'm half the person you are and half the talent you are when I'm 74, I will know that I've accomplished something great."
Both Foxx and Swank are now considered to be among the favourites to get Oscars - the Hollywood's ultimate prize. However, Swank has to overcome a strong challenge from Annette Bening, a nominee for the theatre farce Being Julia. Meanwhile, ballots for Oscars - the Hollywood's top honours - were mailed earlier this week to members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. The voting is due to end on 22 February - five days before the ceremony.

Spike Lee backs student directors
Film-maker Spike Lee says black representation is stronger than ever in cinema and TV but the true power in entertainment lies behind the camera.
The She Hate Me director urged students at his old Atlanta university, Morehouse College, to seek "gatekeeper positions" behind the scenes. Lee told them to "work up the corporate ladder because everybody can't be an actor, everybody can't make a record". He spoke as part of a discussion panel, then led a retrospective of his films.
Returning to his old university, which educates only African American students, Lee discussed the challenges facing black people in the entertainment industry. "Even Denzel (Washington), he's getting $20m a movie. But when it comes time to do a movie, he has to go to one of those gatekeepers," Lee said. He told aspiring young film-makers in the audience not to ignore non-traditional routes to getting a movie made, including raising funds independently and releasing films straight to DVD. "It's a huge market," the 47-year-old director said. "It's not something that should be looked upon as a stepchild." Lee has made more than 25 films, including Jungle Fever, Do the Right Thing, Summer of Sam and 1986 hit She's Gotta Have It.

Horror film heads US box office
A low-budget horror film produced by Evil Dead director Sam Raimi has topped the North American box office.
Boogeyman, which focuses on a man who returns to his childhood home to confront his traumatic past, took $19.5m (£14.9m) in three days. Last week's chart-topper, the Robert de Niro thriller Hide and Seek, fell to number four. Other new entries included The Wedding Date, a comedy starring Will and Grace's Debra Messing, at number two.
The road-trip comedy Are We There Yet? and multiple Oscar nominee Million Dollar Baby completed the top five. Other Oscar contenders, including The Aviator and Sideways, continued to perform strongly at the box office. The Aviator has taken $75m (£40m) so far, while Sideways has taken $46.8m (£24.8m) in a more limited release.
Boogeyman, which cost just $7m (£3.5m) to make, performed well even though it was not screened to critics before release - normally a sign that a film will get bad reviews or perform poorly at the box office. "I certainly believe it's a genre where people are going to be more moved by the marketing materials for the movie than by what the critics say," said Rory Bruer, head of distribution for Sony Pictures, which released the film in the US. Overall the weekend box office was strong despite the fact that it was American football's Super Bowl weekend - a time when cinema admissions generally fall. This year, the top 12 films grossed around $91m (£48.3m), compared to 2004's Super Bowl weekend when the total box office was $73.4m (£38.9m).

The release of a film about the Mumbai (Bombay) blasts in 1993 has been postponed following protests by those on trial for the bombings.
Investigating the blasts which killed more than 250 people and wounded 1,000, the film Black Friday had been due to open across India on Friday. But 36 people accused in connection with the blasts said it should not be screened until the trial is over. Mumbai High Court postponed the film's launch until 3 February.
Black Friday is based upon the novel of the same name written by journalist S Hussain Zaidi, which looks at the 15 explosions which rocked Mumbai on 12 March 1993. Director Anurag Kashyap said the film's release should not be delayed as the book has already been on sale for two years. "If you have not gone against the book, then how can you go against the movie?" Mr Kashyap's lawyer Mihir Desai said. This is the second time that those accused in connection with the blasts have sought legal intervention regarding the film.
They previously asked that a line from the movie's poster, which claimed the film portrayed "the true story of the Bombay bomb blasts", be removed. Their lawyer, Majeed Memon, said: "We had argued that how can a film say it is telling the true story when the court itself is struggling to find the truth? "So we said they should remove the line from their promotional posters and they did give us an assurance that they would do so." The Mumbai bombings case is one of India's longest-running trials. A special court was set up to hear the case and regular hearings have taken place there for the last nine years, with more than six hundred witnesses questioned.

Only one man recognises that robots are a threat to humanity - but that's fine because it only takes one man to save the day in the thriller I, Robot.
Will Smith co-stars alongside more CGI robots than you can count and as a thrill-a-minute kind of action film, it's perfectly adequate. You'll have forgotten it all tomorrow but you'll have a fun night with the film and all the extras. There is a one-disc version that has commentaries and a Making Of but the two-disc adds more. Unusually for this kind of film, the extras don't solely concentrate on the special effects. They're covered but there's also a general Production Diary and a Post-Production feature.
Remember the National Lottery's draw machines Arthur and Guinevere? They were more accurate than this glossy Hollywood version of the tale.
But as long as you're not expecting a documentary, live with it: King Arthur is a fun, exciting, totally shallow experience and looks excellent. Clive Owen is the brooding king, Keira Knightly rises above her costume and Ray Winstone gives it all some grit. It's at its best in its battle scenes which are well done and are also the best part of the Making Of extra.
Less flashy than a David Attenborough show and less detailed than a Simon Schama one, the BBC series British Isles nevertheless turned out to be quite engrossing. Admit it, the fact that this is one of the shows Alan Titchmarsh left Ground Force to present did mean that you expected something equally frothy. But Titchmarsh turns out to know his subject and the sight of our present-day landscape being peeled back to reveal the past was fascinating. He's now written an accompanying book, too.

Late film star Marlon Brando is said to have repeatedly turned down his Oscar-winning role in The Godfather.
The actor's friend Budd Schulberg told Vanity Fair magazine that Brando's assistant suggested he read the novel. The actor repeatedly refused, throwing the book at her and saying: "For the last time, I won't glorify the mafia". But Brando, who died last July at the age of 80, eventually took the role of Don Corleone, winning him an Oscar in 1973 which he notoriously refused. The actor sent a young woman dressed in Native American costume to refuse the award on his behalf and to draw attention to the plight of Native Americans.
Schulberg told the magazine that Brando's assistant realised the film star had warmed to the idea of The Godfather role when he sported a drawn-on pencil moustache and asked: "How do I look?" His assistant, Alice Marchak, said that he looked like George Raft, an actor famed for playing gangsters on the silver screen. Every time she went to see Brando from then on, she added, he was wearing a different gangster-style moustache. Brando was asked to screen test for the role in The Godfather, as studio executives were said to be reluctant for the actor to play the part following problems on the set of Brando's previous film Mutiny on the Bounty . In fact Brando's Academy Award triumph revived his career. The actor was nominated for an Oscar the following year for his role in Bernardo Bertolucci's Last Tango in Paris. Before his death, Brando granted gaming company Electronic Arts the rights to use his voice and image in a video game based on the Godfather film and book and recorded voice-overs which closely resembled his role as Don Corleone. Brando's co-stars from The Godfather, James Caan and Robert Duvall, will also reprise their roles for the video game, it was confirmed on Wednesday.

Dutch watch Van Gogh's last film
The last film to be made by the slain Dutch director Theo van Gogh, called 06/05, has been premiered in The Hague.
Members of Van Gogh's family and celebrities attended the screening of 06/05, based on the murder of the anti-immigration politician Pim Fortuyn. Van Gogh was shot and stabbed to death in Amsterdam six weeks ago. A Dutch-Moroccan man suspected of radical Islamist links has been charged. The killing, and Fortuyn's death in 2002, convulsed the Netherlands. Many Dutch people have questioned their country's self-image as a peaceful, tolerant nation in the wake of the murders, which triggered heated debate about immigration.
An animal rights activist was sentenced to 18 years in prison last year for killing Fortuyn. Earlier this year, Van Gogh made a film accusing Islam of promoting violence against women. It caused outrage among Muslims and death threats were made against him. The film 06/05 will become available on the internet on Wednesday and go on general release in Dutch cinemas in January. Van Gogh's movie mixes real images of the day of Fortuyn's murder with a fictional plot about Dutch intelligence services conspiring to silence the politician. The story unfolds through the eyes of a freelance photographer who unwittingly takes pictures revealing the involvement of Dutch authorities in Fortuyn's murder. Photographer Jim de Booy then goes on the run from secret service agents who burgle his home and threaten his family.

Organisers say this year's Berlin Film Festival, which opens on Thursday with period epic Man to Man, will celebrate a revitalised European cinema.
Of the 21 films in competition for the Golden and Silver Bear awards, more than half are from Europe with France particularly well represented. Festival director Dieter Kosslick says this strong showing signals "a new consciousness for European films". "They're on an incredible winning streak," he told the Reuters agency. "This isn't to say there aren't any good American films," he continued. "It's just that there are more good European films."
However, Mr Kosslick refused to accept that widespread opposition to the Iraq war had turned audiences against Hollywood imports. "There is no anti-American mood," he said. Some 350 films will be screened at this year's festival, with a further 300 shown at the European Film Market that runs alongside it. More than a dozen celebrities are scheduled to attend, among them Will Smith, Kevin Spacey and Keanu Reeves. But Mr Kosslick says more would be coming had the Academy Awards not been brought forward to 27 February. "I'm not worried that we won't be able to fill the red carpet with stars," he said, though he admitted the festival may be moved to January next year to avoid a similar clash. The 10-day Berlinale runs until 20 February.

Sky takes over Oscar night mantle
Sky has signed a major new deal to broadcast this year's Academy Awards, taking over from three years of live Oscar coverage on the BBC.
Sky said it was "honoured to have won exclusive broadcasting rights" and promised to cover the event "in a way no other broadcaster could". The BBC denied it had lost a bidding war, saying it had "decided to pass the mantle to another broadcaster". The ceremony, hosted by newcomer Chris Rock, takes place on 27 February 2005.
Sky's coverage will launch with the nominations on 25 January and will include themed programming across Sky channels including Sky News, Sky Travel and the Biography Channel. There will also be a month-long season of Oscar-winning films on Sky Movies in the run up to the event and live uninterrupted coverage on the night. "We are honoured to have won the live and exclusive broadcasting rights for The Academy Awards," said Sky Networks' Sophie Turner Laing. "Sky is the natural place to see the biggest and most prestigious film event of the year, and will cover the event in a way that no other broadcaster could."
Sky first scooped Oscar rights from the BBC in 1999, but the BBC won them back in 2001 when Sky was forced to pull out of a bidding war due to financial constraints. "BBC viewers will of course be able to watch quality coverage of the 2005 Academy Awards on the BBC's bulletins and news programmes," a spokesman said. Among the films tipped to do well at this year's Academy Awards are Martin Scorsese's The Aviator, Jean-Pierre Jeunet's A Very Long Engagement and the Ray Charles biopic, Ray.

Snicket tops US box office chart
The film adaptation of Lemony Snicket novels has topped the North America box office chart, displacing Ocean's 12.
A Series of Unfortunate Events, starring Jim Carrey, took $30.2m (£15.5m) in its debut weekend. Ocean's 12 fell to number two while new entry Spanglish entered the chart at number three, taking $9m (£4.6m). A Series of Unfortunate Events also stars Scottish comedian Billy Connelly, while Carrey takes on a number of different roles in the surreal film. The only other new entry in the top 10 was re-make, Flight of the Phoenix, at number eight, starring Dennis Quaid. Carrey entertained crowds at the UK premiere of Lemony Snicket in London on Friday. The actor grabbed co-star Meryl Streep and whisked her around Leicester Square. Based on the cult children's books by author Daniel Handler, the film follows three children who are orphaned when their parents die in a fire. They are taken in by their wicked uncle Count Olaf, played by Carrey, who schemes to get his hands on their fortune.

Levy tipped for Whitbread prize
Novelist Andrea Levy is favourite to win the main Whitbread Prize book of the year award, after winning novel of the year with her book Small Island.
The book has already won the Orange Prize for fiction, and is now 5/4 favourite for the £25,000 Whitbread. Second favourite is a biography of Mary Queen of Scots, by John Guy. A panel of judges including Sir Trevor McDonald, actor Hugh Grant and writer Joanne Harris will decide the overall winner on Tuesday.
The five writers in line for the award won their respective categories - first novel, novel, biography, poetry and children's book - on 6 January. Small Island, Levy's fourth novel, is set in post-war London and centres on a landlady and her lodgers. One is a Jamaican who joined British troops to fight Hitler but finds life difficult out of uniform when he settles in the UK. "What could have been a didactic or preachy prospect turns out to hilarious, moving humane and eye-popping. It's hard to think of anybody not enjoying it," wrote the judges. The judges called Guy's My Heart is My Own: The Life of Mary Queen of Scots "an impressive and readable piece of scholarship, which cannot fail but leave the reader moved and intrigued by this most tragic and likeable of queens". Guy has published many histories, including one of Tudor England. He is a fellow at Clare College, Cambridge and became a honorary research professor of the University of St Andrews in 2003.
The other contenders include Susan Fletcher for Eve Green, which won the first novel prize. Fletcher has recently graduated from the University of East Anglia's creative writing course. The fourth book in the running is Corpus, Michael Symmons Roberts' fourth collection of poems. As well as writing poetry, Symmons Roberts also makes documentary films. Geraldine McCaughrean is the final contender, having won the children's fiction category for the third time for Not the End of the World. McCaughrean, who went into magazine publishing after studying teaching, previously won the category in 1987 with A Little Lower than Angels and in 1994 with Gold Dust.

Indian film director Mira Nair has said she was thrilled to be given the chance to make William Makepeace Thackeray's novel Vanity Fair - as the book has been a favourite through her life.
The book is one of the classics of English literature - the story of scheming 19th Century social climber Becky Sharp, played in the film by Reese Witherspoon. Nair said that she jumped at the chance to work on the film, which she has - controversially - made in a Bollywood style, including two song-and-dance routines in the film's second half. "It was serendipity really - I was offered Vanity Fair by the studio Focus Features, who had distributed Monsoon Wedding," Nair told BBC World Service's Masterpiece programme. "They offered me their next-best thing, not realising that Vanity Fair had actually been one of my favourite novels since I was 16 years old in an Irish Catholic boarding school in India."
Since her 1988 debut feature Salaam Bombay! - nominated for the Best Foreign Language Oscar and winner of Best First Feature at Cannes - Nair has become one of India's most famous and respected directors. She is not restricted to Bollywood, however - she followed Salaam Bombay! with Mississippi Masala, starring Denzel Washington, and The Perez Family, her first Hollywood film.
Her career peaked with Monsoon Wedding in 2001, which won the Golden Lion award at Venice. Nair's Indian-style adaptation of Vanity Fair, however, has been attacked by critics in the US - where it only reached number eight at the box office in its opening week - who described the Bollywood elements as "jarring." The film has a new ending, with Becky Sharp running off for a new life in India. But Nair said that her film had picked up on the way Thackeray - who was born in India but moved to England as a young man - had seen the world. "First, when I was 16, it was Becky Sharp, who is a completely memorable character, because I recognised myself in her - I recognised all the ladies who did not want to be ladies, who wanted to buck the system that they were in," she said. "But it was the sort of novel I somehow kept at the side of my bed for many years, and I would dip into every now and then and suddenly get completely mesmerised again. "As I got older and read it, I think it was Thackeray's clarity - his clear-sightedness about his own society, the fact that he was born in India but came to England as a young man - that gave him the eyes of an outsider, and yet he was an insider. "That perspective was something I really loved."
Nair also defended her decision to cast an American actress - Reese Witherspoon - as Becky Sharp, despite the fact that all the rest of the cast are British or Irish. "I cast intuitively - in my films I cast as many non-actors as I cast actors," she said. "For me, it is intuition - I have to fall in love with an actor. It is a visceral response.
"Thackeray describes Becky Sharp as a minx. Also she's described as someone who's tiny, red-headed and thin. Reese had that completely minx-like irresistibility about her." Having won the role because she seemed physically perfectly suited to the part, however, Witherspoon then became pregnant. But Nair said that, though this had created the need for some filming tricks, it had in fact also helped the film. "It was a self-fulfilling prophesy - when I first met her husband [actor Ryan Philippe], I said 'knock her up, won't you, I need some flesh on the girl'," she joked. "I'm not a fan of the underfed Los Angeles actor at all. This was, for me, about Becky Sharp being, eventually, a full-blown woman through the course of the film. "I love the luminosity that pregnancy brings, I love the fleshiness, I love the ample bosom - it gave me much more to play with." Nair explained how camera tricks had been used to disguise Witherspoon's "bump" in various scenes - including hiring a number of young boys in costumes to stand in front of her. "She runs, she gets off coal carts, she jumps off horses - she does everything," Nair said. "But there's also a certain carriage with horses that is going to wipe the screen at a certain moment, because of the bump."

The comedy Sideways has dominated this year's Independent Spirit Awards, winning all six of the awards for which it was nominated.
It was named best film while Alexander Payne won best director and best screenplay, along with writing partner Jim Taylor. It also won acting awards for stars Paul Giamatti, Thomas Haden Church and Virginia Madsen. Sideways is tipped to do well at Sunday's Oscars, with five nominations.
The awards, now in their 20th year, are given to films made outside the traditional studio system, and are traditionally held the day before the Oscars. Other winners included Catalina Sandino Moreno, who took best actress for her role as a drug smuggler in the Colombian drama Maria Full of Grace. Moreno is also nominated for best actress at the Oscars. The best first screenplay award went to Joshua Marston for Maria Full of Grace. Scrubs star Zach Braff won the award for best first feature for Garden State, which he wrote, directed and starred in. Oscar-nominated euthanasia film The Sea Inside from Spain won best foreign film, while Metallica: Some Kind Of Monster was awarded best documentary. Actor Rodrigo de la Serna took the best debut performance prize for The Motorcycle Diaries. The awards are voted for by the 9,000 members of the Independent Feature Project/Los Angeles, which includes actors, directors, writers and other industry professionals. Last year's big winner, Lost In Translation, went on to win the Oscar for best original screenplay, for writer-director Sofia Coppola.

Tautou film tops Cesar prize nods
French film A Very Long Engagement has received 12 nominations for France's Cesar film awards, despite a recent ruling it was "not French enough".
The World War I romantic drama starring Audrey Tautou, was recently ruled "too American" by a Paris court as it was partially backed by Warner Bros. But the Cesar organisers modified their rules to allow the film to compete. The film, directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet, received best actress, picture and director nominations.
Last November a court judged the film was too American to compete in French film festivals. Two associations of French producers challenged Jeunet's right to French government subsidies, because Warner Bros was a backer. The ruling meant the movie - which was filmed in France and used French actors and technicians - was not eligible to compete for French prizes. But Alain Terzian, president of Cesar organisers, the Academie des Arts et Techniques du Cinema, said the changes in eligibility rules, which allow films "of French expression", were made three months prior to the court decision. Other films in the best film category include Police drama 36, Quai Des Orfevres, Arnaud Desplechin's Kings And Queen, Abdellatif Kechiche's L'Esquive and France's number one film at the 2004 box-office The Chorus.
Best actors are Daniel Auteuil for 36, Mathieu Amalric for Kings And Queen, Gerard Jugnot for The Chorus, Philippe Torreton for L'Equipier and Benoit Poelvoorde for Podium. Tautou will compete against Maggie Cheung , Emmanuelle Devos, Yolande Moreau and Karin Viard for best actress. Michael Moore's Fahrenheit 9/11, The Motorcycle Diaries, Lost in Translation, Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and 21 Grams are all vying in the best foreign film prize. The awards ceremony will be held on 26 February. This year, Will Smith, star of I, Robot, Independence Day and Men In Black, will be given an honorary Cesar, along with French singer/actor, Jacques Dutronc.

Hollywood ready for Oscars night
Hollywood is preparing for the biggest night in the film world's calendar, the 77th Academy Awards, on Sunday.
A host of stars are expected to grace the red carpet outside Los Angeles' Kodak Theatre, including Johnny Depp, Cate Blanchett and Leonardo DiCaprio. British actors in attendance include nominees Clive Owen, Imelda Staunton, Kate Winslet and director Mike Leigh. The Aviator leads the shortlist, but critics believe the night may belong to Clint Eastwood's Million Dollar Baby. A recent poll of US pundits found Eastwood's boxing drama had become the new favourite to win best film over the Howard Hughes biopic.
If the 74-year-old does win, he will become the oldest person ever to be named best director at the ceremony. UK critics still favour The Aviator for best film, but believe the best director title will generate a close fought battle between Eastwood and Martin Scorsese.
Scorsese has never won the best director prize, despite four previous nominations for films including Raging Bull, Goodfellas and Gangs of New York. Eastwood has won best director once before, for Unforgiven in 1993. Most experts predict the twice-nominated Jamie Foxx will win best actor for his portrayal of singer Ray Charles, while Vera Drake star Imelda Staunton looks likely to lose out in the best actress field to Hilary Swank in Million Dollar Baby. The UK's highest hopes remain with Clive Owen, who has scooped both the Golden Globe and the Bafta for his supporting role in Closer. Actor and comedian Chris Rock will host the event, which will be broadcast with a seven-second time delay to allow censors to cut out any unsuitable content.
"We have the bleep machine ready, but bleeps will be used as needed," producer Gil Cates told reporters. However, he added that he strongly disapproved of the growing tendency to censor live broadcasts on US TV.
He also played down fears that Rock, who is known for using strong language in his stand-up routines, might cause controversy on the night. The 40-year-old comic has already promised not to swear live on air during the show. "Chris has a sense of humour and everything he says is really said humorously," Cates said. "You need a movie star and someone who is a stand-up comic so they can deal with the vicissitudes of the show." Security will also be tight, with police employing a system to detect sarin nerve gas. "We are pulling out all the stops," said John Miller, chief of counterterrorism at the Los Angeles Police Department. The show is "a symbol of American culture and has the potential to be a high-visibility target," he added. Meanwhile, organisers have erected a canopy over the red carpet following an outbreak of torrential rain in Los Angeles over the past week. Cates said the covers would be removed if the threat of wet weather receded. Details have also emerged of the contents of this year's gift bags, which are given to nominees and presenters on the night. This year's bags will include a gift certificate for a luxury beach resort, a pair of mink eyelashes and a kitchen set with a year's supply of tea and coffee. The event will be televised by the ABC network from 1700 local time (0100 GMT), and on Sky Movies in the UK from 0130 GMT.

Animation charms Japan box office
Oscar-winning director Hayao Miyazaki's latest film has set a new Japanese box office record, with 1.5bn yen ($14.3m) in two days, according to reports.
Howl's Moving Castle is the follow-up to Miyazaki's Spirited Away, which won best animation at last year's Oscars. It is based on the children's book by English writer Diana Wynne Jones. It has registered the highest opening weekend takings of any Japanese film in the country, according to trade publication Screen Daily.
The film is about an 18-year-old girl who is trapped in an old woman's body after being put under a spell by a witch. Its two-day takings represented 1.1 million cinema admissions, Screen Daily said. The film's distributor Toho expects 40 million people to see it in total - almost one third of the country's population - it added. The film won the Golden Osella for outstanding technical contribution at this year's Venice Film Festival.

US box office set for record high
Ticket sales at the US box office are predicted to break records this year, with figures expected to reach $9.4 billion, beating 2002's all-time high.
Overall figures could be dampened by the lack of a Christmas hit like last year's Oscar-winning Lord of the Rings. Traditionally, ticket sales during the festive season account for 20% of the annual total. Although admissions have actually fallen this year, the predicted high is down to increasing ticket prices. According to Exhibitor Relations President Paul Dergarabedian, the average cost of a cinema ticket could be as high as $6.25 in 2004, compared to $5.80 in 2002. This year some of the biggest hits such as The Passion of the Christ and Fahrenheit 9/11 came from outside the major studios which are usually responsible for the key blockbusters.
"Many of the films that did well (with audiences) are not necessarily the films that made a lot of money," said Mr Dergarabedian. He added that surprise hits had come from some of the more art-house offerings such as Napoleon Dynamite and critical hit Sideways. Sony Pictures, responsible for hits like Spiderman 2 and The Grudge, are expected to top domestic market share for the second time in three years, with $1 billion-plus in sales for the third consecutive year. Sony Pictures Entertainment vice chairman. Jeff Blake said: "We had a really diverse slate this year, and... certainly we pulled off one of the surprises with Grudge." Horror movie The Grudge cost Sony $10 million to make but brought in $110 million. It's the latest in a recent trend for Hollywood studios to back the upper and lower ends of the market, whilst ignoring the middle. Warner Inc are likely to end the year in second place on market share with around $1.25 billion, with Disney at number three.

A film that follows a group of alienated youth in a Paris suburb as they prepare to perform an 18th Century play has won France's top cinema award.
L'Esquive earned a Cesar prize for its director, Tunisian-born Abdellatif Kechiche, and its young star, the 18-year-old actress Sara Forestier. It saw off competition from big-budget French epic, A Very Long Engagement, and the box-office hit, The Chorus. US film Lost in Translation won the award for best foreign feature. The wistful romantic comedy directed by Sofia Coppola has already won several awards, including an Oscar for best screenplay in 2004. Its late release in France made it a contender for this year's Cesars.
The low-budget L'Esquive depicts the travails of a group of youth getting ready to perform a school play by the 18th-Century dramatist, Marivaux. The actors are mostly amateurs and the action is set in the impoverished suburbs of Paris, home to thousands of immigrants from North Africa and their children. Kechiche said he made the film because he "wanted to show people we don't normally see at the cinema". A Very Long Engagement, a World War I drama featuring Audrey Tautou, won five Cesar awards. The Chorus, a film about a schoolteacher who introduces an unruly classroom to the pleasures of classical singing, won two awards - for best music and best sound. US actor Will Smith, who won an honorary award at the ceremony, thanked his family and his "hero", Nelson Mandela, in his speech.

Tautou 'to star in Da Vinci film'
French actress Audrey Tautou, star of hit film Amelie, will play the female lead in the film adaptation of The Da Vinci Code, it has been reported.
The movie version of Dan Brown's best-selling novel is being directed by Ron Howard and also stars Tom Hanks. Tautou will play Hanks' code-cracking partner, according to various newspapers. She is currently starring in A Very Long Engagement, directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet. Jeunet was also responsible for directing Tautou in Amelie in 2001, which launched the actress into the mainstream.
She also starred as the lead role in critically-acclaimed film Dirty Pretty Things in 2002. Oscar-winning director Ron Howard chose Tautou for the part, preferring a French actress to a big name Hollywood star. UK actress Kate Beckinsale had been widely tipped as a possibility for the role alongside Vanessa Paradis and Juliette Binoche. The thriller upon which the movie is based has sold more than 17 million copies and is centred on a global conspiracy surrounding the Holy Grail mythology. The Louvre Museum, scene of the gruesome murder at the beginning of the novel, recently gave permission for filming to take place there, showbusiness newspaper Variety reported. The $100m movie will be produced by Columbia/Sony Pictures and is due for release on May 19, 2006 in the United States and France.

Foxx and Swank take actors awards
Jamie Foxx and Hilary Swank have won the Screen Actors Guild Awards for best male and female film actors, boosting their Oscars hopes this month.
Foxx's portrayal of late soul-singer Ray Charles in Ray had already earned him a prestigious Golden Globe award. Swank triumphed for playing a gutsy female boxer in Million Dollar Baby. Modest wine country comedy Sideways knocked out favourites Million Dollar Baby and The Aviator by taking the top prize for best cast performance.
The Screen Actors Guild (SAG) represents US film and TV actors. Its winners often go on to win Oscars. In other nominations, Cate Blanchett triumphed as the best supporting actress for her role as Katharine Hepburn in The Aviator. Veteran actor Morgan Freeman took the best supporting actor award for playing a prize-fighter turned gym manager in Million Dollar Baby.
"Thank you for Ray Charles for just living so complex and so interesting, and making us all just come together," said Foxx, accepting his award in Los Angeles on Saturday.
He also praised the film director: "Thank you for Taylor Hackford for taking a chance with an African-American film. Taylor, you're my director of the year." Swank, too, was full of praise for her director and co-star Clint Eastwood. "I bow down to you," Swank said to the 74-year-old Eastwood. "You are a talent beyond compare. If I'm half the person you are and half the talent you are when I'm 74, I will know that I've accomplished something great."
Both Foxx and Swank are now considered to be among the favourites to get Oscars - the Hollywood's ultimate prize. However, Swank has to overcome a strong challenge from Annette Bening, a nominee for the theatre farce Being Julia. Meanwhile, ballots for Oscars - the Hollywood's top honours - were mailed earlier this week to members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. The voting is due to end on 22 February - five days before the ceremony.

Children vote Shrek 2 best film
Young UK film fans voted animated Hollywood hit Shrek 2 best film at the children's Bafta awards on Sunday.
More than 6,000 children voted in the only category chosen by fans. Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, runner-up in the poll, was the choice of the Bafta experts who named it best feature film. BBC One Saturday morning show Dick and Dom In Da Bungalow won two awards - best entertainment and best presenters for Richard McCourt and Dominic Wood.
Former Playschool presenter Floella Benjamin was awarded the Special Award for outstanding creative contribution to children's film and television. She first appeared on Playschool 25 years ago and was made an OBE in 2001 for services to broadcasting. South American-themed cartoon Joko! Jakamoko! Toto! won the honour for pre-school animation and its writer Tony Collingwood for original writer. Debbie Isitt won the award for best adapted writer for her work with Jacqueline Wilson's The Illustrated Mum, which won the award for best schools drama.
Schools' Factual (primary) - Thinking Skills: Think About It - Hiding Places
Schools' Factual (secondary) - In Search of the Tartan Turban
Pre-School Live Action - Balamory
Factual - Serious Desert Interactive Bafta - King Arthur International category - 8 Simple Rules for Dating my Teenage Daughter

West End to honour finest shows
The West End is honouring its finest stars and shows at the Evening Standard Theatre Awards in London on Monday.
The Producers, starring Nathan Lane and Lee Evans, is up for best musical at the ceremony at the National Theatre. It is competing against Sweeney Todd and A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum for the award. The Goat or Who is Sylvia? by Edward Albee, The Pillowman by Martin McDonagh and Alan Bennett's The History Boys are shortlisted in the best play category.
Pam Ferris, Victoria Hamilton and Kelly Reilly are nominated for best actress. Ferris - best known for her television roles in programmes such as The Darling Buds of May - has made the shortlist for her role in Notes on Falling Leaves, at the Royal Court Theatre. Meanwhile, Richard Griffiths, who plays Hector in The History Boys at the National Theatre, will battle it out for the best actor award with Douglas Hodge (Dumb Show) and Stanley Townsend (Shining City). The best director shortlist includes Luc Bondy for Cruel and Tender, Simon McBurney for Measure for Measure, and Rufus Norris for Festen.
Festen is also shortlisted in the best designer category where Ian MacNeil, Jean Kalman and Paul Arditti will be up against Hildegard Bechtler, for Iphigenia at Aulis, and Paul Brown, for False Servant. The Milton Shulman Award for outstanding newcomer will be presented to Dominic Cooper (His Dark Materials and The History Boys), Romola Garai (Calico), Eddie Redmayne (The Goat, or Who is Sylvia?) or Ben Wishaw (Hamlet). And playwrights David Eldridge, Rebecca Lenkiewicz and Owen McCafferty will fight it out for The Charles Wintour Award and a £30,000 bursary. Three 50th Anniversary Special Awards will also be presented to an institution, a playwright and an individual.

UK debut for Kevin Spacey movie
Hollywood stars Kevin Spacey and Kate Bosworth attended the British premiere of new film, Beyond the Sea, in London's Leicester Square on Thursday.
Spacey, 45, wrote, directed and starred in the film, inspired by the life of 1950s croooner Bobby Darin. "This is my tribute to someone I think was a remarkable talent," said Spacey, who, as Darin, sings all 18 songs on the film soundtrack. Bosworth, 21, plays Darin's wife - real life Hollywood actress Sandra Dee. "I knew absolutely nothing about Bobby Darin before this film, but now I'm a huge fan," said Bosworth, who attended the premiere with British boyfriend Orlando Bloom.
"There is darkness and tragedy in the story, and it was a dream for me to land this part." Actress Sandra Dee continues to live in Los Angeles as a virtual recluse, but has given her approval to the biopic.
"She called me last week and said she loved it," said Spacey, who was joined at the premiere by members of the boy band Westlife. Spacey, a double Oscar-winner, has long been fascinated by the story of singer Bobby Darin. The voice behind Mack the Knife, Dream Lover and Beyond the Sea, fought childhood illness to become one the biggest stars of the 1950s, but died aged 37 from the heart condition that had troubled him all his life. "Bobby Darin was one of the greatest entertainers the world has ever known, and yet, because he died young, he's been kind of forgotten," said Spacey at the premiere. "Making this film was the most fun I've ever had in my entire life." The movie also stars British actors Bob Hoskins and Brenda Blethyn, as Darin's mother.

Box office blow for Alexander
Director Oliver Stone's historical epic Alexander has failed in its bid to conquer the box office, entering the US film charts at number six.
The swords and sandals blockbuster, rumoured to have cost more than $150m (£79m) to make, earned just $13.5 (£7m) over three days at the US box office. Due to the Thanksgiving holiday, the film opened on Wednesday, bringing its total takings to $21.6m (£11.4m). Top of the box office for a second week was action movie National Treasure. The family adventure, starring Nicolas Cage, took $33.1m (£17.m), ahead of animated comedy The Incredibles - now in its fourth week in the charts - which took $24.1m (£12.7m).
Last week Oliver Stone's film met with scathing reviews from US critics. The film stars Irish actor Colin Farrell as one of history's most celebrated leaders - a relentless and arrogant warrior who conquered much of the known world by the age of 25. In particular, its portrayal of Alexander as a bisexual has met with a hostile reception and the threat of legal action from Greek lawyers. "Though the battles have the blood-and-sinew bravado you expect from Oliver Stone, this three-hour buttnumbathon is hamstrung by a hectoring grandiosity," wrote one reviewer in Rolling Stone magazine. Others poured scorn on Farrell's bleached hair and Angelina Jolie's unwieldy accent, which Variety called "a combination of Mata Hari and Count Dracula" . But novelist Gore Vidal defended the film, saying it was "barrier-breaking" for its frank depiction of bisexuality.
In Sweden last Thursday, to pick up a lifetime achievement award at the Stockholm International Film Festival, Stone expressed the hope that Alexander might be better appreciated in Europe. "One of the reasons I am being honoured here is Europeans tend to see me a little differently than they do in the US," said the director behind JFK, Platoon and Born on the Fourth of July. He added Alexander "was not an easy movie, but then I've never made easy movies".

Ray DVD beats box office takings
Oscar-nominated film biopic Ray has surpassed its US box office takings with a combined tally of $80m (£43m) from DVD and video sales and rentals.
Ray's success on DVD outstripped its $74m (£40m) US box office total, earning more than $40m (£22m) on the first day of the DVD's release alone. Ray has been nominated in six Oscar categories including best film and best actor for Jamie Foxx. The film recounts the life of blues singer Ray Charles, who died in 2004. In its first week on home entertainment release the film was the number one selling DVD, with the limited edition version coming in at number 11. Sony horror film The Grudge, starring Michelle Gellar, was the US' second best-selling DVD, with Jennifer Lopez and Richard Gere's romantic comedy Shall We Dance? at number three. Foxx's critically acclaimed performance as Ray has already earned him a Screen Actors Guild Award for best actor, as well as a prestigious Golden Globe. Ray director Taylor Hackford, responsible for the classic 1982 film An Officer and a Gentleman, has also received an Oscar nomination in the best director category. The film's three other Oscar nominations are for costume, film editing and sound mixing.

Ocean's Twelve raids box office
Ocean's Twelve, the crime caper sequel starring George Clooney, Brad Pitt and Julia Roberts, has gone straight to number one in the US box office chart.
It took $40.8m (£21m) in weekend ticket sales, according to studio estimates. The sequel follows the master criminals as they try to pull off three major heists across Europe. It knocked last week's number one, National Treasure, into third place. Wesley Snipes' Blade: Trinity was in second, taking $16.1m (£8.4m). Rounding out the top five was animated fable The Polar Express, starring Tom Hanks, and festive comedy Christmas with the Kranks.
Ocean's Twelve box office triumph marks the fourth-biggest opening for a December release in the US, after the three films in the Lord of the Rings trilogy. The sequel narrowly beat its 2001 predecessor, Ocean's Eleven which took $38.1m (£19.8m) on its opening weekend and $184m (£95.8m) in total. A remake of the 1960s film, starring Frank Sinatra and the Rat Pack, Ocean's Eleven was directed by Oscar-winning director Steven Soderbergh. Soderbergh returns to direct the hit sequel which reunites Clooney, Pitt and Roberts with Matt Damon, Andy Garcia and Elliott Gould. Catherine Zeta-Jones joins the all-star cast. "It's just a fun, good holiday movie," said Dan Fellman, president of distribution at Warner Bros. However, US critics were less complimentary about the $110m (£57.2m) project, with the Los Angeles Times labelling it a "dispiriting vanity project". A milder review in the New York Times dubbed the sequel "unabashedly trivial".

Mike Leigh's award-winning abortion drama Vera Drake has scooped seven nominations at this year's British Independent Film Awards.
But the Venice winner faces stiff competition from Shane Meadows' critically acclaimed Dead Man's Shoes, which received eight nominations. Also in the running for a clutch of awards are My Summer of Love and the stalker drama Enduring Love. The winners will be announced at a ceremony in London on 30 November. The winners of the awards will be chosen by a jury chaired by Cold Mountain director Anthony Minghella and including actresses Cate Blanchett and Helena Bonham-Carter.
The awards, which recognise independent film-making in Britain, were established seven years ago. "This year's nominees reflect the growing strength and diversity of British independent filmmaking," said BIFA founder and director Elliot Grove. Commenting on the diversity of the nominated films, he added: "Our selection committee had a harder time than ever narrowing down the field."
Joining Vera Drake and Dead Man's Shoes in the running for best film are My Summer of Love, climbing documentary Touching the Void and zombie comedy Shaun of the Dead. Geoffrey Rush wins a best actor nomination for his role as Peter Sellers in the recent biopic The Life & Death of Peter Sellers.
The Australian star faces competition from Daniel Craig (Enduring Love), Phil Davis (Vera Drake), Ian Hart (Blind Fight) and Dead Man's Shoes' star Paddy Considine. Considine is also nominated for a best supporting actor award for My Summer of Love. A rare US nominee, Scarlett Johansson, is among this year's best actress contenders for her role in Girl with a Pearl Earring.
Fellow nominees include Imelda Staunton (Vera Drake), Natalie Press (My Summer of Love), Anne Reid (The Mother) and Eva Birthistle (Ae Fond Kiss... ). Shane Meadows and Kevin McDonald, both former winners of the Douglas Hickox Award (for Best Directorial Debut) won best director nominations. Seasoned film-makers Roger Michell, Mike Leigh and Pavel Pavlikowsky challenge them to the award. Harry Potter author JK Rowling will receive a special award for her contribution to the industry.

Fockers fuel festive film chart
Comedy Meet The Fockers topped the festive box office in North America, setting a new record for Christmas Day.
The sequel took $44.7m (£23.2m) between 24 and 26 December, according to studio estimates. It took $19.1m (£9.9m) on Christmas Day alone, the highest takings on that day in box office history. Meet The Fockers is the sequel to Ben Stiller comedy Meet The Parents, also starring Robert De Niro, Blythe Danner, Dustin Hoffman and Barbra Streisand. Despite the success of Meet The Fockers, takings were down 26.5% on 2003's figures - which was blamed on Christmas falling over a weekend this year.
"When Christmas falls on a weekend, it's bad for business," said Paul Dergarabedian, president of Exhibitor Relations, which compiles box office statistics. The weekend's top 12 films took an estimated $121.9m (£63.3m), compared with $165.8m (£86.1m) last year, when the third Lord of the Rings film dominated the box office. Meet The Fockers knocked last week's top film, Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events, down to third place, with $12.5m (£6.5m). Comedy Fat Albert - co-written by Bill Cosby - entered the chart in second place after opening on Christmas Day, taking $12.7m (£6.6m). The Aviator, starring Leonardo DiCaprio as Howard Hughes, took $9.4m after expanding from 40 to 1,796 cinemas on Christmas Day.

It's a universal rule that a film can either be a superhero special effects extravaganza or it can be good. But Spider-Man 2 breaks that rule in two.
It's not fantastically deep but you get quickly drawn into the tale of Spidey versus Doc Ock and more so into the fate of poor Peter Parker. Gigantic action set pieces seamlessly work with more brooding personal torment and it all looks stunning. A few effects look false but Tobey Maguire, Kirsten Dunst and Alfred Molina make this compelling. The other universal rule is that DVDs of superhero films will have Making Of features only about the effects. This disc covers those special effects enough but as just one part of a detailed look at the film. Then there are commentaries, trailers and a blooper reel.
Sometimes quality comes in bulk: this set contains no less than 34 John Wayne films ranging from the Westerns and war movies to The Quiet Man.
Now is that a Christmas present or what? Give this to someone on 24 December and you won't see them again until early in the New Year. It's not truly a complete collection and leans more toward Wayne's earlier films: there's no True Grit, for instance, though there is Hellraisers. The films look well transferred to DVD, though none has extras.
It was very daft but it knew it was and somehow this famous 1979 series became a cult favourite that's been long awaited on DVD. This set has the first season of Buck (Gil Gerard) and Wilma's (Erin Gray) tongue-in-cheek adventures and it's all as camp and gaudy as you remember. But it's also a disappointment. The US DVD has this and the more po-faced second season - and you can import it for just about the same price. The bigger omission, though, is that there are no extras. That's particularly disappointing because originally there were meant to be commentaries and stars Gerard and Gray had agreed to do them.

Baby becomes new Oscar favourite
Clint Eastwood's boxing drama Million Dollar Baby has become the new favourite to win best picture at the Oscars on Sunday.
According to pundits, the film has overtaken previous favourite The Aviator, with Eastwood also tipped to take the best director award. Its star Hilary Swank is favourite to win best actress while Jamie Foxx is tipped to win best actor for Ray. Million Dollar Baby has seven nominations while The Aviator has 11. The Aviator has scored a best director nomination for Martin Scorsese, who has never won an Oscar, while stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Cate Blanchett are both nominated for acting Oscars.
"If you look at the Oscars race, The Aviator should be ahead," said awards pundit Tom O'Neil. "It is the most nominated film, and the most nominated movie has won best picture 18 times out of the last 20 years. "But the reality is Million Dollar Baby is the dark horse. People feel emotionally about it and Clint is a beloved Hollywood chum of the Academy voters," he said. Anne Thompson of the Hollywood Reporter said that Million Dollar Baby was "heart-wrenching". "It's very emotional, it even makes grown men cry," she said. "The Aviator is a gorgeous movie, but it's colder."
In the acting categories, Foxx is regarded as almost unbeatable for his performance as Ray Charles in Ray. "The performance is based on a real person who was a showbusiness hero with a handicap, who recently died," O'Neil said. "He has unstoppable momentum among the voters." Hilary Swank is the favourite to win best actress for the second time in six years. She previously won in 1999 for her performance in Boys Don't Cry. In the supporting categories, Cate Blanchett is tipped to win for her performance as Katharine Hepburn in The Aviator, while Morgan Freeman is favourite to take home his first ever Oscar, for Million Dollar Baby. The Oscars will take place at Hollywood's Kodak Theatre on 27 February.

Russian film wins BBC world prize
Russian drama The Return (Vozvrashchenie) has been named winner of the BBC Four World Cinema Award.
The film tells the story of two adolescent boys who are subjected to a harsh regime when their strict father returns after a 10-year absence. Directed by Andrey Zvyagintsev, The Return previously won the 2003 Golden Lion award at the Venice Film Festival. The prize was presented at an awards ceremony held in London on Thursday and hosted by Jonathan Ross. The winner was chosen by a panel which included X Files actress Gillian Anderson, critic Roger Clarke and Touching the Void director Kevin McDonald.
Ross, who is the presenter of BBC One's Film 2005, was also involved in the deliberations. A shortlist of six films from around the world had been drawn up from which the panel chose. Other nominees included the Motorcycle Diaries, Zatoichi and Hero. A viewer poll saw director Zhang Yimou's martial arts epic Hero emerge as the favourite with 32% of votes cast. Tragedy struck the production of The Return when one of the young stars, 15-year-old Vladimir Girin, drowned in a lake where some of the film's scenes were set. The winner of the World Cinema Award last year was the French animated feature Belleville Rendezvous

US TV cuts nudity from BBC film
A US TV network is editing BBC Films' Dirty War to avoid showing the front of a nude woman being scrubbed down after a fictional chemical attack.
It is not worth showing "non-essential" nude scenes when indecency complaints are "aggressively pursued" by US TV watchdogs, said PBS' Jacoba Atlas. Dirty War - screened uncut on BBC One last September - depicts a dirty bomb attack on the City of London. It is also being screened uncut on US cable channel HBO on 24 January. PBS said it will use extra footage for its broadcast, showing the woman "from a more discreet angle" instead.
The US Federal Communications Commission fined CBS $550,000 (£306,814) last autumn for singer Janet Jackson's "wardrobe malfunction", during which her breast was exposed during a dance routine with Justin Timberlake. Many US networks and broadcasters are now more nervous about airing nudity, violence or bad language. Ms Atlas said PBS could put itself financially at risk if it showed the uncut version of Dirty War, and it could also deter many of its 170 individual stations from airing "an important film". "You want to pick your battles," she said. She added that PBS, which is a private, non-profit media enterprise owned and operated by the nation's 349 public television stations, is bolder about screening non-fiction or historical programming. PBS is seen in virtually all US homes with TV, and describes itself as a "trusted community resource" serving nearly 100 million people each week.

Da Vinci Code is 'lousy history'
The plot of an international bestseller that thousands of readers are likely to receive as a Christmas present is 'laughable', a clergyman has said.
The Da Vinci Code claims Jesus was not crucified, but married Mary Magdalene and died a normal death. It claims this was later covered up by the Church. The Bishop of Durham, the Rt Rev Dr Tom Wright, described the novel as a "great thriller" but "lousy history". The book has sold more than seven million copies worldwide. Despite enjoying Dan Brown's conspiracy theory, the Bishop said there was a lack of evidence to back up its claims.
Writing his Christmas message in the Northern Echo, the Bishop said: "Conspiracy theories are always fun - fun to invent, fun to read, fun to fantasise about. "Dan Brown is the best writer I've come across in the genre, but anyone who knows anything about 1st century history will see that this underlying material is laughable." A great deal of credible evidence proves the Biblical version of Jesus' life was true, according to the Bishop. "The evidence for Jesus and the origins of Christianity is astonishingly good," he said. "We have literally a hundred times more early manuscripts for the gospels and letters in the New Testament than we have for the main classical authors like Cicero, Virgil and Tacitus.
"Historical research shows that they present a coherent and thoroughly credible picture of Jesus, with all sorts of incidental details that fit the time when he lived, and don't fit the world of later legend." Brown's book has become a publishing phenomenon, consistently topping book charts in the UK and US. The Da Vinci Code has been translated into 42 languages and has spawned its own cottage industry of publications, including guides on to how to read the book, rebuttals and counter claims. The book, which has become an international best-seller in little over two years, is set to be made into a film starring Tom Hanks.

Oscars race enters final furlong
The race for the Oscars entered its final stages as the deadline for voters to choose their winners passed.
The 5,808 Academy voters had until Tuesday afternoon to return their ballots - any late submissions will not be included in the count. The next five days will be spent counting the voting forms and preparing the winners' envelopes. Best actor nominee Leonardo DiCaprio is to present a statuette for the first time at the LA ceremony on Sunday.
The 30-year-old actor, who is nominated for playing Howard Hughes in The Aviator, will join other hopefuls such as co-star Cate Blanchett, Natalie Portman and Kate Winslet as Oscar presenters. The only people who will know the Oscar winners before they are revealed at the ceremony will be the auditors who are in charge of looking after the ballot count.
After collating the results, they are responsible for sealing the results in the famous golden envelopes which will be revealed by a host of celebrity presenters at the ceremony. Former Academy Award winners Gwyneth Paltrow, Dustin Hoffman and Halle Berry will also present prizes. The event at the Kodak Theatre will be attended by 3,300 people, including some of the best-known names in film, and organisers say they expect it will be watched on television by one billion people around the world. One current concern is the torrential rain which has lashed Los Angeles for the past week, flooding suburbs and causing mudslides. It is hoped the forecast for Sunday, for cool weather but no rain, will prove accurate. "The last time it rained on Oscars night was in the mid-to-late 1980s," said Oscars communications director John Pavlik. "We have had rain up until the day before the show many times, but for some reason the Oscar gods always shine on Sunday and we hope they will do so again this year," he added.

Aviator 'creator' in Oscars snub
The man who said he got Oscar-nominated movie The Aviator off the ground and signed up Leonardo DiCaprio has been shut out of the Academy Awards race.
Charles Evans Jr battled over his role with the people who eventually made the film, and won a producer's credit. But he is not on the list of producers who can win a best film Oscar due to a limit on the number of nominees. The Oscars organisers have picked two of The Aviator's four producers to be nominated for best film.
Up to three producers can be named per film but the studios behind The Aviator and Million Dollar Baby failed to trim their credits - so the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences (Ampas) has done it for them. The Aviator's nominated producers are Michael Mann and Graham King - with Mr Evans and Sandy Climan, Mr Mann's former deputy, left off. Mr Evans sued Mr Mann in 2001, claiming he came up with the idea, spent years developing it and persuaded DiCaprio to play Hughes - but said he was later excluded from the project. The two sides settled out of court in a deal that has remained secret apart from the fact Mr Evans' name has appeared as a producer when the film's credits roll. At the Golden Globes, Mr Evans - who was named among the winners when the film won best drama film - evaded a security guard to have his photo taken with DiCaprio, director Martin Scorsese, Mr Mann and Mr King.
Ampas decided to limit the number of producers who could be nominated after Shakespeare in Love's victory in 1999 saw five producers collect awards. The eligible names for The Aviator and Million Dollar Baby were decided by Ampas' producers branch executive committee on Wednesday. The decision also saw Clint Eastwood get his third personal nomination for Million Dollar Baby. He is now named in the best film category as well as being nominated for best director and best lead actor. The Academy Awards ceremony will be held in Hollywood on 27 February. Chinese actress Ziyi Zhang, star of Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, Hero and House of Flying Daggers, is the latest name to be added to the list of presenters on the night.

Cage film's third week at US top
Nicolas Cage movie National Treasure has topped the US and Canada box office for the third week in a row.
National Treasure made $17.1m (£8.8m) in ticket sales from Friday to Sunday, according to studio estimates, taking its total to $110.2m (£56.7m). Comedy Christmas with the Kranks, starring Tim Allen and Jamie Lee Curtis, was in second place. The Polar Express entered in third place while Jude Law film Closer made its debut at number six.
Oliver Stone's big-budget epic Alexander, starring Colin Farrell, followed last week's disappointing sixth-place opening with a slump to seventh place and takings of $4.7m (£2.4m). Critics have savaged the three-hour epic, which reportedly cost $150m (£77m) to make. National Treasure, which sees Cage's character Ben Gates chase a hidden fortune, has been made by Disney Studios. It is Cage's fourth collaboration with Jerry Bruckheimer, who is usually noted for his male-orientated action films.

Oscar nominees gear up for lunch
Leonardo DiCaprio, Jamie Foxx and Hilary Swank are among those due to attend this year's Oscar nominees luncheon on Monday.
They will join more than 100 nominees from the 24 Oscar categories at the annual event, which will take place at the Beverly Hilton hotel, Los Angeles. British hopefuls, including Kate Winslet, Imelda Staunton and Sophie Okonedo are also expected to attend. This year's Oscar ceremony will be held on Sunday 27 February.
Martin Scorsese's The Aviator is leading the field at this year's Oscars with 11 nominations, while other multiple nominees include Million Dollar Baby and Sideways. Oscar nominees Swank and Foxx were among the winners at the Screen Actors Guild awards at the weekend, one of the many ceremonies held in the run-up to the Oscars. Swank won Best Actress for Million Dollar Baby while Foxx triumphed for his performance as Ray Charles in the biopic Ray. Sideways was also among the winners, taking the prize for best cast performance. The next major film award ceremony of the season is the Bafta awards, which take place at London's Odeon Leicester Square on 12 February. Many of those nominated for Oscars including DiCaprio, Foxx and Staunton - an Oscar nominee for her performance in Vera Drake - have also been nominated for Baftas.

Church anger over Bollywood film
Roman Catholic organisations in India have demanded the withdrawal of a film that depicts a priest having an affair with a girl half his age.
Indian television channels are now refusing to run the promotional material for the film, Sins, ahead of its release on Friday. The director of the film, Vinod Pande, says the movie is not offensive and has refused to withdraw it. Catholics are planning a protest in Mumbai (Bombay) on Wednesday. The president of one of Mumbai's main Catholic organisations, Dolphy D'Souza, says the portrayal of an ordained priest as a man of loose moral character has hurt the religious sentiments of India's Catholic community.
He called the film "pornographic and sensational". Mr D'Souza, who is also the vice-president of the Catholics' national body, has accused the director of the film of portraying a priest in bad light for commercial gains. Catholics have urged Mr Pande to withdraw the film to show respect to the Christian community's hurt sentiments. "Religion needs to be a personal affair and should not be a subject for entertainment or for commercial use," Joseph Dias, general secretary of the Catholic Secular Forum, said in a statement.
But Mr Pande said that if the critics were to see the film they would not protest against it and would not insist on its withdrawal. He says he has no plans to cancel the film ahead of its scheduled screening on Friday.
"It's about forbidden love. There was no agenda whatsoever to hurt anyone," he said. The BBC's Zubair Ahmed in Mumbai says that the controversial film shows a priest in steamy scenes with a girl half his age. She apparently goes to him for help but he falls in love with her. It takes place in the picturesque southern Indian state of Kerala. The film has already been cleared by the Censor Board with an 'A' (adults only) certificate. Mr D'Souza says he is shocked at the Censor Board's decision to clear the film. Our correspondent says that India's TV channels have so far refused to be dragged into the controversy and have not screened the film's promotional material. Most of the Catholic community's anger has come after watching newspaper advertisements and hoardings of the film. Christians make up about two per cent of India's population of more than a billion people.

Bookmakers back Aviator for Oscar
The Aviator has been tipped by UK bookmakers as the favourite to win the best film award at this year's Oscars.
Ray star Jamie Foxx is clear favourite in the best actor category while Million Dollar Baby's Hilary Swank is tipped to win the best actress prize. Bookmakers predict Cate Blanchett will be named best supporting actress. William Hill and Ladbrokes have given The Aviator 4/9 and 8/13 odds of winning best film, with Million Dollar Baby in second place at 9/4.
Bet Direct and Bet 365 also tip The Aviator, with the majority of bookmakers regarding Finding Neverland as the outsider. The Aviator is also widely tipped to win the best director prize for Martin Scorsese. British star Clive Owen is second favourite at William Hill to take the best supporting actor award, for his performance in Closer. The favourite in that category is Sideways star Thomas Hayden Church. Vera Drake star Imelda Staunton has 5/1 odds of winning the best actress Oscar at Bet 365 and William Hill, ahead of fellow UK star Kate Winslet who has odds of 25/1 at William Hill.
Mike Leigh is the outsider in the best director category for Vera Drake, a position he holds jointly with Ray's Taylor Hackford at bookmakers VC Bet. This year's Academy Awards will be handed out in Hollywood on 27 February. X Factor judge Sharon Osbourne will present Sky television's live coverage of the event. Meanwhile, Clive Owen's best supporting actor nomination has led a bookmaker to shorten his odds of becoming the next James Bond. He has moved from 4/1 to 5/2 favourite to play 007, with Hugh Jackman and Ewan McGregor joint second favourite. "Clive Owen's nomination has sparked a betting frenzy from James Bond fans, who feel that his heightened global recognition will have done his chances of becoming the next Bond a world of good," said William Hill spokesman Rupert Adams.

Global release for Japan hit film
Oscar-winning animator Hayao Miyazaki's latest film, Howl's Moving Castle, is to be released in 50 countries around the world, its distributor has said.
Howl's Moving Castle set a Japanese box office record last week, taking 1.5bn yen (£7.7m) in its first two days. Miyazaki won an Oscar earlier this year for Spirited Away, Japan's first Academy Award for nearly 50 years. Howl's Moving Castle is based on a children's fantasy novel by UK author Diana Wynne Jones. It tells the story of an 18-year-old woman who ages dramatically after falling under a witch's spell. She heads to a moving castle kept by Howl, a wizard, and searches for a way to become normal again. A spokesman for distributor Toho said the film "has received strong interest from domestic audiences and foreign media and viewers alike". "We have a good feeling about this film. We saw very good viewer response," he added. The film's worldwide release will start in South Korea on 24 December, and France on 12 January.

Ocean's Twelve raids box office
Ocean's Twelve, the crime caper sequel starring George Clooney, Brad Pitt and Julia Roberts, has gone straight to number one in the US box office chart.
It took $40.8m (£21m) in weekend ticket sales, according to studio estimates. The sequel follows the master criminals as they try to pull off three major heists across Europe. It knocked last week's number one, National Treasure, into third place. Wesley Snipes' Blade: Trinity was in second, taking $16.1m (£8.4m). Rounding out the top five was animated fable The Polar Express, starring Tom Hanks, and festive comedy Christmas with the Kranks.
Ocean's Twelve box office triumph marks the fourth-biggest opening for a December release in the US, after the three films in the Lord of the Rings trilogy. The sequel narrowly beat its 2001 predecessor, Ocean's Eleven which took $38.1m (£19.8m) on its opening weekend and $184m (£95.8m) in total. A remake of the 1960s film, starring Frank Sinatra and the Rat Pack, Ocean's Eleven was directed by Oscar-winning director Steven Soderbergh. Soderbergh returns to direct the hit sequel which reunites Clooney, Pitt and Roberts with Matt Damon, Andy Garcia and Elliott Gould. Catherine Zeta-Jones joins the all-star cast. "It's just a fun, good holiday movie," said Dan Fellman, president of distribution at Warner Bros. However, US critics were less complimentary about the $110m (£57.2m) project, with the Los Angeles Times labelling it a "dispiriting vanity project". A milder review in the New York Times dubbed the sequel "unabashedly trivial".

Oscar nominee Dan O'Herlihy dies
Irish actor Dan O'Herlihy, who was nominated for best actor at the 1955 Oscars, has died at the age of 85.
O'Herlihy, whose Oscar nomination was for Luis Bunuel's The Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, died at his home in Malibu, California, a spokesman said. The actor began his film career in the 1940s, playing Macduff to Orson Welles' Macbeth in 1948, and was also a regular in on the Dublin stage. He later appeared in Robocop and its sequel and cult TV show Twin Peaks. He played the CEO of Omni Consumer Products in 1987's Robocop and Robocop 2 three years later, and was saw mill owner Andrew Packard in Twin Peaks, also in 1990. Despite his Oscar nomination, he had few other lead roles and became a familiar supporting actor on TV and in film. The year he was nominated, the Academy Award was won by Marlon Brando for On the Waterfront.

Berlin cheers for anti-Nazi film
A German movie about an anti-Nazi resistance heroine has drawn loud applause at Berlin Film Festival.
Sophie Scholl - The Final Days portrays the final days of the member of the White Rose movement. Scholl, 21, was arrested and beheaded with her brother, Hans, in 1943 for distributing leaflets condemning the "abhorrent tyranny" of Adolf Hitler. Director Marc Rothemund said: "I have a feeling of responsibility to keep the legacy of the Scholls going." "We must somehow keep their ideas alive," he added.
The film drew on transcripts of Gestapo interrogations and Scholl's trial preserved in the archive of communist East Germany's secret police. Their discovery was the inspiration behind the film for Rothemund, who worked closely with surviving relatives, including one of Scholl's sisters, to ensure historical accuracy on the film. Scholl and other members of the White Rose resistance group first started distributing anti-Nazi leaflets in the summer of 1942. They were arrested as they dropped leaflets at Munich University calling for a "day of reckoning" with Adolf Hitler's regime. The film focuses on the six days from Scholl's arrest to the intense trial which saw Scholl initially deny the charges and ended with a defiant appearance. It is one of three German films vying for a top prize at the Festival.
A South African film version of Bizet's tragic opera Carmen shot in Cape Town in the Xhosa language has also premiered at the Berlin Festival. The film is entitled U-Carmen eKhayelitsha or Carmen in Khayelitsha after the township in which the story is set. It is performed by a 40-strong music and theatre troupe in their debut film performance. The film is the first South African feature in 25 years and only the second to be nominated for a Golden Bear Award.

Uganda's authorities have banned the play The Vagina Monologues, due to open in the capital, Kampala this weekend.
The Ugandan Media Council said the performance would not be put on as it promoted and glorified acts such as lesbianism and homosexuality. It said the production could go ahead if the organisers "expunge all the offending parts". But the organisers of the play say it raises awareness of sexual abuse against women. "The play promotes illegal, unnatural sexual acts, homosexuality and prostitution, it should be and is hereby banned," the council's ruling said.
The show, which has been a controversial sell-out around the world, explores female sexuality and strength through individual women telling their stories through monologues. Some parliamentarians and church leaders are also siding with the Media Council, Uganda's New Vision newspaper reports. "The play is obscene and pornographic although it was under the guise of women's liberation," MP Kefa Ssempgani told parliament.
But the work's author, US playwright Eve Ensler, says it is all about women's empowerment. "There is obviously some fear of the vagina and saying the word vagina," Ms Ensler told the BBC. "It's not a slang word or dirty word it's a biological, anatomical word." She said the play is being produced and performed by Ugandan women and it is not being forced on them. The four Ugandan NGOs organising the play intended to raise money to campaign to stop violence against women and to raise funds for the war-torn north of the country. "I'm extremely outraged at the hypocrisy," the play's organiser in Uganda, Sarah Mukasa, told the BBC's Focus on Africa programme. "I'm amazed that this country Uganda gives the impression that it is progressive and supports women's rights and the notions of free speech; yet when women want to share their stories the government uses the apparatus of state to shut us up."

Wine comedy wins critics' award
Quirky comedy Sideways was named the best film of the year by the Los Angeles Film Critics Association.
The US movie also picked up four other accolades including best director for Alexander Payne and supporting actor for Thomas Haden Church. British actress Imelda Staunton has again been recognised for her role in Vera Drake, winning best actress, while Liam Neeson won best actor for Kinsey. The awards will be handed out on 13 January at a ceremony in Las Vegas.
Sideways tells the story of two men who take a road trip through California's wine regions and also stars Paul Giamatti. Virginia Madsen was also named best supporting actress for her performance in the film. House of Flying Daggers, directed by Yimou Zhang, was named best foreign language film, while the animation award went to The Incredibles. Unusually, the runners-up in categories were also named with Clint Eastwood's Million Dollar Baby just missing out on the best film award. The best director runner-up was Martin Scorsese for The Aviator. A career achievement award will be handed to veteran actor and comic Jerry Lewis at the ceremony next year.

Actor Foxx sees Globe nominations
US actor Jamie Foxx has been given two nominations for Golden Globe awards, with Meryl Streep, Morgan Freeman and Cate Blanchett also up for prizes.
The stars were shortlisted on Monday for supporting roles, with the main nominations still to come. Foxx has starred in Collateral and Ray. Clive Owen, David Carradine and Natalie Portman are also up for awards. The Golden Globes, Hollywood's second most prominent awards, are the first major nominations to be announced. Last year, The Lord Of the Rings: The Return Of the King was named best drama movie while Lost In Translation won best musical or comedy. Sean Penn, Charlize Theron, Tim Robbins and Renee Zellweger all won acting awards - mirroring the eventual Oscars outcome. The Golden Globes ceremony will take place on 16 January, with the Oscars following on 27 February.

Godzilla gets Hollywood fame star
Movie monster Godzilla has received a star on Hollywood's Walk of Fame, honouring both his 50th birthday and the launch of his 28th film.
An actor dressed as the giant creature breathed smoke over photographers on Monday as Godzilla received the 2,271st star on Hollywood Boulevard. "Godzilla should thank you for this historical and monumental star," said Final Wars producer Shogo Tomiyama. "But unfortunately, he cannot speak English," he added. Hollywood's honorary mayor, Johnny Grant, said: "I do hereby proclaim this Godzilla Day in Hollywood.
"He's loose, he's wild, and I'm getting the hell out of here," he added. The premiere of Godzilla: Final Wars at Grauman's Chinese Theatre followed the ceremony on Hollywood Boulevard. The monster was joined by co-stars including Japanese pop star and actor Masahiro Matsuoka. Director Ryuhei Kitamura said it may not be Godzilla's final outing, as it has been billed. "That's what the producers say. But the producer's a liar," he said. "[Godzilla's] been working for the last 50 years. So, I think Godzilla just deserves a vacation." And producer Shogo Tomiyama added: "So long as Godzilla can fascinate people, I believe he will be resurrected by new generations of filmmakers in the future." Godzilla first appeared in 1954 as a prehistoric lizard woken by atomic bomb tests.

God cut from Dark Materials film
The director and screenwriter of the film adaptation of Philip Pullman's His Dark Materials is to remove references to God and the church in the movie.
Chris Weitz, director of About a Boy, said the changes were being made after film studio New Line expressed concern. The books tell of a battle against the church and a fight to overthrow God. "They have expressed worry about the possibility of perceived anti-religiosity," Weitz told a His Dark Materials fans' website. Pullman's trilogy has been attacked by some Christian teachers and by the Catholic press as blasphemy. Weitz, who admitted he would not be many people's first choice to direct the films, said he regarded the film adaptation as "the most important work of my life".
"In part because it is one of the few books to have changed my life," he told bridgetothestars.net. The award-winning trilogy - Northern Lights, The Subtle Knife and The Amber Spyglass - tell the story of Oxford school child Lyra Belacqua. She is drawn into an epic struggle against the Church, which has been carrying out experiments on children in an attempt to remove original sin.
As the books progress the struggle turns into a battle to overthrow the Authority, a figure who is God-like in the books. Weitz, who directed American Pie and About A Boy, said New Line feared that any anti-religiosity in the film would make the project "unviable financially". He said: "All my best efforts will be directed towards keeping the film as liberating and iconoclastic an experience as I can. "But there may be some modification of terms."
Weitz said he had visited Pullman, who had told him that the Authority could "represent any arbitrary establishment that curtails the freedom of the individual, whether it be religious, political, totalitarian, fundamentalist, communist, what have you". He added: "I have no desire to change the nature or intentions of the villains of the piece, but they may appear in more subtle guises." There are a number of Christian websites which attack the trilogy for their depiction of the church and of God, but Pullman has denied his books are anti-religious. His agent told the Times newspaper that Pullman was happy with the adaptation so far. "Of course New Line want to make money, but Mr Weitz is a wonderful director and Philip is very supportive. "You have to recognise that it is a challenge in the climate of Bush's America,"

Aviator wins top Globes accolades
The Aviator has been named best film at the Golden Globe Awards, with its star Leonardo DiCaprio named best actor.
Hollywood veteran Clint Eastwood took the best director prize for Million Dollar Baby while its star Hilary Swank was best actress. Quirky comedy Sideways was named best screenplay and best comedy. Ray star Jamie Foxx was best actor in a musical/comedy while Briton Clive Owen and Natalie Portman won prizes for best supporting roles in Closer.
The Aviator, in which DiCaprio plays millionaire Howard Hughes, edged ahead of its rivals at the Beverly Hills ceremony by winning the best original score prize. This give it a total of three awards while Million Dollar Baby, Sideways and Closer took two Golden Globes each. Accepting his best dramatic actor prize, DiCaprio described director Martin Scorsese as "one of the greatest contributors to the world of cinema of all time".
Annette Bening won best actress in a musical/comedy for Being Julia while Spanish movie The Sea Inside was named best foreign language film. Swank, who previously won the Golden Globe and Oscar for Boys Don't Cry, paid tribute to Million Dollar Baby director and co-star Clint Eastwood. "You guided us so brilliantly, while you also, in my humble opinion, gave the performance of your career," she said. Foxx was nominated for three awards but was beaten to the best supporting actor title by Owen and the best actor in a TV movie prize by Geoffrey Rush in The Life and Death of Peter Sellers.
A BBC co-production, The Life and Death of Peter Sellers was also named best TV movie. Mick Jagger and Dave Stewart won the best original song award for Old Habits Die Hard from movie re-make Alfie, while Ian McShane was named best actor in a TV drama for his lead role in Deadwood.
Other UK hopes Kate Winslet and Imelda Staunton went home empty-handed despite lead actress nominations for Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and Vera Drake respectively. Winning a Golden Globe is said to improve a film or performer's chance of subsequently winning an Academy Award. Unlike the Oscars, the Golden Globes split awards by genre - one prize for dramas and the other for musicals and comedies. The Globes also honour the best in television, with suburban series Desperate Housewives named best TV comedy show. Actress Teri Hatcher beat fellow Desperate Housewives stars Marcia Cross and Felicity Huffman to the best comedy actress prize.
Hatcher thanked the show's cast, crew and "a network who gave me a second chance at a career when I couldn't have been a bigger 'has been'". Cosmetic surgery series Nip/Tuck beat The Sopranos and Deadwood to the best television drama title. Arrested Development star Jason Bateman was named best TV actor in a musical or comedy series. The Golden Globes are awarded by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, comprising film reporters based in Los Angeles and working for overseas outlets. Robin Williams, a five-time Globe winner for such films as The Fisher King and Good Morning, Vietnam, received the Cecil B DeMille award for career achievement. He dedicated his prize to Superman actor Christopher Reeve, who died last year.

Singer's film to show at festival
A documentary which takes a candid look at the life of chart-topping singer George Michael will be shown at this year's Berlin Film Festival.
A Different Story will screen in the Panorama section of the festival, which runs from 10-20 February. It features the singer talking about both his career and his personal life, from his days in Wham! through to more recent events. Michael will attend the festival to introduce the screening on 16 February. Director Southan Morris and executive producer Andy Stephens will also attend the festival.
The 93 minute film will see Michael discussing his early days in Wham! along with his later career, including his legal battles with record label Sony and his stance against the Iraq war and American politics. It will also touch upon his turbulent personal life, including his arrest in a Beverly Hills park toilet in 1998 for "lewd behaviour", and the death of his boyfriend Anselmo Feleppa from Aids. The film, which includes previously unseen footage of the singer also features contributions from Michael's former Wham! partner Andrew Ridgeley, as well as ex-Wham! backing singers Pepsi and Shirlie. Other contributors include Sting, Mariah Carey, Elton John, Noel Gallagher, Geri Halliwell and Simon Cowell. This year's festival will open with Man To Man, a historical epic starring Joseph Fiennes and Kristin Scott-Thomas. It will be one of 21 films competing for the festival's top prize, the Golden Bear. Other films in competition will include The Life Aquatic, a quirky comedy starring Bill Murray, and the biopic Kinsey, which features Liam Neeson. The full programme will be announced on 1 February.

Surprise win for anti-Bush film
Michael Moore's anti-Bush documentary Fahrenheit 9/11 has won best film at the US People's Choice Awards, voted for by the US public.
Mel Gibson's The Passion of the Christ won best drama, despite both films being snubbed so far at US film awards in the run-up to February's Oscars. Julia Roberts won her 10th consecutive crown as favourite female movie star. Johnny Depp was favourite male movie star and Renee Zellweger was favourite leading lady at Sunday's awards in LA.
Film sequel Shrek 2 took three prizes - voted top animated movie, top film comedy and top sequel. In television categories, Desperate Housewives was named top new drama and Joey, starring former Friends actor Matt LeBlanc, was best new comedy. Long-running shows Will and Grace and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation were named best TV comedy and TV drama respectively.
Nominees for the People's Choice Awards were picked by a 6,000-strong Entertainment Weekly magazine panel, and winners were subsequently chosen by 21 million online voters. Fahrenheit 9/11 director Michael Moore dedicated his trophy to soldiers in Iraq. His film was highly critical of President George W Bush and the US-led invasion of Iraq, and Moore was an outspoken Bush critic in the 2004 presidential campaign inwhich Democratic challenger John Kerry lost.
"This country is still all of ours, not right or left or Democrat or Republican," Moore told the audience at the ceremony in Pasadena, California. Moore said it was "an historic occasion" that the 31-year-old awards ceremony would name a documentary its best film. Unlike many other film-makers, Passion of the Christ director Mel Gibson has vowed not to campaign for an Oscar for his movie. "To me, really, this is the ultimate goal because one doesn't make work for the elite," Gibson said backstage at the event. "To me, the people have spoken."

Da Vinci film to star Tom Hanks
Actor Tom Hanks and director Ron Howard are reuniting for The Da Vinci Code, an adaptation of the international best-selling novel by Dan Brown.
Distributor Sony Pictures said production will begin next year, with a planned release in May 2006. Hanks will play Robert Langdon, who is trying to solve the murder of a member of an ancient society that has protected dark secrets for centuries. It will be Hanks' third collaboration with Howard. They previously worked together, along with Howard's producing partner Brian Grazer, on Splash and Apollo 13.
Hanks is one of Hollywood's most bankable stars, with his presence in a movie almost guaranteeing box office success. Brown's book has become a publishing phenomenon, consistently topping book charts in the UK and US. It has sold more than eight million copies worldwide in little over two years. It is a classic whodunit, which centres on a global conspiracy surrounding the Holy Grail mythology and places heavy emphasis on symbols and cryptography. Its protagonist is a Harvard professor likened to a contemporary Indiana Jones, who also appeared in Brown's first book Angels and Demons. The tale mixes art history with mythology, semiotics with medieval history.

A controversial film starring Hollywood actor Kevin Bacon as a convicted paedophile won top honours at the London Film Festival on Thursday.
The Woodsman won the Satyajit Ray Award, named after the Indian director. The low-budget film, directed by Nicole Kassell, is about a convicted child molester trying to rebuild his life after 12 years in jail. Judges said the film tackled the contentious subject with "great insight and sensitivity". Previous films to take the prize include the Oscar-winning Boys Don't Cry, which was about the true life story of murdered transsexual Brandon Teena.
British writer-director Amma Asante won the UK Film Talent Award this year for her debut feature A Way Of Life. Set in South Wales, the film is about a teenage single mother who becomes embroiled in a tense stand-off with a Turkish neighbour. Also on Thursday night, the Fipresci International Critics Awards went to Aaltra, a Belgian film about the handicapped; and the Sutherland Trophy, which was won by Jonathan Caouette for his film Tarnation. The festival closed with a screening of the film I Heart Huckabees, starring Jude Law and Dustin Hoffman and directed by Three Kings film-maker David O Russell. The festival this year also included the first European screening of the new Pixar animation The Incredibles, and the British film Bullet Boy, starring So Solid Crew rapper Asher D.

Fockers retain film chart crown
Comedy Meet The Fockers has held on to the number one spot at the North American box office for a second week.
It took $42.8m (£23.7m) at the weekend, making its overall takings more than $163m (£90m) in 12 days, according to studio estimates. It took $19.1m (£9.9m) on Christmas Day alone, the highest takings on that day in box office history. The sequel to the Ben Stiller comedy Meet The Parents stars Robert De Niro, Dustin Hoffman and Barbra Streisand. The success of Meet the Fockers could help produce record box office revenue for 2004, said Paul Dergarabedian, president of the industry's tracker Exhibitor Relations. "We've had a much stronger than anticipated final week of the year that helped the industry end on a high note," said Mr Dergarabedian.
Meet the Fockers also broke the box office records for the most money taken on New Year's Eve, when it made $12.2m (£6.2m), and New Year's Day, when it took $18m (£9.4m). The previous New Year's Eve record was set in 2000 by Cast Away with $8.5m (£4.5m). The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King had held the New Year's Day title with $12.8m (£6.7m). However, Christmas takings were down 26.5% on 2003's figures - which was blamed on Christmas falling over a weekend this year. This weekend's top 12 films took an estimated $125.4m (£65.8m), a 4.3% increase on the same weekend last year. But there were no major releases last week to provide competition to Meet the Fockers or Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events, which finished in second place with $14.7m (£7.7m). The Aviator, starring Leonardo DiCaprio as Howard Hughes, ended up in third position after taking $11.2m (£5.9m). Comedy Fat Albert - co-written by Bill Cosby - moved down the chart to fourth place after taking $10.7m (£5.6m).

