Kettlebell sets are undeniably heavy merchandise, so when you order them online, you may need to pay extra for delivery. (BestReviews)
Kettlebells are some of the most dynamic pieces of fitness equipment available, considering they can be used in countless ways and work multiple muscle groups simultaneously. While you may enjoy using them at the gym, if you intend to step up your workout at home, it’s worth investing in a kettlebell set.
Home kettlebell sets, which sometimes include as many as a dozen pieces, typically range in weight from 5 to 50 pounds. If you'd like to invest in a quality starter set, the Body Solid Vinyl Kettlebell Set features eight weights from 5 to 30 pounds.
Kettlebells are most often associated with controlled swinging exercises that target several muscle groups at once. However, that’s not the only way to use these dynamic pieces of equipment.
Many individuals use them for traditional upper-body weight training, such as rows and tricep presses. Others incorporate them into core-focused exercises, including sit-ups and Russian twists. Kettlebells can also engage the lower body when they’re used for deadlifts and squats.
If you have one kettlebell, it's fairly easy to find a home for it between uses. When you invest in a kettlebell set, however, space becomes more of a concern. Because kettlebell sets have anywhere from three to eight pieces, they take up significant floor space. You can optimize space vertically by storing kettlebells on a rack, but as expected, this adds to the overall cost of the set.
Kettlebell sets in gyms often go up to 80 pounds, but most kettlebell sets intended for home use range between 5 and 50 pounds. Beginner-friendly kettlebell sets make up a large portion of the category, which usually include three pieces that are 20 pounds and below. There are a few, but not many, kettlebell sets that include 3- and 4-pound weights.
Most kettlebells are made with cast iron. Depending on their design, they’re either made from solid cast iron or were assembled from two pieces. As expected, solid kettlebells have smooth, seamless designs, whereas others have a noticeable line running down their lateral side.
Several newer kettlebells have vinyl coatings, which offer quieter and softer landings on floors. Others, including many adjustable kettlebells, are made with high-density plastic components whose quality is on par with studio-quality equipment.
No matter their design, most kettlebells share the same handle styling. It features a wide, often straight grip that can be held by one or both hands.
As far as finish is concerned, you’ll come across bare iron, powder coating, enamel and vinyl. Bare iron and powder coatings are considered superior in terms of grip stability. Enamel and vinyl both have smooth, usually seamless finishes. Although they’re softer on hands, they may slide or slip when you grip them, including with sweaty hands.
Kettlebells are instantly recognizable on a gym floor, but believe it or not, they’re available in a few shapes. Classic cannonball-style kettlebells remain the most popular. However, there is a growing number of oval-shaped kettlebells, including many adjustable sets. Some manufacturers have released cube kettlebells with rounded edges as well.
Beginner kettlebell sets with two or three weights usually cost about $60 or less. Sets that include several weights, including those that are 30 pounds and higher, cost $85-$300. Studio-quality sets, including those with pieces that exceed 50 pounds, usually cost $500 and up.
A. Some fitness enthusiasts invest in kettlebell sets when they already have dumbbells so they can experiment with a broad range of exercises and techniques. On the other hand, some people feel that dumbbells meet their training needs and, therefore, may not necessarily have a specific use for kettlebells.
A. An easy way to learn how to use kettlebells is by watching online videos where you can watch an instructor's form closely. Not only will they give you tips on effective exercises, but they also share insight on how to use kettlebells safely. Another way to learn about kettlebells is by working with a personal trainer who can customize a routine that works with your fitness goals.
Body Solid 5- to 30-Pound Vinyl Kettlebell Set: available at Dick's Sporting Goods
Our take: If you're new to using kettlebells, this set starts at a beginner-friendly weight — but will cover your needs for increasing as you progress.
What we like: The cast-iron set is coated in vinyl to minimize floor damage and sound. Weight is clearly marked on each piece. The handles are wide enough for most people to use both hands, which means you can do more exercises.
What we dislike: The vinyl may sustain scuffs or scratches, particularly the lighter colors.
Cap Barbell Enamel-Coated Cast-Iron Kettlebell 35-Pound Pair: available at Amazon
Our take: If you're experienced in using kettlebells, this mid-range weight pair is a budget-friendly home gym purchase.
What we like: The pair includes 15- and 20-pound bells whose wide, flat bases offer stability. They're made from cast iron and have a completely seamless design and powder coating. The handle is slightly wider than other kettlebells, which may be better for certain people.
What we dislike: A few people reported that the kettlebells arrived damaged, including a few chips.
Bowflex SelectTech 840 Kettlebell: available at Amazon, Dick's Sporting Goods and Bowflex
Our take: The space-savvy Bowflex SelectTech, popular for small home gyms, lets users transition seamlessly between 8 and 40 pounds.
What we like: The dial-a-weight system is convenient and user-friendly. Despite its design, it still offers an authentic kettlebell experience. Since it has a compact design, it's easy to store in closets or other small spaces. Overall quality is impressive.
What we dislike: The jump from 25 to 35 pounds is a bit unusual, and some users would have preferred a 30-pound option.
Sign up here to receive the BestReviews weekly newsletter for useful advice on new products and noteworthy deals.Sian Babish is a writer for BestReviews. BestReviews is a product review company with a singular mission: to help simplify your purchasing decisions and save you time and money.
BestReviews spends thousands of hours researching, analyzing and testing products to recommend the best picks for most consumers. BestReviews and its newspaper partners may earn a commission if you purchase a product through one of our links.
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
