(Shutterstock)
Totems are objects that have mysterious powers. Among other things, guns are totems. Owning firearms, carrying them, holding them, makes many people feeling particularly robust. Stronger. More capable. More aggressive. Possibly invincible.
Somewhere, probably in the hall closet or the guest room closet, there is a box that I believe contains my late father’s Harrington & Richardson .22 LR pistol. I never considered it mine. When I visited his widow and she suggested I take it, I brought the thing back to my motel room. Having no use for a handgun, I tried to turn it in to the authorities.
I’d driven from our home in Los Angeles where you could hand over unwanted weapons to the police, no questions asked. They even had an annual buyback program. But in Nevada, the cop I spoke with over the phone couldn’t figure out what I was talking about. Why the hell did I want to give away a gun? The implication was that I needed to get my head adjusted. Ultimately, I decided to keep the damn thing. Maybe for protection. Perhaps for sentimental reasons. But I was ambivalent, never purchased ammunition, and like I say, lost track of it.
If you are a gun owner and don’t happen to be participating in a war, then most likely you hunt, or you are planning to defend yourself and your family from someone else’s gun. Or you’re are one of those guys out to protect yourself and your country from an invasion by...by your country. Sometimes, you are your own worst enemy.
I happen to know, or at least knew, a little about weapons, these details provided long ago, courtesy of the military. I got Escape and Evasion training with the CBs and war games at Camp Lejeune from Marine instructors. At one point I could take apart and reassemble an M16 while blindfolded, though I never could figure out how that particular skill was going to come in handy.
Some people think about guns as a last resort. Others as an initial response. To danger. To disrespect. To the need to dominate a situation, an individual, or those with whom they disagree. Guns are protectors and/or enforcers. They are also extensions of who we are. Signals from our brains and our hearts, leaving home base, traveling across our chests into our shoulders and down our arms. This route conveys feelings, moods, beliefs and emotional states. The flow continues into the trigger finger, which ultimately has the power to express our mindset.
Guns are symbols, tools, security blankets, courage, grandiose illusions, delusions. For the simple-minded, they are solutions. For those who understand that the world is complex, they are problems. For so many, very young to very old, Black, Asian, Brown, white — people simply going about their lives — a trigger is pulled and they’ve been turned into victims. Ultimately, guns are instruments playing the last notes of tunes that don’t get to resolve.
Kraus received a Bronze Star for his service in Vietnam. His memoir, “You’ll Never Work Again In Teaneck, N.J.” includes several chapters about his time in the military.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
