There I was, IV in my arm, heavily in labor with my second child, desperately scrolling through resumes on my cell phone, trying to replace members of the successful 17-person Us Weekly video unit I launched who were now fleeing. Even though no one in my department had gotten fired, many wanted out amid the carnage of layoffs after a messy takeover. I was one of the few remaining employees standing (or laying). I’d heard about such women, so chained to their jobs that they were working from the delivery room. Funny, I thought — until I realized that was me.
I left that job after my unpaid maternity leave. Nevertheless, it still took another two years and two other positions in companies with — let’s be polite here — “evolving strategic priorities” for me to realize that pursuing another high-powered corporate media job was no longer what I was looking for. Fifteen-plus years of hard work, and this was my reward for optimizing my life around my business card? No stability and no control. A wave of dread overcame me even thinking about attempting to balance two children and my professional ambition.
My father was an immigrant and entrepreneur. He worked his fingers to the bone to send me to a fancy Ivy League university. My mother was a lawyer and a feminist. I’m a feminist. I’m supposed to be climbing. I was supposed to want this. In the year 2014 (before kids, when I also stayed awake past 11 p.m.) I led a “Lean In” book group.
If more women at all income levels and strata of society are going to find a better way to balance their work and home lives, we need far more government and corporate support for child care, paid leave and affordable health insurance across the board.  (Shutterstock)
I wasn’t ready to lean out, but was it time to lean sideways? When you lean sideways off a ladder, you fall. Right? I’m generally brave but I was terrified of what awaited me.
Since I had no concrete plan, naturally I called myself a consultant. It felt vague enough to fit what I wanted. Upon hearing the news, my personal and professional friends and acquaintances fell into two distinct groups. One group gave me sympathetic nods and sent me listings for full-time jobs. The other looked at me with a mixture of jealousy and abject horror and asked, “So, you’ll be home with the kids?”
I found my groove as a small business owner, working on some similar projects to what I did before at large companies: video strategy and production, but on my own terms. I was by my own choice a small business owner. My work-life balance gradually emerged. Balancing Zoom calls, building creative decks and leading media training sessions while also taking my son to swim class, and enjoying leisurely unstructured walks with my daughter. I finally “made it.” This is success. My kids are no longer “tasks” in my calendar between meetings — “3:00-3:30 p.m.” — they’re now the focal points. Once I stopped equating my identity with my business title, that’s when the real joy came. Ironically, since jumping off the corporate ladder, I’ve won industry awards and recognition that I’d long since given up on receiving.
On my path to self-employment, I began to see an army of women who wanted to lean sideways. Or maybe they’d always been there, and I only finally noticed. Women who were running businesses, not with the goal to turn it into a $1 billion unicorn company, but to have a good, sustainable enterprise that allowed them to see their children without using PTO. I’ve met a part-time energy executive, a fashion founder who isn’t interested in scaling it to sell, a social media coach earning six figures, a three-day-a-week psychotherapist, a 30-hour-week lawyer and so on. I’ve been researching this topic and interviewing parents for the podcast Mom’s Exit Interview. They want to use their education, skills and experience to be fulfilled but on their own terms.
I’m not saying this is necessarily a scalable societal solution. While these women are all making meaningful economic contributions to their households, many of them share a position of economic privilege. Even though not everyone’s lean sideways resulted in a meaningful drop in income (mine didn’t), many (including me) had a spouse with a steady paycheck and health insurance, enabling them to take a risk. Not everyone is in that position; if more women at all income levels and strata of society are going to find a better way to balance their work and home lives, we need far more government and corporate support for child care, paid leave and affordable health insurance across the board.
My hope is that after COVID, as we get back to work, often staying at home, non-traditional ways of working, will not just be accepted with an asterisk, but be embraced and potentially become a part of the new normal. Perhaps the Great Resignation can morph into the Great Reorientation. We have learned: We don’t need a boss to give us permission to create the lives we want.
Rittberg is the host of Mom’s Exit Interview podcast. She runs her own video marketing company and is a mother of two living in Brooklyn.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
