To create a chore chart that works, you must get creative, assign age-appropriate chores and consider a reward system that meets individual needs and interests. (BestReviews)
If you’re bored of nagging the children (or your partner), a chore chart is exactly what you need. Transform your household, lighten your stress load and get the entire family working as a team with a chore chart that isn’t a chore.
Check out these top tips to create the perfect chore chart for your family, how to decide  age-appropriate chores, various reward systems and the top DIY chore chart ideas to get your household on track.
Whether you need the spouse to pull their weight, or to get the children off the couch while you're running around after every spilled drink and lost sock, a DIY chore reward chart is the perfect way to personalize daily tasks. It's the secret household ingredient to fewer arguments, tantrums and alleviating that buried resentment that might be piling up from doing everything yourself.
If you don’t have much time, consider buying a pre-organized chore chart, like those listed below and then customize it with a relevant reward system and necessary chores for your household.
Everyone is motivated differently. Customizing a chore chart based on what inspires everyone in the family is essential for keeping your household on track, while making it a bit more fun.
For example, if you have a child that always wants pocket money, then a simple cash reward is usually enough to get them to help. Alternatively, screen-time may be more appropriate for some. For younger children, that value having their own responsibilities, an individual responsibility chart with stickers or magnets might be the perfect bet.
It’s important to allocate chores that are age-appropriate. If you assign your children chores that are too challenging for them they are likely to lose motivation. Make sure they know how to do something properly and are safe if they will be completing tasks unsupervised.
Check out these age-appropriate chores to help you get your household on track, without overwhelming your children.
Put mason jars labeled with the children’s names in front of a blackboard that has a list of chores. Add money to a jar every time a chore is completed. This is great for sibling competition.
Make your list of chores more exciting by writing them on a spinning wheel. No one will be mad at you for giving them the worst job, as it won’t be your decision. Plus the spinning of the wheel becomes a fun game in itself.
Set up a pegboard and add pegs that are color-coded for each child. Write a chore and corresponding reward on each peg. Children will be able to keep track of what chore remains.
Each peg holds a reward, but this time it’s a secret surprise hidden in an envelope. The curiosity will have everyone begging to open an envelope first.
Perfect for children who thrive with independence and responsibilities, this can be created in endless ways. All you need to do is grab a ready-to-go chart that lists the chores that need to be done and then personalize it with your child’s favorite things. They can even decorate it themselves.
Go full parent-mode and get organized with a large classroom-like board. It’s ideal for large families. A magnetic board is great as you can use fun magnets to differentiate between tasks, difficulty levels and rewards.
NEATLINGS Chore System: available at Amazon
This easy-to-use chore system is suitable for all ages within a family of up to three children. It comes equipped with over 80 self-care and household, color-coded chore cards. It also includes hanging strips, an erasable pen and four pocket-chart panels.
U Brands Magnetic Chalkboard: available on Amazon
This 36 x 24 inch premium wooden-framed chalkboard creates a rustic look, complimenting your household furnishings without turning your house into a classroom. It is magnetic, making it the perfect addition to your DIY chore chart, to add magnets, pictures, notes and more.
Whirl of Fun Spinning Prize Wheel available at AmazonThis 12-inch compact, 10-slot spinning wheel is the perfect way to make chores fun. Its customizable whiteboard surface is made with longevity in mind. And it comes equipped with all essential assembly tools, along with a stand for easy use.
Wallies Wall Decals, Reusable Weekly Chalkboard: available at Amazon 
This 9" x 25" chalkboard wall decal is a great way to keep your family organized for easy chore allocation for each day of the week. It’s both removable and repositionable (without leaving any sticky residue behind) and can be used on any flat surface such as walls, wood or glass. Best of all, it comes with chalk so you can start using it right out of the package.
Minimo Motivation - My Daily Routine Magnetic Chore Chart: available at Amazon
This dry-erase chore chart is perfect for younger children. It focuses on a motivational reward system, such as the included 12 magnets that they will love. Help them stay on track of their routine, to-do lists, personal goals and customize their rewards.
Magnetic Dry Erase Chore Chart and Calendar Planner Bundle for Fridge: available at Amazon
If your children procrastinate by heading to the fridge, then this is the ultimate chore chart for your household. Featuring a chore chart and monthly calendar, this dry-erase, magnetic whiteboard also comes equipped with six fine-tip markers and an eraser.
Courtney Love is a writer for BestReviews. BestReviews is a product review company with a singular mission: to help simplify your purchasing decisions and save you time and money.
BestReviews spends thousands of hours researching, analyzing and testing products to recommend the best picks for most consumers. BestReviews and its newspaper partners may earn a commission if you purchase a product through one of our links.
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
