These past several weeks have been near-apocalyptic for the cryptomarkets. In 24 hours, the market capitalization for cryptocurrencies fell by 12%, dropping from $1.1 trillion to $970 billion. We’ve seen some stablecoins — cryptocurrencies that are supposedly secured by other assets to decrease price volatility — fail catastrophically, defaulting appallingly on their promise to maintain a fixed value. The price of Bitcoin slid to $20,000, down almost 70% from its former high of $66,000 last year. Celsius, a major cryptocurrency lending firm, halted transactions and is seemingly preparing for bankruptcy. And Coinbase is laying off 1,100 employees from its crypto exchange.
Things are bad. Assessing the cause of the digital-asset bubble, Bill Gates skeptically concluded that it has been “100% based on greater fool theory,” an idea that investors can profit from worthless assets so long as people will bid them higher. That appraisal may be true to an extent, but we need to be very careful not to throw the baby out with the bubble-bath water. There is no doubt an extremely important role for cryptocurrencies in the future.
Over the past several years, as more and more exotic financial products were built atop the blockchain, I’ve tried to keep focus on the utility side of the ledger. For example, promoters of digital collectibles such as sports video clips and animated characters (known as NFTs), which use the same underlying technology as Bitcoin, have created significant trading markets with hopes of tremendous asset appreciation. Many NFTs are legitimate products but many others are pointless and rest on kitsch and pure speculation for their value proposition.
A Bitcoin ATM is seen at the Clark Street subway station on June 13, 2022 in Brooklyn in New York City.  (Michael M Santiago/Getty Images
/Getty Images)
Here’s a secret. Carnival barkers exaggerate. You shouldn’t buy investments from them.
The real future of cryptocurrency is somewhere else. I’m waiting for a savvy, cranky bald man with a heavy drawl to shout, “it’s the technology, stupid!” The greatest value proposition in fintech is the value of distributed ledger technology itself, and what it can do. And by that value, I mean how blockchain can — through digital innovation and efficiency — increase available products and services that improve the human condition.
In a relatively short period of several years, we have seen enormous accomplishments in the fintech world. With its nearly impenetrable defenses against fraud and data corruption, information storage capacity, and numerous trading applications across many sectors of the economy, blockchain technology could become the new plumbing for the global financial markets. It could revolutionize how the securities markets operate, reducing both the cost and hazards associated with investing. It could drive down insurance prices by helping to spread the cost of accidents and natural disasters far more widely than presently concentrated. And, using cryptocurrency, it could deliver to the underbanked populations both here and throughout the world tremendous financial opportunities — such as access to credit — that could vastly improve the quality of their lives.
Ironically, stablecoins are likely to be among the species of cryptocurrencies with an especially important future. Designed responsibly so that they are backed by hard assets, they have already proven their immense value in simplifying and securing all sorts of financial transactions. They reduce trade settlement time — a period in which transacting parties waiting for payment face risk of serious financial loss — to near-instantaneous. Stablecoins can thus serve a critical role in the global economy. Their versatility can also be employed, for example, to encourage targeted trade in goods and services that serve important social policies, such as health-care delivery.
In the end, the success of stablecoins and other cryptocurrencies will ultimately depend on appropriate regulation. The New York State Department of Financial Services has shown leadership on this issue for several years by requiring its licensed entities “to meet conservative reserve requirements and provide routine attestations to protect consumers and ensure the stability of the coins.” After the recent crypto meltdown, the agency issued even more particularized guidance for its licensees that requires sufficient asset reserves for their dollar-backed stablecoins.
Congress may be catching up. In the wake of the market collapse this past month, it is reportedly making substantial strides towards enacting legislation to address its causes. We’ll see.
One thing seems sure, though. Recent events demand that the path forward for cryptocurrencies must be forged by pragmatists who have a healthy respect for the destructive power of unknown scenarios and untested systems. It may be a longer path than desired by some so-called visionaries, but it will get us to a better place more safely.
Alter is a partner at Abrams Fensterman LLP and former general counsel for the New York State Department of Financial Services
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
