A popular transit discount program could lend a hand to 500,000 more New Yorkers — but the city’s new budget didn’t carve out money to give all of them the savings, according to economists and data obtained by the Daily News.
The program, dubbed “Fair Fares,” has since 2019 offered half-priced MetroCards to residents living below the federal poverty line. About 273,000 New Yorkers get the cards — but analysts believe roughly 800,000 people are eligible.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority issues the MetroCards, which can be reloaded at subway vending machines with a 50% discount. The city reimburses the agency the difference.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority issues the MetroCards, which can be reloaded at subway vending machines with a 50% discount.  (Anthony DelMundo / New York Daily News)
The city budget in 2019 allocated $106 million for Fair Fares — but a slow rollout under former Mayor Bill de Blasio and the COVID-19 pandemic changed the city’s assessment of how much money is needed for the program.
Mayor Adams and the City Council approved $75 million for Fair Fares for the coming fiscal year, which begins July 1. Debipriya Chatterjee, an economist at the Community Service Society of New York, said that won’t be enough if more people start taking advantage of the discount.
“If enrollment increases by 5% per month, we are not going to have enough funds,” said Chatterjee.
People who have half-priced MetroCards are starting to use them more — and the cost to reimburse the MTA is growing.
The city in March spent $5 million on the discounts — the most in one month since the program launched, and 42% more than the $3.5 million the city spent in March 2021, a pandemic month.
“The per enrollee cost per month — which is kind of like a proxy to gauge how much each enrollee is using — during the crest of the pandemic was about $4,” said Chatterjee. “Over the last five months, it was about $15. Now it’s $18.”
Chatterjee estimates that at current rates, the city will spend $71 million in reimbursing the program this fiscal year, leaving little room to expand enrollment while keeping beneath the $75 million budget.
“You have this budget, but you are not saying how much you will spend on outreach and education, which in turn is keeping the enrollment pool small,” said Chatterjee. “So then your budget appears to be sufficient.”
A popular transit discount program could lend a hand to 500,000 more New Yorkers — but the city’s new budget didn’t carve out money to give all of them the savings, according to economists and data obtained by the Daily News.  (Anthony DelMundo / New York Daily News)
Adams spokeswoman Kate Smart said the city plans a “robust, year-round, ongoing” outreach to promote the program, including a $2 million spend for advertisements and social media promotion.
“It’s a top priority of this administration to cut red tape and connect more New Yorkers with the wide range of benefits the city offers, including Fair Fares,” said Smart. “We want as many New Yorkers as possible to take advantage of Fair Fares, and will evaluate additional needs and potential expansion through the budget process.”
Still, advocates think the eligibility requirements are too strict, and want the mayor and City Council to expand the pool to 200% of the federal poverty line, or a family of four making $53,000 a year. Doing so would grow the number of people eligible by about 400,000, to 1.2 million.
“The next phase of Fair Fares should both deepen and broaden affordability,” said Riders Alliance spokesman Danny Pearlstein. “Free fares for people living below the poverty line and half fares for families earning $50,000 would transform a million lives across the city.”
Community Service Society president David Jones, who serves as a city representative on the MTA board, said increasing the number of people enrolled in Fair Fares would help reduce fare evasion, a problem MTA officials estimate will cost the agency $500 million in 2022.
“The arrest data shows us that enforcement of fare evasion is still falling disproportionately on Black and Hispanic men, despite it being a systemwide problem,” said Jones. “That aside, the city’s economic recovery is better served by making sure all who are eligible for Fair Fares are enrolled. Its potential as a mitigating factor on fare evasion is unknown because it’s underutilized.”
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
