(Shutterstock)
Last month, my 18-year-old client Jose messaged me in a panic after his high school counselor told him he could no longer take classes and said that he should consider switching to a GED program because he had been in high school for too long. Jose’s schooling was interrupted for close to a year during the pandemic as he waited eight months for an iPad so that he could participate remotely. As a result, he had not yet been able to complete the requirements he needed to graduate. He had been working hard to finish his classes and sounded defeated.
Jose came to the United States as an unaccompanied minor seeking safety from death threats by gangs. He told me that all he wanted was for his mother to see him graduate. Jose’s education was a priority for her, and he felt that he was letting her down.
Unfortunately, Jose’s challenges are not uncommon. As an attorney with Kids in Need of Defense (KIND), I have worked for many years with immigrant children who come alone to the United States seeking safety and face many barriers to accessing the education they need and deserve.
Education is never one-size-fits-all, but unaccompanied children are thrown into a system that has not yet adapted to support their needs. These children often come here fleeing gang- or gender-based violence, severe abuse, abandonment or exploitation. They have a variety of educational backgrounds. Some never had the opportunity to go to school or had their education cut short due to financial strains on their family; others stopped going to school due to violence in their community. The New York City public school system, which has more than 1,500 unaccompanied minor students, currently lacks the infrastructure to address the myriad of challenges these children experienced in their home countries or as they migrated. Like Jose, they are expected to succeed despite language barriers, financial responsibilities and looming concerns that they will be deported from this country.
As KIND and its partners have often seen, older youth are denied enrollment in nearby schools and told to pursue high school equivalency programs or alternative education. This process can be daunting and deters children from pursuing their education, however much they may want to attend. Children and their families are scared to push back and ask for services that will help the child in school because they often fear, erroneously, that speaking out will somehow impact their immigration case.
A 2022 Migration Policy Institute analysis found that nearly 4,000 newcomer immigrant youth ages 14-21 years old were not enrolled in school, and mostly lived in the Bronx, followed closely by Queens and Brooklyn.
It is important to create meaningful opportunities for children to explain what can be very personal details about the barriers they face in trying to get an education. For example, it took several conversations and time to earn the trust of my client to learn that he had worked in the fields of Honduras since the age of 7 and does not know how to read or write. The same was true for my 17-year-old client who told me that she could not keep up with her classes because she does not have access to technology in the shelter where she is living. Additionally, the overwhelming majority of programs with adequate support are in Manhattan, requiring long and complicated commutes for clients living further out in other boroughs.
Unaccompanied children’s lack of access to education was further exacerbated by the pandemic, when many fell through the cracks.
The good news is that New York City already has the answer. It can build on the successful English Language Learner transfer schools, which have proven to be effective in helping immigrant students graduate high school, while providing the supportive services they need to excel in work, college and career preparation programs. By investing in a $2.1 million transfer school pilot program, the First Step program, New York City could increase access for newly arrived, high-school-aged immigrants in the outer boroughs where most live, while addressing the limited capacity of existing schools. This program, proposed by the New York Immigration Coalition, will create quality programs for these students in already existing transfer schools outside of Manhattan and address the fact that immigrant youth are dropping out now at a rate almost five times that of their native English-speaking peers.
ELL transfer schools are special because they seek to create a trauma-informed culture of welcome, with flexible programs that can help keep unaccompanied children in school and graduate.
We applaud Deputy Chancellor Carolyne Quintana’s recent words of support for the transfer program and urge the city to allocate the $2.1 million for the First Step program to allow children like Jose to access learning in school. We must ensure that the city has the educational infrastructure to help each and every child thrive, which in turn helps our great city thrive.
Cardoso-Rojo is a supervising attorney at Kids in Need of Defense.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
