The world body governing international swimming has a new rule starting today that trans women can only compete in women’s events if they have never gone through male puberty or if they had it suppressed by age 12.
This comes as transgender women have in growing numbers begun competing in women’s categories. Biology — including, crucially, higher testosterone levels and greater muscle density — generally gives them an advantage. As Duke University researchers point out, “Just in the single year 2017, Olympic, World, and U.S. Champion Tori Bowie’s 100 meters lifetime best of 10.78 was beaten 15,000 times by men and boys.”
At this moment of awakening, we should vigorously defend the rights of transgender individuals to be free of discrimination in the workplace, as well as to use all public accommodations. People should be called the pronoun of their choice. Far too many conservatives cruelly refuse to take such humane steps to widen the circle of respect and inclusion.
As evidenced by the strict controls on performance-enhancing substances, however, competitive sport is a special, zero-sum case, in which one person’s freedom can complicate the fairness of the outcome. In a national poll released last week, majorities oppose allowing transgender women and girls to compete in female events in high school sports, as well as in college and professional sports, and just three in 10 support it.
This is an understandable position. Refusing to let people compete after they have fully transitioned and have no inherent biological advantage would be petty and wrong. But letting the matter be settled by identification alone is unfair to women.
Thursday marks a half-century since the passage of Title IX, the landmark law securing gender equity in American education. The statute brought an athletic revolution in its wake, as girls and young women were suddenly given the ability to compete by facing off in track, basketball, soccer, tennis, swimming, gymnastics, golf, rugby and on countless other fields and courts.
That’s a legacy to celebrate, for the millions who’ve benefited from organized athletics, and it should include a fair way for people who are transgender.
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
Copyright © 2021, New York Daily News
